The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Infant's Delight: Poetry, by Anonymous

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Infant's Delight: Poetry

Author: Anonymous

Release Date: February 2, 2004 [EBook #10912]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INFANT'S DELIGHT: POETRY ***




Produced by Afra Ullah and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team




THE INFANT'S DELIGHT



[Illustration: THE MISTLETOE-SELLERS.]


[Illustration: THE DEAD ROBIN.]

[Illustration]



BLIND MAN'S BUFF.

When the win-ter winds are blow-ing,
  And we ga-ther glad and gay,
Where the fire its light is throw-ing,
  For a mer-ry game at play,
There is none that to my know-ing,--
  And I've play-ed at games enough,--
Makes us laugh, and sets us glow-ing
  Like a game at Blind-man's Buff.




THE DEAD ROBIN.

All through the win-ter, long and cold,
  Dear Minnie ev-ery morn-ing fed
The little spar-rows, pert and bold,
  And ro-bins, with their breasts so red.

She lov-ed to see the lit-tle birds
  Come flut-ter-ing to the win-dow pane,
In answer to the gen-tle words
  With which she scat-ter-ed crumbs and grain.

One ro-bin, bol-der than the rest,
  Would perch up-on her fin-ger fair,
And this of all she lov-ed the best,
  And daily fed with ten-der-est care.

But one sad morn, when Minnie came,
  Her pre-ci-ous lit-tle pet she found,
Not hop-ping, when she call-ed his name,
  But ly-ing dead up-on the ground.




ALL THINGS OBEY GOD.

"He saith to the snow, Be thou on the earth."

God's works are very great, but still
  His hands do not ap-pear:
Though hea-ven and earth o-bey His will,
  His voice we can-not hear.

And yet we know that it is He
  Who moves and governs all,
Who stills the rag-ing of the sea,
  And makes the showers to fall.

Alike in mer-cy He be-stows
  The sun-shine and the rain;
That which is best for us He knows,
  And we must not com-plain,

Whe-ther He makes His winds to blow,
  And gives His tem-pests birth,
Or sends His frost, or bids the snow--
  "Be thou up-on the earth."



[Illustration: HE SAITH TO THE SNOW: BE THOU ON THE EARTH. JOB 37.6]

[Illustration: SNOW-BALL-ING.]




SNOW-BALL-ING.

See these mer-ry ones at play,
On this snowy New Year's Day:
How they run, and jump, and throw
Hand-fuls of the soft, white snow.
You should hear them laugh and shout
As they fling the snow about!
'Tis by Frank and Gus alone
That the balls are chief-ly thrown,
While their cou-sins make and bring
Other balls for them to fling.
Ka-tie is pre-par-ing thus,
Quite a store of balls for Gus;
But her mer-ry sis-ter May
From her task has run a-way,
All that heavy lump of snow,
At her cou-sin Gus to throw.
E-dith is not very bold,
And at first she fear-ed the cold;
Now at last you see her run
Down the steps to join the fun.




THE SICK DOLL.


Oh! is there any cause to fear
  That dol-ly will be very ill?
To cure my lit-tle dar-ling here,
  Pray, doc-tor, use your ut-most skill.

And dol-ly, if you would get well,
  Hold out your arm, that Dr. Gray
May feel your tiny pulse, and tell
  What best will take the pain a-way.

And do not say: "I will not touch
  That nas-ty phy-sic, nor the pill."
If lit-tle dolls will eat too much,
  They must not won-der if they're ill.

If your mam-ma ate too much cake,
  She would be very poor-ly too,
And nas-ty phy-sic have to take;
  And, lit-tle dol-ly, so must you.



[Illustration: Those who the South-ern O-cean cross,
Meet with the wide-wing-ed Al-ba-tross.]

[Illustration: In ri-vers near the hot E-qua-tor,
Lives the huge, sca-ly Al-li-ga-tor.]

[Illustration: In north-ern snows, the Po-lar Bear,
'Mid glit-ter-ing ice-bergs makes his lair.]

[Illustration: In shel-ter-ed nooks, by ri-ver-sides,
The strange-ly-beard-ed Bar-bel hides.]

[Illustration: THE SICK DOLL.]

[Illustration: LITTLE ROSE'S VALENTINE.]

[Illustration]



NEL-LY'S PET LAMB.


This lit-tle Lamb was brought to Nell
  The day its old ewe mo-ther died,
And, now it knows and loves her well,
  It will not go from Nel-ly's side.
A-long the hall, and up the stair,
  You hear its lit-tle pat-ter-ing toes:
Her Pet will fol-low every-where
  A-bout the house, where Nel-ly goes.




ROSE'S VA-LEN-TINE.


ROSE.

The post-man has been, dear mam-ma,
  And has brought me a let-ter so fine;
And Su-san has one, but it is not, by far,
  So pret-ty a let-ter as mine.
And, pray, will you read it to me,
  Mam-ma, if I give you a kiss?
I wish very much to know who it can be
  That has sent me a let-ter like this.

MAM-MA.

To the lot of our dear lit-tle Rose
  We trust every bless-ing may fall;
And this is the prayer and the fond hope of those
  Who love her most dear-ly of all.

So now, lit-tle Rose, can you guess
  Who sent you this let-ter by post?

ROSE.

Oh, yes, dear mam-ma, I can tell you; oh, yes!
  For you, and pa-pa, love me most.




"YOUR HEA-VEN-LY FA-THER FEED-ETH THEM."


God loves His lit-tle birds; for all
  His ten-der care He shows;
A sin-gle spar-row can-not fall
  But its Cre-a-tor knows.

They do not sow, nor reap the corn,
  Gar-ner nor barn have they;
God gives them break-fast every morn,
  And feeds them through the day.

And this we know; for in His Word,
  Where all His ways we read,
We find that eve-ry lit-tle bird
  He cares for, and will feed.

God loves each lit-tle bird; but still
  More ten-der is His care
For chil-dren who o-bey His will,
  Than for the fowls of air.



[Illustration: YOUR HEAVENLY FATHER FEEDETH THEM. MATT. vi. 26.]

[Illustration: PLOUGH-ING.]




PLOUGH-ING.


The lit-tle birds by God are fed
But man must earn his dai-ly bread,
  And work that he may eat;
Striv-ing his best, as John does now,
The broad ten-acre field to plough,
  Where-in to sow the wheat.

Old John, the plough-man, ne'er re-pines,
Whe-ther it blows, or rains, or shines,
  But hap-py still does seem;
And Dick, who leads the fore-most horse,
Goes whist-ling as he walks across
  The field be-side the team.

Let us per-form as glad-ly, too,
The work our Mas-ter bids us do,
  And then we need not fear;
But when from earth-ly toil we rest,
We all shall meet a-mong the blest
  Who served Him tru-ly here.




"HOW IS THE WEA-THER?"

  Cold win-ter has come,
  And the cru-el winds blow--
The trees are all leaf-less and brown;
  These two pret-ty rob-ins,
  Oh, where shall they go
To shel-ter their lit-tle brown heads from the snow?
  Just look at the flakes com-ing down.

But see, they have found a snug shel-ter at last,
And hark, how they talk, while the storm whis-tles past:

  Says Pol-ly to Dick-y,
  "You're near-est the door,
And you are the gen-tle-man, too:
  Just peep out and see
  When the storm will be o'er;
Be-cause, if the wea-ther's as bad as be-fore,
I think we will stay, do not you?"



[Illustration: Far up a-mong the moun-tain peaks,
His food the lone-ly Con-dor seeks.]

[Illustration: The Co-bra has a dead-ly bite.
And yet in mu-sic takes de-light.]

[Illustration: The A-rabs through the de-sert wide,
On the swift Dro-me-dary ride.]

[Illustration: In gen-tle ri-vers, still and clear,
We see the shin-ing Dace ap-pear.]

[Illustration: "HOW IS THE WEATHER?"]

[Illustration: NELLY'S NEW PARASOL.]



NAUGH-TY NEL-LY AND HER NEW PA-RA-SOL.


"No, Nel-ly! not to-day, my child!
  I can-not let you take it;
This cold March wind, so strong and wild,
  Your pa-ra-sol, 'twould break it!"

So said Mam-ma; but Nel-ly thought,
  "I will take my new pre-sent:
Tis mine; to please me it was bought;
  The wea-ther's bright and plea-sant."

So naugh-ty Nel-ly sli-ly took
  What kind Mam-ma had bought her,
And out she went--and, only look!
  The wild March wind has caught her!

The silk tore up, the ribs broke out,
  In spite of Nel-ly's sway-ing;
And peo-ple laugh-ed at her, no doubt--
  That comes of dis-o-bey-ing.




"THE FLOW-ERS AP-PEAR ON THE EARTH."

(SONG OF SOLOMON, ii. 12.)


Now the win-ter cold is past,
  And blithe March winds are blow-ing,
In shel-ter-ed nooks we find at last
  Bright flow-ers of spring are grow-ing.

Along the hedge-row's mossy bank,
  Where ivy green is creep-ing,
We see through weeds and net-tles rank
  The dark-blue vi-o-let peep-ing.

And in the sun-ny gar-den beds
  Gay a-co-nites are show-ing,
And snow-drops bend their grace-ful heads,
  And cro-cus-es are glow-ing.

God makes the buds and leaves un-fold,
  All flow-ers are of His giv-ing;
He guards them through the win-ter's cold,
  He cares for all things liv-ing.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: WHO TORE IT?]

[Illustration: The E-mu in Aus-tra-lia's found,
Where the wild bush spreads far a-round.]



[Illustration: The ant-lered Elk comes pranc-ing forth
From the pine for-ests of the North.]

[Illustration: The Frog is of-ten-est to be seen
In grassy mea-dows, damp and green.]

[Illustration: The Fly-ing Fish can swim with ease,
Or flut-ter o'er the tro-pic seas.]

[Illustration: THE LITTLE HERO.]

[Illustration: BLOWING BUBBLES.]

[Illustration]



JUMP! PUS-SY!


Pus-sy, jump! for all the day
You have time e-nough to play;
Though at night, in barn and house,
You must watch for rat or mouse.

Pus-sy, jump! and if you do,
We will pour some milk for you;
Pus-sy, you shall be ca-ressed,
If you try and jump your best.




BLOW-ING BUB-BLES.


  Har-ry and Tom, the o-ther day,
  Went out in-to the yard to play;
Their great de-light, in wea-ther bright,
  Is blow-ing bub-bles with pipes of clay.

  Tom took a ba-sin deep and wide,
  And Har-ry brought his mug be-side;
They fil-led them quite with soap-suds white,
  And each to blow the big-gest tried.

  Poor Tom, he blew with might and main,
  And so, of course, he blew in vain;
For all his trou-ble he made no bub-ble,
  But Tom was brave and tried a-gain.

  Till Har-ry said, "Dear Tom, you see,
  You blow too hard; now--look at me.
There! that will rise to-ward the skies,
  And float a-bove the li-lac tree."




A-PRIL SHOW-ERS.

"Thou makest the earth soft with show-ers: Thou bless-est the spring-ing
there-of."--PSALM lxv. 10.


When A-pril skies be-gin to frown,
And the cold rain comes pelt-ing down,
We must not grum-ble nor com-plain,
Nor i-dly say, we hate the rain.

God sends the rain; the dust-y ground
It soft-ens in the fields a-round;
The mois-ture ev-e-ry plant re-ceives,
And springs a-fresh in flow-ers and leaves.

Should God for-bid the show-ers to fall,
Nor send us any rain at all,
The ground would all grow hard and dry,
And ev-e-ry liv-ing plant would die.

All things would starve and per-ish then--
No food for birds, nor beasts, nor men;
Then do not mur-mur, nor com-plain,
God, in His good-ness, sends the rain.



[Illustration]

[Illustration: "SNAP, BE GOOD!"]




"SNAP, BE GOOD!"


"Dear lit-tle Snap, you fun-ny pup,
  I love to see you beg,
So cle-ver-ly do you sit up
  And bend each slen-der leg,
    Drop-ping the paw;
And raise your ears a-bove your head,
  Look-ing so very wise;
You seem to know I have some bread;
  And then, such bright green eyes
    I never saw.

"Your shag-gy coat is long and rough,
  Your tail is rough-er still;
Now, Snap, I think you've had e-nough,
  And more would make you ill--
    In-deed it would.
But sis-ter Lot-ty has some cake,
  And so if you will sit
Quite still and good, till I say 'Take!'
  Then you shall have a bit;
    So, Snap, be good!"




THE STRAY KIT-TEN.


"Come, Kit-ty, come; you need not fear,
  Nor make that plain-tive mew;
Don't be a-fraid, but ven-ture near,
And lap the milk we bring you here,
  For none will in-jure you.

"And, Kit-ty, since you've lost your way,
  You need no fur-ther roam;
But stop, and dine with us to-day,
And then, if you would wish to stay,
  Poor Kit-ty, here's your home.

"And we will feed you fine and fat,
  On fresh new milk and nice;
And, when you grow to be a cat,
You can re-quite us well for that,
  By catch-ing all the mice."



[Illustration: Where the wide wastes of o-cean lie,
The greed-y Gan-net loves to fly.]

[Illustration: Though ve-nom-ous, as authors write,
The Gek-ko is not known to bite.]

[Illustration: The Ri-ver Horse a-mong the reeds
Of A-fric's lone-ly ri-vers feeds.]

[Illustration: A-round our coasts the fish-ers meet
With Had-docks, which, when dri-ed, we eat.]

[Illustration: THE STRAY KITTEN.]

[Illustration: THE FIRST OF MAY.]


[Illustration]



THE MAY-POLE.


  Round the May-pole, on the grass,
  Mer-ry lit-tle foot-steps pass;
  In the mid-dle Bes-sie stands,
  With the May-pole in her hands;
  While her play-mates dance and sing
  Round her in an end-less ring.
  Soon, in-deed, a feast they'll make,
  Cow-slip tea, with nice plum-cake--
And so our leave of them we'll take.




THE FIRST OF MAY.


The haw-thorn blos-som, snow-y white,
  Hangs thick upon the hedge to-day;
With many flow-ers the fields are bright
  Upon this mer-ry First of May.

So let us ga-ther flow-er-ets fair,
  And blos-soms from the haw-thorn spray,
To deck our May-pole stand-ing there,
  Upon this mer-ry First of May.

And then, like fai-ries, in a ring,
  A-round it we will dance or play,
And all our glad-dest songs will sing
  Upon this mer-ry First of May.

And dear-est Maud shall there be seen
  With crown of haw-thorn blos-soms gay,
And she shall be our lit-tle queen,
  Upon this mer-ry First of May.




UNI-VER-SAL PRAISE.


See how na-ture now re-joices
  In this sun-ny month of May;
Still to God from all its voices
  Giv-ing prais-es day by day.
In the glad green wood-land al-leys
  Ev-e-ry bird its an-them trills!
While flocks feed-ing in the val-leys,
  Herds up-on a thou-sand hills,
Join with ev-ery crea-ture liv-ing,
  Here on land, in air, or sea,
In one great world-wide thanks-giv-ing,
  Yield-ing praise, O God, to Thee!
All a-round us swells the cho-rus
  From this good-ly world of ours,
And earth's al-tar stands be-fore us
  Sweet with in-cense from her flow-ers.
So, with Na-ture still con-fess-ing
  His great good-ness, let us pay
Grate-ful hom-age for each bless-ing
  Of this sun-ny month of May.



[Illustration]

[Illustration: LOST LABOUR.]

[Illustration: The sa-cred I-bis, we are told,
The E-gyp-tians much re-vered of old]

[Illustration: The I-gua-na's flesh is sweet and good;
It haunts the riv-er and the wood.]

[Illustration: On hin-der legs and tail so strong,
The slim Jer-boa bounds a-long.]

[Illustration: A row of prick-les, long and keen,
On the John-Do-ry's back is seen.]

[Illustration: WASHING MY CHILDREN.]

[Illustration: TAKING CARE OF BABY]


[Illustration]



THE DAN-DE-LION CLOCK.

The dan-de-lion blos-soms gay
From the fields have passed away,
And in their place left heads of grey.
Now, Min-nie, won't it be good fun
For each of us to ga-ther one,
And sit and blow them in the sun?
Very hard we both must blow,
And scat-ter all the seeds like snow,
That will be 'one o'clock,' you know."




TAK-ING CARE OF BA-BY.


Lit-tle, help-less ba-by dear,
  While with-in your cot you lie,
Sis-ter May is sit-ting near--
  She will sing your lul-la-by.

When at last you fall a-sleep,
  Not the slight-est noise she'll make;
Quiet as a mouse she'll keep,
  Lest she should her dar-ling wake.

May will watch you well, for though
  She can play and prat-tle too,
'Tis not very long ago
  Since she was a babe like you.

Then mam-ma o'er lit-tle May
  Day and night her watch would keep;
May her care can now re-pay,
  Watch-ing ba-by whilst a-sleep.




SUM-MER FLOW-ERS.

"The de-sert shall re-joice, and blos-som as the rose."--ISAIAH XXXV. I.


Be-hold the flow-ers of June! how fair
  And bright their buds ap-pear,
As, open-ing to the sum-mer air,
  Our eyes and hearts they cheer!

Who would have thought there could a-bound
  Such beau-ty and de-light
Be-neath the cold and win-try ground
  That hid those flow-ers from sight?

That pow-er which made and governs all--
  The might-y pow-er of God--
A-lone could life and beau-ty call
  Out of the life-less sod.

And He, who from the Win-ter's gloom
  Can Sum-mer thus dis-close,
Shall one day make the de-sert bloom,
  And blos-som as the rose.



[Illustration]

[Illustration: "WHERE'S DICK-EY?"]




"WHERE'S DICK-EY?"

"Look there!" lit-tle Lot-ty cried,
"Dick-ey's cage is o-pen wide,
And, I fear, he's not in-side. Cou-sin John,
Do please stand up-on this chair,
Just to see if he is there.
Pret-ty Dick, I won-der where
     You are gone!

"Naugh-ty puss, your jaws, you lick!
Have you eat-en lit-tle Dick?
That would be a cru-el trick! No, I see
Pret-ty Dick has flown a-way,
And is sing-ing blithe and gay,
Sit-ting yon-der on a spray
     Of the tree.

"Well, I too should think it wrong,
If a gi-ant, tall and strong,
Just to hear my lit-tle song ev-ery day,
Shut _me_ in a cage; and yet
Thus I did my lit-tle pet---
So he must be glad to get
     Safe a-way."




PLAY-ING AT OM-NI-BUS.


Says Hu-bert, "Look, how fast it pours!
I'm sure we can't go out of doors
  While it is rain-ing thus;
So let us in the nur-se-ry stay,
To have a mer-ry game, and play
  At driv-ing om-ni-bus.

"Flo-ra and Ted-dy, you must be
The horses, and be driv-en by me.
  Mind you go stea-dy--do!
A place for Char-lie we shall find;
To guard the 'bus he'll ride be-hind,
  And take the mon-ey too.

"Dick, with pa-pa's old hat to wear,
Looks just the thing to be a fare
  Who wants to ride with us.
Jump up, sir! Six-pence all the way!
Gee, gee, you horses! Gee, I say!"--
  Off goes the om-ni-bus!



[Illustration: With wings scarce mov-ing, through the sky,
The lazy Kite is seen to fly.]

[Illustration: The Kan-ga-roo a poc-ket wears,
In which her lit-tle ones she bears.]

[Illustration: The Liz-ard in the sun's warm rays
De-lights to bask on summer days.]

[Illustration: The Lam-prey, in the Se-vern caught,
Was once the first of dain-ties thought.]

[Illustration: PLAYING AT OMNIBUS.]

[Illustration: ON THE WATER.]

[Illustration]



GA-THER-ING POP-PIES.


Through the corn the chil-dren creep,
Where the nod-ding pop-pies sleep,
Fill-ing hands and a-prons white
With the scar-let blos-soms bright.
Gau-dy pop-pies must not stay
Till the fu-ture har-vest day:
They would wi-ther when the heat
Ri-pens all the gold-en wheat--
Life for them is short and sweet.




ON THE WA-TER.

In our lit-tle boat to glide
On the wa-ter blue and wide,
While the sky is smooth and bright,
What could give us more de-light?
See the rip-ples, how they run,
Twink-ling bright-ly in the sun;
While re-flect-ed we can see
Sha-dows of each hill and tree.
See the li-lies, round and large,
Float-ing near the reed-y marge,
Where the bul-rush has its place
And the hea-vy wa-ter-mace.
See the great green dra-gon-fly,
And the swal-low skim-ming by.
See the fish-es spring and gleam,
Ere they splash in-to the stream,
See the bright king-fish-er too
Dart a gleam of green and blue.
These are all a-round our boat
On the wa-ter whilst we float.




HURT-FUL WEEDS.

"Ev-e-ry plant, which My hea-ven-ly
Fa-ther hath not plant-ed, shall be root-ed
up."--ST. MATT. XV. 13.


Though in the corn that waves a-round
  Are thorns, and many hurt-ful weeds,
That spring in e-ven good-ly ground
  And plant-ed thick with choic-est seeds;

Though in our hearts, how-e-ver taught
  And trained to guard them-selves from sin,
The good is mixed with evil thought
  Our en-e-my has sown there-in,

God's plant-ing shall not be o'er-thrown
  By world-ly weeds that cling a-bout
His corn; and what He hath not sown
  Shall in His time be root-ed out.

Then, that our lives may yield their fruit,
  Still let it be our con-stant prayer,
That God from out our hearts will root
  All seeds He hath not plant-ed there.



[Illustration]

[Illustration: THE BUT-TER-FLY.]



THE BUT-TER-FLY.


A yel-low But-ter-fly one day,
  Grown tired of play and tired of fly-ing,
Up-on a this-tle blos-som grey
  With out-spread wings was i-dly ly-ing.

The stur-dy bees went hum-ming by,
  Draw-ing sweet ho-ney from the clo-ver,
Nor stir-red the yel-low But-ter-fly,
  For he was but an i-dle ro-ver.

Two lit-tle girls, named Anne and May,
  Came by with mirth and laugh-ter ring-ing,
Anne ran to seize the in-sect gay--
  May fol-low-ed fast and ceased her sing-ing.

"Oh! dar-ling An-nie, let it be,
  Your touch will rob its plumes of beau-ty;
And God, who made both you and me,
  Has taught us kind-ness is a du-ty."




"GO A-WAY, RO-VER!"

"You big black dog, go, go a-way!
  I will not let you bite
My lit-tle pet; it can-not play,
  You gave it such a fright!

"I think you want to eat it up
  Be-cause it is so small,
But if you dare to touch my pup
  For help I mean to call;

"And then pa-pa will bring a stick,
  And make you run a-way;
So, Ro-ver, you had best go quick,
  And leave us here to play!"

       *       *       *       *       *

Why, Ro-ver, is quite good and tame--
  You need not be a-fraid;
He on-ly wants to have a game,
  You sil-ly lit-tle maid!



[Illustration: In sum-mer time, a-long our coasts.
The Mack-a-rel swarm in count-less hosts.]

[Illustration: We all at Mon-keys love to gaze,
And watch their fun-ny tricks and ways.]

[Illustration: A bird so fool-ish is the Nod-dy,
It may be caught by a-ny-bo-dy.]

[Illustration: The harm-less Newt is to be seen
In stag-nant ponds, with duck-weed green.]

[Illustration:"GO AWAY, ROVER!"]

[Illustration: LUCY AND ARTHUR.]


[Illustration]



THE RUSH PA-RA-SOL.


"Oh, come to the brook, sis-ter Kate,
  Oh, come with me, Het-ty and Gus,
Where rush-es, so long and so straight,
  Are grow-ing in thou-sands for us!"

Thus cries, to the rest, lit-tle May;
  And off to the mea-dow go all--
For nurse has just shown her the way
  Of mak-ing a rush pa-ra-sol.

LU-CY AND AR-THUR.


The day was fine, the sun was hot,
  So Lu-cy took her pail and spade,
And went to find a nice dry spot
  Where wells and cas-tles might be made.

But all the shore just then was wet,
  So Lu-cy took off shoes and socks;
She knew that nurse would fume and fret
  If they got spoilt by sand or rocks.

But Ar-thur was so strong and big,
  He thought that he was quite a man,
And he, in boots, would stand and dig,
  Which proved a very fool-ish plan.

For soon his boots got wet and cold,
  And hurt his feet, and made him cry;
He had to sit and hear nurse scold,
  While both his boots were put to dry.

THE PRO-VI-DENCE OF GOD.

"The Lord shall give that which is good,
and our land shall yield her increase."--PSALM lxxxv. 12.


The seed was sown long months a-go,
And, through the win-ter's cold and snow,
We trust-ed that God's care would bring
The green and ten-der blade in spring,
Which che-rished by the sun and rain
Of sum-mer, now has yield-ed grain
In au-tumn, when the reap-er leaves
His cot to cut and bind the sheaves,
And load with them the nod-ding wain
Which bears them home-ward from the plain.

So God's great mer-cies thus a-bound;
His love still brings the sea-sons round;
His bless-ings fill our hap-py fields,
And all our land its in-crease yields:
So if we serve Him as we should,
Our Lord will give us all things good;
And He who doth the ra-vens feed
Much more will give us all we need!


[Illustration]

[Illustration: PLAY-ING A-MONG THE SHEAVES.]




PLAY-ING A-MONG THE SHEAVES.

Oh, who could there be
More mer-ry than we,
  On this bright har-vest morn.
As we fro-lic and play,
While we hide a-way,
  A-mong the sheaves of corn?

We may fro-lic still
Wher-e-ver we will,
  But yet we must not tread
To waste with our feet
The grains of the wheat--
  The wheat that makes our bread.

For God, as we need,
Gives the corn to feed
  And make us well and strong;
And to waste in vain
His gift of the grain
  Would grieve Him, and be wrong.




KEEP-ING SCHOOL.


Oh, tell me if e-ver you knew
  A teach-er who looked so se-vere
As sis-ter Ma-ri-a can do,
  When les-sons she's go-ing to hear?

Just look how she holds up her cane
  And frowns, as she threat-ens each one!
But yet they'll not cry or com-plain,
  Be-cause it is only in fun.

The dunce's cap Dol-ly must wear,
  Her task was not learnt very well;
And now lit-tle Jane, I de-clare,
  Pre-tends she's un-a-ble to spell.

Yet sis-ter may hold up her cane,
  And though they'll look so-lemn, each one,
From laugh-ter they scarce can re-frain.
  Be-cause it is only in fun.



[Illustration: In i-vy, tree, or barn, or tow-er
The Owl a-waits the e-ven-ing hour.]

[Illustration: The fish-ing Ot-ter may be found
In streams which flow through Eng-lish ground.]

[Illustration: Be-neath the ri-ver's sedg-y side
The sav-age Pike de-lights to hide.]

[Illustration: In cav-ern pools, in end-less night,
The poor blind Pro-teus shuns the light.]

[Illustration: KEEPING SCHOOL.]

[Illustration: MILKING-TIME.]


[Illustration]



SNAP AP-PLE.


"Come, while it spins round, try your luck;
  Come, E-thel, and Kate, and your bro-thers!
On two ends two ap-ples are stuck,
  And an on-ion on each of the o-thers.
Be ready, and snap as they pass,
  Be quick, if you mean to be right,
Or not the sweet ap-ples, a-las!
  'Twill be, but the on-ions, you'll bite."




MILK-ING TIME.

Through the long day the cows are seen
  All graz-ing as they go,
Wan-der-ing a-long the mea-dows green
  Where yel-low hawk-weeds grow.

But when the clock with-in the tower
  Strikes five, they al-ways pace
Slow-ly--for well they know the hour--
  Home to the milk-ing place.

Then in the yard quite still they stand,
  Swing-ing their la-zy tails,
Where Ann and Su-san are at hand
  With stools and milk-ing pails

I love to see the white milk flow,
  And in the pail froth up;
And Ann, who is so kind, I know,
  Will let me fill my cup.




AU-TUMN.

"Be glad then, and re-joice in the Lord your God."--JOEL ii. 23.


'Tis au-tumn now; the corn is cut,
  But o-ther gifts for us are spread,
The pur-ple plum, the ripe brown nut,
  And pears and ap-ples, streaked with red,
A-mong the dark-green branch-es shine,
  Or on the grass be-neath them fall;
While full green clus-ters deck the vine
  That trails o'er trel-lis, roof, and wall.

In our dear land the la-den trees
  Be-speak God's pro-vi-dence and love;
He sends all need-ful gifts like these
  For those who trust in Him a-bove.
How good is He to make such choice
  Of plea-sant fruits for us to grow!
'Tis meet, in-deed, that we re-joice
  In Him who loves His chil-dren so.


[Illustration: BE GLAD THEN, AND
REJOICE IN THE LORD YOUR GOD.
JOEL II. 23]

[Illustration: THE SQUIR-REL.]




THE SQUIR-REL.


"Squir-rel, squir-rel, brown and brisk,
  High a-bove me in the tree,
I can see you bound and frisk,
  I can see you peep at me.

"Squir-rel, squir-rel, you can play;
  Mer-rier beast is none than you;
Yet you are not only gay,
  You are wise and mer-ry too.

You can play till sum-mer's o'er,
  And the nuts come fall-ing free,
Then to hoard your win-ter store
  You are busy as a bee.

"Squir-rel, squir-rel, I would bound
  Gai-ly at my sports as you,
And, like you, I would be found
  Care-ful for the fu-ture too."




"CON-TRA-RY WINDS"


Both Tom and Will had e-qual skill
  In mak-ing lit-tle boats and ships;
They cut a-way a whole half day,
  And co-vered all the floor with chips.

And when the boys had made their toys,
  They thought to put them to the test--
To try which boat, when set a-float,
  Would sail a-cross a tub the best.

But Will and Tom, each blow-ing from
  A dif-fe-rent side, you well may guess,
No boats could go straight on, and so
  They tacked a-bout in great dis-tress.

Such heavy gales a-gainst their sails
  Made both the boats go whirl-ing round;
The sails got wet, the boats up-set,
  And all the crew on board were drowned.

[Illustration: When the warm sum-mer days draw near,
From south-ern climes the Quails ap-pear.]

[Illustration: South Afric's plains the Quag-gas roam,
Re-mote from farm or set-tler's home.]


[Illustration: The fish-er-man the Roach may hook,
In quiet pond or gentle brook.]

[Illustration: When the fell Rat-tle-snake slides near,
The In-dian may its rat-tle hear.]

[Illustration: "CONTRARY WINDS."]

[Illustration: NAUGHTY DICK.]


[Illustration]



BAT-TLE-DORE AND SHUT-TLE-COCK.


See these mer-ry chil-dren four,
Now their les-son time is o'er,
Deal-ing with the bat-tle-dore
  Steady blow on blow;

Till the fea-thered shut-tle-cocks
Fly at their al-ter-nate knocks,
"Re-gu-lar as kitch-en clocks,"
  Spin-ning to and fro.

[Illustration: OUR GOD IS MERCIFUL.

PSALM CXVI. 5]

[Illustration: CUT-TING NAMES.]




CUT-TING NAMES.


See where the spread-ing beech has made
Be-neath its boughs a plea-sant shade
  To screen them from the sun;
There George, and Anne, and Ma-ry play,
Or read up-on each sun-ny day,
  When all their tasks are done.

George has pulled out his knife, you see,
And on the smooth-barked beech-en tree
  Has some-thing found to do;
He's carv-ing deep, and plain, and well
The let-ters, one by one, which spell
  His name and An-nie's too.

His sis-ter An-nie, stand-ing by,
Is watch-ing with a cu-ri-ous eye,
  And won-der-ing at his skill.
To men and wo-men when they grow,
They'll come and find the beech tree show
  Those names quite plain-ly still.




THE CON-CERT.


"See how it rains! We can-not go
Our walk a-cross the fields; and so,
Since Tom and Et-tie Holmes are come,
And cous-in Fred has brought his drum,
And some can sing, and o-thers play,
We'll have a con-cert here to-day.
You, Tom, must in the mid-dle stand,
And mark the time, with stick in hand;
You, bro-ther Ben, the tongs must take,
For they will good tri-an-gles make;
Hal clicks the 'bones,' and Em-me-line
Will beat her lit-tle tam-bour-ine,
And cous-in Fred will drum a-way,
And Kate the con-cer-ti-na play.
All must at-tend to Tom; and mind
None play too fast, nor lag be-hind;
And then, I'm sure, we all shall see
How grand a con-cert this will be,
And say this is the wis-est way
To spend this wet Oc-to-ber day."


[Illustration: The long-billed Snipe fre-quents our clime
About the chil-ly au-tumn time.]

[Illustration: The Ti-ger, from his hid-den lair,
Springs on the tra-vel-ler un-a-ware.]

[Illustration: The U-rano-sco-pus hides a-mong
The mud, and an-gles with its tongue.]

[Illustration: Though gay and pleas-ing to the sight,
The Vi-per has a dead-ly bite.]

[Illustration: THE CONCERT.]

[Illustration: CAUGHT IN THE FOG.]


[Illustration]



PLAY-ING WITH WOOD-EN BRICKS.


An In-di-an tem-ple on the floor
  The chil-dren build with wood-en bricks,
They've placed two pil-lars by the door,
  And on the roof they now would fix
A good tall spire, so Et-ty takes
  A long-er brick, and sets it there;
And though when-e'er we walk it shakes,
  It will not tum-ble, I de-clare!




CAUGHT IN THE FOG.

Anne and Jane will long re-mem-her
How, one morn-ing in No-vem-ber,
As they both were home-ward stroll-ing,
Round the Lon-don fog came roll-ing--
First, a yel-low dark-ness fall-ing,
Then a noise of link-boys call-ing,
Cab, and 'bus, and cart-wheels rum-bling,
Hor-ses on the pave-ment stum-bling,
Peo-ple, in the smoke and smo-ther,
Run-ning up a-gainst each other,
No one see-ing, much less know-ing,
Whi-ther he or she was go-ing.
Little Jane clung to her sis-ter,
While Anne com-fort-ed and kissed her,
For the girls felt bro-ken-heart-ed,
Fear-ing lest they should be part-ed.
So they were when Char-lie found them,
Lost a-mid the crowd a-round them,
But so glad when they es-pied him,
And came trip-ping home beside him.




TRUST IN GOD.

"He ma-keth light-nings for the rain;
He bring-eth the wind out of His trea-sur-ies."--Ps. CXXXV. 7.


Our God who reign-est up on high,
Though light-nings flash a-cross the sky,
And howl-ing tem-pests hur-ry by,
We fear not these, for Thou art nigh
  To all who trust in Thee.

Though now the sky is o-ver-cast,
And hea-vy rains are fall-ing fast,
And storm and sleet go driv-ing past,
And day by day the moan-ing blast
  Sweeps dead leaves from the tree,

No-vem-ber time, that seems so drear,
When days are dark and win-ter near,
Will pass at length, and Christ-mas cheer
The last hours of the dy-ing year
  With song and dance and mirth.

And in due time Thy mighty pow-er
Will give the spring, with sun and shower,
The o-pen-ing leaf, the ear-ly flow-er,
And birds in e-ve-ry wood-land bow-er
  Will sing to glad-den earth.


[Illustration: HE MAKETH LIGHTNINGS
FOR THE RAIN; HE BRINGETH THE
WIND OUT OF HIS TREASURIES.

PSALM CXXXV. 7.]

[Illustration: HOME FROM SCHOOL.]




HOME FROM SCHOOL.

Come, Meg and El-len, don't com-plain,
For, see, the geese en-joy the rain,
  And dog-gie does not fret;
    And yet,
The drops come rol-ling down his ears,
And nose, and whisk-ers, just like tears;
  Poor Mop, he's drip-ping wet!
Our big um-brel-la co-vers three,
And snug and dry we all may be,
  And chat-ter as we go,
    And show
The grumb-ling peo-ple whom we meet
That nei-ther wind, nor driv-ing sleet,
  Can spoil our tem-pers.--No,
We will not take such days as this,
Nor any-thing God sends, a-miss,
  But what we can-not cure
    Endure;
And this will prove a Gold-en Rule
To prac-tise as we walk from school--
  Of that we may be sure.




THE KIT-TENS' BATH.


One day when Lil-lie saw her cat
  Sit down and lick a kit-ten's face;
"No, puss," said she, "don't wash like that--
  My bath will be the pro-per place.

"I'll show you how to wash them, puss."
  So in she dipped them one by one;
Poor Min-nie mewed and made a fuss,
  But Lil-lie only thought it fun.

Puss feared her lit-tle kits would drown,
  And did her best to get them out;
While Lil-lie dipped them up and down,
  And splashed the wa-ter all a-bout.

Till nurse came up and saw the mess,
  Took out the kit-tens, and instead
Made thought-less Lil-lie quite un-dress,
  And have her bath and go to bed.


[Illustration: We find the snow-y Whi-ting most
A-bound along our South-ern coast.]

[Illustration: Who roams through Eng-land's mea-dows fair
May see the Yel-low-ham-mer there.]

[Illustration: The Xeno-pel-tis has a hide,
With spots of man-y co-lours dyed.]

[Illustration: See, with long tail but scan-ty mane,
The Ze-bra gal-lops o'er the plain.]

[Illustration: THE KITTENS' BATH.]


[Illustration]



TURN-ING THE TRENCH-ER.


If, at this old Christ-mas game,
  Kate, who spins the trench-er, call
Any play-er out by name,
  He must catch it ere it fall.

If "Move all" she should re-peat,
  All sit still; but if she say
"Twi-light," each must change his seat,
  Or a for-feit he must pay.




THE WISE MEN OF THE EAST.


The East-ern sages watched the sky,
  They looked from night till morn,
There shone a bright, new star on high,
  They knew that Christ was born.

Then up they rose, and came from far,
  They jour-neyed night and day,
Led by the shin-ing of that star,
  And found Him where He lay.

There is not any need for us
  To leave our homes be-hind,
Through dis-tant lands to tra-vel thus
  The Son of God to find.

For home to us each Christ-mas Day
  The new-born Sa-vi-our brings;
Then shall we not our hom-age pay
  Like those good East-ern kings?





End of Project Gutenberg's The Infant's Delight: Poetry, by Anonymous

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE INFANT'S DELIGHT: POETRY ***

***** This file should be named 10912.txt or 10912.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/9/1/10912/

Produced by Afra Ullah and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year.

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


