The Project Gutenberg EBook of On Horsemanship, by Xenophon

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: On Horsemanship

Author: Xenophon

Translator: H. G. Dakyns

Posting Date: August 21, 2008 [EBook #1176]
Release Date: January, 1998

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON HORSEMANSHIP ***




Produced by John Bickers





ON HORSEMANSHIP

By Xenophon

Translation by H. G. Dakyns



     Xenophon the Athenian was born 431 B.C. He was a
     pupil of Socrates. He marched with the Spartans,
     and was exiled from Athens. Sparta gave him land
     and property in Scillus, where he lived for many
     years before having to move once more, to settle
     in Corinth. He died in 354 B.C.

     On Horsemanship advises the reader on how to buy
     a good horse, and how to raise it to be either a
     war horse or show horse. Xenophon ends with some
     words on military equipment for a cavalryman.




PREPARER'S NOTE

This was typed from Dakyns' series, "The Works of Xenophon," a
four-volume set. The complete list of Xenophon's works (though there is
doubt about some of these) is:

     Work                                   Number of books

     The Anabasis                                         7
     The Hellenica                                        7
     The Cyropaedia                                       8
     The Memorabilia                                      4
     The Symposium                                        1
     The Economist                                        1
     On Horsemanship                                      1
     The Sportsman                                        1
     The Cavalry General                                  1
     The Apology                                          1
     On Revenues                                          1
     The Hiero                                            1
     The Agesilaus                                        1
     The Polity of the Athenians and the Lacedaemonians   2

     Text in brackets "{}" is my transliteration of Greek text into
     English using an Oxford English Dictionary alphabet table. The
     diacritical marks have been lost.




ON HORSEMANSHIP


I

Claiming to have attained some proficiency in horsemanship (1)
ourselves, as the result of long experience in the field, our wish is to
explain, for the benefit of our younger friends, what we conceive to be
the most correct method of dealing with horses.

 (1) Lit. "Since, through the accident of having for a long time
    'ridden' ourselves, we believe we have become proficients in
    horsemanship, we wish to show to our younger friends how, as we
    conceive the matter, they will proceed most correctly in dealing
    with horses." {ippeuein} in the case of Xenophon = serve as a
    {ippeus}, whether technically as an Athenian "knight" or more
    particularly in reference to his organisation of a troop of
    cavalry during "the retreat" ("Anab." III. iii. 8-20), and, as is
    commonly believed, while serving under Agesilaus ("Hell." III. iv.
    14) in Asia, 396, 395 B.C.

There is, it is true, a treatise on horsemanship written by Simon, the
same who dedicated the bronze horse near the Eleusinion in Athens
(2) with a representation of his exploits engraved in relief on the
pedestal. (3) But we shall not on that account expunge from our treatise
any conclusions in which we happen to agree with that author; on the
contrary we shall hand them on with still greater pleasure to our
friends, in the belief that we shall only gain in authority from the
fact that so great an expert in horsemanship held similar views to our
own; whilst with regard to matters omitted in his treatise, we shall
endeavour to supply them.

 (2) L. Dind.  (in Athens). The Eleusinion. For the position of this
    sanctuary of Demeter and Kore see Leake, "Top. of Athens," i. p.
    296 foll. For Simon see Sauppe, vol. v. Praef. to "de R. E." p.
    230; L. Dind. Praef. "Xen. Opusc." p. xx.; Dr. Morris H. Morgan,
    "The Art of Horsemanship by Xenophon," p. 119 foll. A fragment of
    the work referred to, {peri eidous kai ekloges ippon}, exists. The
    MS. is in the library of Emmanual Coll. Cant. It so happens that
    one of the hipparchs (?) appealed to by Demosthenes in Arist.
    "Knights," 242.

{andres ippes, paragenesthe nun o kairos, o Simon, o Panaiti, ouk elate
pros to dexion keras};

bears the name.

 (3) Lit. "and carved on the pedestal a representation of his own
    performances."

As our first topic we shall deal with the question, how a man may best
avoid being cheated in the purchase of a horse.

Take the case of a foal as yet unbroken: it is plain that our scrutiny
must begin with the body; an animal that has never yet been mounted
can but present the vaguest indications of spirit. Confining ourselves
therefore to the body, the first point to examine, we maintain, will be
the feet. Just as a house would be of little use, however beautiful its
upper stories, if the underlying foundations were not what they ought
to be, so there is little use to be extracted from a horse, and in
particular a war-horse, (4) if unsound in his feet, however excellent
his other points; since he could not turn a single one of them to good
account. (5)

 (4) Or, "and that a charger, we will suppose." For the simile see
    "Mem." III. i. 7.

 (5) Cf. Hor. "Sat." I. ii. 86:

regibus hic mos est: ubi equos mercantur, opertos inspiciunt, ne, si
facies, ut saepe, decora molli fulta pede est, emptorem inducat hiantem,
quod pulchrae clunes, breve quod caput, ardua cervix.

and see Virg. "Georg." iii. 72 foll.

In testing the feet the first thing to examine will be the horny portion
of the hoof. For soundness of foot a thick horn is far better than a
thin. Again it is important to notice whether the hoofs are high both
before and behind, or flat to the ground; for a high hoof keeps the
"frog," (6) as it is called, well off the ground; whereas a low hoof
treads equally with the stoutest and softest part of the foot alike,
the gait resembling that of a bandy-legged man. (7) "You may tell a good
foot clearly by the ring," says Simon happily; (8) for the hollow hoof
rings like a cymbal against the solid earth. (9)

 (6) Lit. "the swallow."

 (7) Al. "a knock-kneed person." See Stonehenge, "The Horse" (ed.
    1892), pp. 3, 9.

 (8) Or, "and he is right."

 (9) Cf. Virg. "Georg." iii. 88; Hor. "Epod." xvi. 12.

And now that we have begun with the feet, let us ascend from this point
to the rest of the body. The bones (10) above the hoof and below the
fetlock must not be too straight, like those of a goat; through not
being properly elastic, (11) legs of this type will jar the rider, and
are more liable to become inflamed. On the other hand, these bones must
not be too low, or else the fetlock will be abraded or lacerated when
the horse is galloped over clods and stones.

 (10) i.e. "the pasterns ({mesokunia}) and the coffin should be
    'sloping.'"

 (11) Or, "being too inflexible." Lit. "giving blow for blow, overuch
    like anvil to hammer."

The bones of the shanks (12) ought to be thick, being as they are the
columns on which the body rests; thick in themselves, that is, not
puffed out with veins or flesh; or else in riding over hard ground they
will inevitably be surcharged with blood, and varicose conditions be set
up, (13) the legs becoming thick and puffy, whilst the skin recedes; and
with this loosening of the skin the back sinew (14) is very apt to start
and render the horse lame.

 (12) i.e. "the metacarpals and metatarsals."

 (13) Or, "and become varicose, with the result that the shanks swell
    whilst the skin recedes from the bone."

 (14) Or, "suspensory ligament"? Possibly Xenophon's anatomy is wrong,
    and he mistook the back sinew for a bone like the fibula. The part
    in question might intelligibly enough, if not technically, be
    termed {perone}, being of the brooch-pin order.

If the young horse in walking bends his knees flexibly, you may safely
conjecture that when he comes to be ridden he will have flexible legs,
since the quality of suppleness invariably increases with age. (15)
Supple knees are highly esteemed and with good reason, rendering as
they do the horse less liable to stumble or break down from fatigue than
those of stiffer build.

 (15) Lit. "all horses bend their legs more flexibly as time advances."

Coming to the thighs below the shoulder-blades, (16) or arms, these if
thick and muscular present a stronger and handsomer appearance, just
as in the case of a human being. Again, a comparatively broad chest is
better alike for strength and beauty, and better adapted to carry the
legs well asunder, so that they will not overlap and interfere with one
another. Again, the neck should not be set on dropping forward from the
chest, like a boar's, but, like that of a game-cock rather, it should
shoot upwards to the crest, and be slack (17) along the curvature;
whilst the head should be bony and the jawbone small. In this way the
neck will be well in front of the rider, and the eye will command what
lies before the horse's feet. A horse, moreover, of this build, however
spirited, will be least capable of overmastering the rider, (18) since
it is not by arching but by stretching out his neck and head that a
horse endeavours to assert his power. (19)

 (16) Lit. "the thighs below the shoulder-blades" are distinguished
    from "the thighs below the tail." They correspond respectively to
    our "arms" (i.e. forearms) and "gaskins," and anatomically
    speaking = the radius (os brachii) and the tibia.

 (17) "Slack towards the flexure" (Stonehenge).

 (18) Or, "of forcing the rider's hand and bolting."

 (19) Or, "to display violence or run away."

It is important also to observe whether the jaws are soft or hard on one
or other side, since as a rule a horse with unequal jaws (20) is liable
to become hard-mouthed on one side.

 (20) Or, "whose bars are not equally sensitive."

Again, a prominent rather than a sunken eye is suggestive of alertness,
and a horse of this type will have a wider range of vision.

And so of the nostrils: a wide-dilated nostril is at once better than a
contracted one for respiration, and gives the animal a fiercer aspect.
Note how, for instance, when one stallion is enraged against another, or
when his spirit chafes in being ridden, (21) the nostrils at once become
dilated.

 (21) Or, "in the racecourse or on the exercising-ground how readily he
    distends his nostrils."

A comparatively large crest and small ears give a more typical and
horse-like appearance to the head, whilst lofty withers again allow the
rider a surer seat and a stronger adhesion between the shoulders and the
body. (22)

 (22) Or if with L. D.  ({kai to somati}), transl. "adhesion to the
    horse's shoulders."

A "double spine," (23) again, is at once softer to sit on than a single,
and more pleasing to the eye. So, too, a fairly deep side somewhat
rounded towards the belly (24) will render the animal at once easier to
sit and stronger, and as a general rule better able to digest his food.
(25)

 (23) Reading after Courier {rakhis ge men}. See Virg. "Georg." iii.
    87, "at duplex agitur per lumbos spina." "In a horse that is in
    good case, the back is broad, and the spine does not stick up like
    a ridge, but forms a kind of furrow on the back" (John Martyn); "a
    full back," as we say.

 (24) Or, "in proportion to." See Courier ("Du Commandement de la
    Cavalerie at de l'Equitation": deux livres de Xenophon, traduits
    par un officier d'artillerie a cheval), note ad loc. p. 83.

 (25) i.e. "and keep in good condition."

The broader and shorter the loins the more easily will the horse raise
his forequarters and bring up his hindquarters under him. Given these
points, moreover, the belly will appear as small as possible, a portion
of the body which if large is partly a disfigurement and partly tends to
make the horse less strong and capable of carrying weight. (26)

 (26) Al. "more feeble at once and ponderous in his gait."

The quarters should be broad and fleshy in correspondence with the sides
and chest, and if they are also firm and solid throughout they will be
all the lighter for the racecourse, and will render the horse in every
way more fleet.

To come to the thighs (and buttocks): (27) if the horse have these
separated by a broad line of demarcation (28) he will be able to plant
his hind-legs under him with a good gap between; (29) and in so doing
will assume a posture (30) and a gait in action at once prouder and more
firmly balanced, and in every way appear to the best advantage.

 (27) Lit. "the thighs beneath the tail."

 (28) Reading {plateia to gramme diorismenous ekhe}, sc. the perineum.
    Al. Courier (after Apsyrtus), op. cit. p. 14, {plateis te kai me
    diestrammenous}, "broad and not turned outwards."

 (29) Or, "he will be sure to spread well behind," etc.

 (30) {ton upobasin}, tech. of the crouching posture assumed by the
    horse for mounting or "in doing the demi-passade" (so Morgan, op.
    cit. p. 126).

The human subject would seem to point to this conclusion. When a
man wants to lift anything from off the ground he essays to do so by
bringing the legs apart and not by bringing them together.

A horse ought not to have large testicles, though that is not a point to
be determined in the colt.

And now, as regards the lower parts, the hocks, (31) or shanks and
fetlocks and hoofs, we have only to repeat what has been said already
about those of the fore-legs.

 (31) {ton katothen astragelon, e knemon}, lit. "the under (or hinder?)
    knuckle-bones (hocks?) or shins"; i.e. anatomically speaking, the
    os calcis, astragalus, tarsals, and metatarsal large and small.

I will here note some indications by which one may forecast the probable
size of the grown animal. The colt with the longest shanks at the moment
of being foaled will grow into the biggest horse; the fact being--and it
holds of all the domestic quadrupeds (32)--that with advance of time the
legs hardly increase at all, while the rest of the body grows uniformly
up to these, until it has attained its proper symmetry.

 (32) Cf. Aristot. "de Part. Anim." iv. 10; "H. A." ii. 1; Plin. "N.
    H." xi. 108.

Such is the type (33) of colt and such the tests to be applied, with
every prospect of getting a sound-footed, strong, and fleshy animal
fine of form and large of stature. If changes in some instances develop
during growth, that need not prevent us from applying our tests in
confidence. It far more often happens that an ugly-looking colt will
turn out serviceable, (34) than that a foal of the above description
will turn out ugly or defective.

 (33) Lit. "by testing the shape of the colt in this way it seems to us
    the purchaser will get," etc.

 (34) For the vulg. {eukhroastoi}, a doubtful word = "well coloured,"
    i.e. "sleek and healthy," L. & S. would read {eukhrooi} (cf. "Pol.
    Lac." v. 8). L. Dind. conj. {enrostoi}, "robust"; Schneid.
    {eukhrestoi}, "serviceable."



II

The right method of breaking a colt needs no description at our hands.
(1) As a matter of state organisation, (2) cavalry duties usually
devolve upon those who are not stinted in means, and who have a
considerable share in the government; (3) and it seems far better for
a young man to give heed to his own health of body and to horsemanship,
or, if he already knows how to ride with skill, to practising manoeuvres,
than that he should set up as a trainer of horses. (4) The older man has
his town property and his friends, and the hundred-and-one concerns of
state or of war, on which to employ his time and energies rather than on
horsebreaking. It is plain then that any one holding my views (5) on
the subject will put a young horse out to be broken. But in so doing he
ought to draw up articles, just as a father does when he apprentices his
son to some art or handicraft, stating what sort of knowledge the
young creature is to be sent back possessed of. These will serve as
indications (6) to the trainer what points he must pay special heed to
if he is to earn his fee. At the same time pains should be taken on
the owner's part to see that the colt is gentle, tractable, and
affectionate, (7) when delivered to the professional trainer. That is a
condition of things which for the most part may be brought about at home
and by the groom--if he knows how to let the animal connect (8) hunger
and thirst and the annoyance of flies with solitude, whilst associating
food and drink and escape from sources of irritation with the presence
of man. As the result of this treatment, necessarily the young horse
will acquire--not fondness merely, but an absolute craving for human
beings. A good deal can be done by touching, stroking, patting those
parts of the body which the creature likes to have so handled. These
are the hairiest parts, or where, if there is anything annoying him, the
horse can least of all apply relief himself.

 (1) Or, "The training of the colt is a topic which, as it seems to us,
    may fairly be omitted, since those appointed for cavalry service
    in these states are persons who," etc. For reading see Courier,
    "Notes," p. 84.

 (2) "Organisation in the several states."

 (3) Or, "As a matter of fact it is the wealthiest members of the
    state, and those who have the largest stake in civic life, that
    are appointed to cavalry duties." See "Hippparch," i. 9.

 (4) Cf. "Econ." iii. 10.

 (5) {ego}. Hitherto the author has used the plural {emin} with which
    he started.

 (6) Reading {upodeigmata}, "finger-post signs," as it were, or "draft
    in outline"; al. {upomnemata} = "memoranda."

 (7) "Gentle, and accustomed to the hand, and fond of man."

 (8) Lit. "if he knows how to provide that hunger and thirst, etc.,
    should be felt by the colt in solitude, whilst food and drink,
    etc., come through help of man."

The groom should have standing orders to take his charge through crowds,
and to make him familiar with all sorts of sights and noises; and if the
colt shows sign of apprehension at them, (9) he must teach him--not by
cruel, but by gentle handling--that they are not really formidable.

 (9) Or, "is disposed to shy."

On this topic, then, of training, (10) the rules here given will, I
think, suffice for any private individual.

 (10) Or, "In reference to horsebreaking, the above remarks will
    perhaps be found sufficient for the practical guidance of an
    amateur."



III

To meet the case in which the object is to buy a horse already fit
for riding, we will set down certain memoranda, (1) which, if applied
intelligently, may save the purchaser from being cheated.

 (1) "Which the purchaser should lay to heart, if he does not wish to
    be cheated."

First, then, let there be no mistake about the age. If the horse
has lost his mark teeth, (2) not only will the purchaser's hopes be
blighted, but he may find himself saddled for ever with a sorry bargain.
(3)

 (2) Or, "the milk teeth," i.e. is more than five years old. See
    Morgan, p. 126.

 (3) Lit. "a horse that has lost his milk teeth cannot be said to
    gladden his owner's mind with hopes, and is not so easily disposed
    of."

Given that the fact of youth is well established, let there be no
mistake about another matter: how does he take the bit into his mouth
and the headstall (4) over his ears? There need be little ambiguity
on this score, if the purchaser will see the bit inserted and again
removed, under his eyes. Next, let it be carefully noted how the horse
stands being mounted. Many horses are extremely loath to admit the
approach of anything which, if once accepted, clearly means to them
enforced exertion.

 (4) {koruphaia}, part of the {khalinos} gear.

Another point to ascertain is whether the horse, when mounted, can be
induced to leave other horses, or when being ridden past a group of
horses standing, will not bolt off to join the company. Some
horses again, as the result of bad training, will run away from the
exercising-ground and make for the stable. A hard mouth may be detected
by the exercise called the {pede} or volte, (5) and still more so by
varying the direction of the volte to right or left. Many horses will
not attempt to run away except for the concurrence of a bad mouth along
with an avenue of escape home. (6)

 (5) See Sturz, s.v.; Pollux, i. 219. Al. "the longe," but the passage
    below (vii. 14) is suggestive rather of the volte.

 (6) Al. "will only attempt to bolt where the passage out towards home
    combines, as it were, with a bad mouth." {e... ekphora} = "the
    exit from the manege or riding school."

Another point which it is necessary to learn is, whether when let go at
full speed the horse can be pulled up (7) sharp and is willing to wheel
round in obedience to the rein.

 (7) {analambanetai}, "come to the poise" (Morgan). For
    {apostrephesthai} see ix.6; tech. "caracole."

It is also well to ascertain by experience if the horse you propose to
purchase will show equal docility in response to the whip. Every one
knows what a useless thing a servant is, or a body of troops, that will
not obey. A disobedient horse is not only useless, but may easily play
the part of an arrant traitor.

And since it is assumed that the horse to be purchased is intended for
war, we must widen our test to include everything which war itself can
bring to the proof: such as leaping ditches, scrambling over walls,
scaling up and springing off high banks. We must test his paces by
galloping him up and down steep pitches and sharp inclines and along a
slant. For each and all of these will serve as a touchstone to gauge the
endurance of his spirit and the soundness of his body.

I am far from saying, indeed, that because an animal fails to perform
all these parts to perfection, he must straightway be rejected; since
many a horse will fall short at first, not from inability, but from want
of experience. With teaching, practice, and habit, almost any horse will
come to perform all these feats beautifully, provided he be sound and
free from vice. Only you must beware of a horse that is naturally of a
nervous temperament. An over-timorous animal will not only prevent the
rider from using the vantage-ground of its back to strike an enemy, but
is as likely as not to bring him to earth himself and plunge him into
the worst of straits.

We must, also, find out of the horse shows any viciousness towards other
horses or towards human beings; also, whether he is skittish; (8) such
defects are apt to cause his owner trouble.

 (8) Or, "very ticklish."

As to any reluctance on the horse's part to being bitted or mounted,
dancing and twisting about and the rest, (9) you will get a more exact
idea on this score, if, when he has gone through his work, you will try
and repeat the precise operations which he went through before you began
your ride. Any horse that having done his work shows a readiness to
undergo it all again, affords sufficient evidence thereby of spirit and
endurance.

 (9) Reading {talla dineumata}, lit. "and the rest of his twistings and
    twirlings about."

To put the matter in a nutshell: given that the horse is sound-footed,
gentle, moderately fast, willing and able to undergo toil, and above all
things (10) obedient--such an animal, we venture to predict, will
give the least trouble and the greatest security to his rider in the
circumstances of war; while, conversely, a beast who either out of
sluggishness needs much driving, or from excess of mettle much coaxing
and manoeuvering, will give his rider work enough to occupy both his hands
and a sinking of the heart when dangers thicken.

 (10) Al. "thoroughly."



IV

We will now suppose the purchaser has found a horse which he admires;
(1) the purchase is effected, and he has brought him home--how is he to
be housed? It is best that the stable should be placed in a quarter
of the establishment where the master will see the horse as often as
possible. (2) It is a good thing also to have his stall so arranged that
there will be as little risk of the horse's food being stolen from the
manger, as of the master's from his larder or store-closet. To neglect
a detail of this kind is surely to neglect oneself; since in the hour of
danger, it is certain, the owner has to consign himself, life and limb,
to the safe keeping of his horse.

 (1) Lit. "To proceed: when you have bought a horse which you admire
    and have brought him home."

 (2) i.e. "where he will be brought as frequently as possible under the
    master's eye." Cf. "Econ." xii. 20.

Nor is it only to avoid the risk of food being stolen that a secure
horse-box is desirable, but for the further reason that if the horse
takes to scattering his food, the action is at once detected; and any
one who observes that happening may take it as a sign and symptom
either of too much blood, (3) which calls for veterinary aid, or of
over-fatigue, for which rest is the cure, or else that an attack of
indigestion (4) or some other malady is coming on. And just as with
human beings, so with the horse, all diseases are more curable at their
commencement (5) than after they have become chronic, or been wrongly
treated. (6)

 (3) "A plethoric condition of the blood."

 (4) {krithiasis}. Lit. "barley surfeit"; "une fourbure." See Aristot.
    "H. A." viii. 24. 4.

 (5) i.e. "in the early acute stages."

 (6) Al. "and the mischief has spread."

But if food and exercise with a view to strengthening the horse's body
are matters of prime consideration, no less important is it to pay
attention to the feet. A stable with a damp and smooth floor will spoil
the best hoof which nature can give. (7) To prevent the floor being
damp, it should be sloped with channels; and to avoid smoothness, paved
with cobble stones sunk side by side in the ground and similar in size
to the horse's hoofs. (8) A stable floor of this sort is calculated
to strengthen the horse's feet by the mere pressure on the part in
standing. In the next place it will be the groom's business to lead out
the horse somewhere to comb and curry him; and after his morning's feed
to unhalter him from the manger, (9) so that he may come to his evening
meal with greater relish. To secure the best type of stable-yard, and
with a view to strengthening the horse's feet, I would suggest to take
and throw down loosely (10) four or five waggon loads of pebbles, each
as large as can be grasped in the hand, and about a pound in weight; the
whole to be fenced round with a skirting of iron to prevent scattering.
The mere standing on these will come to precisely the same thing as if
for a certain portion of the day the horse were, off and on, stepping
along a stony road; whilst being curried or when fidgeted by flies he
will be forced to use his hoofs just as much as if he were walking. Nor
is it the hoofs merely, but a surface so strewn with stones will tend to
harden the frog of the foot also.

 (7) Lit. "A damp and smooth floor may be the ruin of a naturally good
    hoof." It will be understood that the Greeks did not shoe their
    horses.

 (8) See Courier, p. 54, for an interesting experiment tried by himself
    at Bari.

 (9) Cf. "Hipparch," i. 16.

 (10) Or, "spread so as to form a surface."

But if care is needed to make the hoofs hard, similar pains should be
taken to make the mouth and jaws soft; and the same means and appliances
which will render a man's flesh and skin soft, will serve to soften and
supple a horse's mouth. (11)

 (11) Or, "may be used with like effect on a horse's mouth," i.e.
    bathing, friction, oil. See Pollux, i. 201.



V

It is the duty of a horseman, as we think, to have his groom trained
thoroughly in all that concerns the treatment of the horse. In the first
place, then, the groom should know that he is never to knot the halter
(1) at the point where the headstall is attached to the horse's head. By
constantly rubbing his head against the manger, if the halter does not
sit quite loose about his ears, the horse will be constantly injuring
himself; (2) and with sores so set up, it is inevitable that he should
show peevishness, while being bitted or rubbed down.

 (1) Lit. "by which the horse is tied to the manger"; "licol d'ecurie."

 (2) Al. "in nine cases out of ten he rubs his head... and ten to
    one will make a sore."

It is desirable that the groom should be ordered to carry out the dung
and litter of the horse to some one place each day. By so doing, he will
discharge the duty with least trouble to himself, (3) and at the same
time be doing the horse a kindness.

 (3) Al. "get rid of the refuse in the easiest way."

The groom should also be instructed to attach the muzzle to the horse's
mouth, both when taking him out to be groomed and to the rolling-ground.
(4) In fact he should always muzzle him whenever he takes him anywhere
without the bit. The muzzle, while it is no hindrance to respiration,
prevents biting; and when attached it serves to rob the horse of
opportunity for vice. (5)

 (4) Cf. "Econ." xi. 18; Aristoph. "Clouds," 32.

 (5) Or, "prevents the horse from carrying out vicious designs."

Again, care should be taken to tie the horse up with the halter above
his head. A horse's natural instinct, in trying to rid himself of
anything that irritates the face, is to toss up his head, and by this
upward movement, if so tied, he only slackens the chain instead of
snapping it. In rubbing the horse down, the groom should begin with the
head and mane; as until the upper parts are clean, it is vain to cleanse
the lower; then, as regards the rest of the body, first brush up the
hair, by help of all the ordinary implements for cleansing, and then
beat out the dust, following the lie of the hair. The hair on the
spine (and dorsal region) ought not to be touched with any instrument
whatever; the hand alone should be used to rub and smooth it, and in the
direction of its natural growth, so as to preserve from injury that part
of the horse's back on which the rider sits.

The head should be drenched with water simply; for, being bony, if you
try to cleanse it with iron or wooden instruments injury may be caused.
So, too, the forelock should be merely wetted; the long hairs of which
it is composed, without hindering the animal's vision, serve to scare
away from the eyes anything that might trouble them. Providence, we must
suppose, (6) bestowed these hairs upon the horse, instead of the large
ears which are given to the ass and the mule as a protection to the
eyes. (7) The tail, again, and mane should be washed, the object being
to help the hairs to grow--those in the tail so as to allow the creature
the greatest reach possible in brushing away molesting objects, (8) and
those of the neck in order that the rider may have as free a grip as
possible.

 (6) Lit. "The gods, we must suppose, gave..."

 (7) Lit. "as defences or protective bulwarks."

 (8) Insects, etc.

Mane, forelock, and tail are triple gifts bestowed by the gods upon the
horse for the sake of pride and ornament, (9) and here is the proof: a
brood mare, so long as her mane is long and flowing, will not readily
suffer herself to be covered by an ass; hence breeders of mules take
care to clip the mane of the mare with a view to covering. (10)

 (9) {aglaias eneka} (a poetic word). Cf. "Od." xv. 78; xvii. 310.

 (10) For this belief Schneid. cf Aristot. "H. A." vi. 18; Plin. viii.
    42; Aelian, "H. A." ii. 10, xi. 18, xii. 16, to which Dr. Morgan
    aptly adds Soph. "Fr." 587 (Tyro), a beautiful passage, {komes de
    penthos lagkhano polou diken, k.t.l.} (cf. Plut. "Mor." 754 A).

Washing of the legs we are inclined to dispense with--no good is done
but rather harm to the hoofs by this daily washing. So, too, excessive
cleanliness of the belly is to be discouraged; the operation itself is
most annoying to the horse; and the cleaner these parts are made, the
thicker the swarm of troublesome things which collect beneath the belly.
Besides which, however elaborately you clean these parts, the horse is
no sooner led out than presently he will be just as dirty as if he had
not been cleaned. Omit these ablutions then, we say; and similarly for
the legs, rubbing and currying by hand is quite sufficient.



VI

We will now explain how the operation of grooming may be performed with
least danger to oneself and best advantage to the horse. If the groom
attempts to clean the horse with his face turned the same way as the
horse, he runs the risk of getting a knock in the face from the animal's
knee or hoof. When cleaning him he should turn his face in the opposite
direction to the horse, and planting himself well out of the way of his
leg, at an angle to his shoulder-blade, proceed to rub him down. He
will then escape all mischief, and he will be able to clean the frog by
folding back the hoof. Let him clean the hind-legs in the same way.

The man who has to do with the horse should know, with regard to this
and all other necessary operations, that he ought to approach as little
as possible from the head or the tail to perform them; for if the horse
attempt to show vice he is master of the man in front and rear. But by
approaching from the side he will get the greatest hold over the horse
with the least risk of injury to himself.

When the horse has to be led, we do not approve of leading him from in
front, for the simple reason that the person so leading him robs himself
of his power of self-protection, whilst he leaves the horse freedom to
do what he likes. On the other hand, we take a like exception to the
plan of training the horse to go forward on a long rein (1) and lead
the way, and for this reason: it gives the horse the opportunity of
mischief, in whichever direction he likes, on either flank, and the
power also to turn right about and face his driver. How can a troop
of horses be kept free of one another, if driven in this fashion from
behind?--whereas a horse accustomed to be led from the side will have
least power of mischief to horse or man, and at the same time be in the
best position to be mounted by the rider at a moment's notice, were it
necessary.

 (1) See a passage from Strattis, "Chrys." 2 (Pollux, x. 55), {prosage
    ton polon atrema, proslabon ton agogea brakhuteron. oukh oras oti
    abolos estin}.

In order to insert the bit correctly the groom should, in the first
place, approach on the near (2) side of the horse, and then throwing
the reins over his head, let them drop loosely on the withers; raise the
headstall in his right hand, and with his left present the bit. If the
horse will take the bit, it is a simple business to adjust the strap of
the headstall; but if he refuses to open his mouth, the groom must hold
the bit against the teeth and at the same time insert the thumb (3)
of his left hand inside the horse's jaws. Most horses will open their
mouths to that operation. But if he still refuses, then the groom must
press the lip against the tush (4); very few horses will refuse the bit,
when that is done to them. (5)

 (2) Lit. "on the left-hand side."

 (3) {ton megan daktulon}, Hdt. iii. 8.

 (4) i.e. "canine tooth."

 (5) Or, "it is a very exceptional horse that will not open his mouth
    under the circumstances."

The groom can hardly be too much alive to the following points * * * if
any work is to be done: (6) in fact, so important is it that the horse
should readily take his bit, that, to put it tersely, a horse that will
not take it is good for nothing. Now, if the horse be bitted not only
when he has work to do, but also when he is being taken to his food and
when he is being led home from a ride, it would be no great marvel if he
learnt to take the bit of his own accord, when first presented to him.

 (6) Reading with L. Dind. {khre de ton ippokomon kai ta oiade...
    paroxunthai, ei ti dei ponein}, or if as Schneid., Sauppe, etc.,
    {khre de ton ippon me kata toiade, k.t.l.}, transl. "the horse
    must not be irritated in such operations as these," etc.; but
    {toiade} = "as follows," if correct, suggests a lacuna in either
    case at this point.

It would be good for the groom to know how to give a leg up in the
Persian fashion, (7) so that in case of illness or infirmity of age
the master himself may have a man to help him on to horseback without
trouble, or, if he so wish, be able to oblige a friend with a man to
mount him. (8)

 (7) Cf. "Anab." IV. iv. 4; "Hipparch," i. 17; "Cyrop." VII. i. 38.

 (8) An {anaboleus}. Cf. Plut. "C. Gracch." 7.

The one best precept--the golden rule--in dealing with a horse is never
to approach him angrily. Anger is so devoid of forethought that it will
often drive a man to do things which in a calmer mood he will regret.
(9) Thus, when a horse is shy of any object and refuses to approach it,
you must teach him that there is nothing to be alarmed at, particularly
if he be a plucky animal; (10) or, failing that, touch the formidable
object yourself, and then gently lead the horse up to it. The opposite
plan of forcing the frightened creature by blows only intensifies its
fear, the horse mentally associating the pain he suffers at such a
moment with the object of suspicion, which he naturally regards as its
cause.

 (9) Cf. "Hell." v. iii. 7 for this maxim.

 (10) Al. "if possibly by help of another and plucky animal."

If, when the groom brings up the horse to his master to mount, he knows
how to make him lower his back, (11) to facilitate mounting, we have no
fault to find. Still, we consider that the horseman should practise and
be able to mount, even if the horse does not so lend himself; (12) since
on another occasion another type of horse may fall to the rider's lot,
(13) nor can the same rider be always served by the same equerry. (14)

 (11) {upobibazesthai}. See above, i. 14; Pollux, i. 213; Morgan ad
    loc. "Stirrups were unknown till long after the Christian era
    began."

 (12) Or, "apart from these good graces on the animal's part."

 (13) As a member of the cavalry.

 (14) Reading {allo}. Al. reading {allos} with L. D., "and the same
    horse will at one time humour you in one way and again in
    another." Cf. viii. 13, x. 12, for {uperetein} of the horse.



VII

The master, let us suppose, has received his horse and is ready to
mount. (1) We will now prescribe certain rules to be observed in the
interests not only of the horseman but of the animal which he bestrides.
First, then, he should take the leading rein, which hangs from the
chin-strap or nose-band, (2) conveniently in his left hand, held slack
so as not to jerk the horse's mouth, whether he means to mount by
hoisting himself up, catching hold of the mane behind the ears, or
to vault on to horseback by help of his spear. With the right hand
he should grip the reins along with a tuft of hair beside the
shoulder-joint, (3) so that he may not in any way wrench the horse's
mouth with the bit while mounting. In the act of taking the spring off
the ground for mounting, (4) he should hoist his body by help of the
left hand, and with the right at full stretch assist the upward movement
(5) (a position in mounting which will present a graceful spectacle also
from behind); (6) at the same time with the leg well bent, and taking
care not to place his knee on the horse's back, he must pass his leg
clean over to the off side; and so having brought his foot well round,
plant himself firmly on his seat. (7)

 (1) Reading {otan... paradexetai... os anabesomenos}. Or,
    reading {otan paradexetai ton ippea (sc. o. ippos) ws
    anabesomenon}, transl. "the horse has been brought round ready for
    mounting."

 (2) So Courier, "la muserolle." It might be merely a stitched leather
    strap or made of a chain in part, which rattled; as
    {khrusokhalinon patagon psalion} (Aristoph. "Peace," 155) implies.
    "Curb" would be misleading.

 (3) "Near the withers."

 (4) Or, "as soon as he has got the springing poise preliminary to
    mounting."

 (5) "Give himself simultaneously a lift." Reading {ekteinon}, or if
    {enteinon}, "keeping his right arm stiff."

 (6) Or, "a style of mounting which will obviate an ungainly attitude
    behind."

 (7) Lit. "lower his buttocks on to the horse's back."

To meet the case in which the horseman may chance to be leading his
horse with the left hand and carrying his spear in the right, it would
be good, we think, for every one to practise vaulting on to his seat
from the right side also. In fact, he has nothing else to learn except
to do with his right limbs what he has previously done with the left,
and vice versa. And the reason we approve of this method of mounting
is (8) that it enables the soldier at one and the same instant to
get astride of his horse and to find himself prepared at all points,
supposing he should have to enter the lists of battle on a sudden.

 (8) Lit. "One reason for the praise which we bestow on this method of
    mounting is that at the very instant of gaining his seat the
    soldier finds himself fully prepared to engage the enemy on a
    sudden, if occasion need."

But now, supposing the rider fairly seated, whether bareback or on a
saddle-cloth, a good seat is not that of a man seated on a chair, but
rather the pose of a man standing upright with his legs apart. In this
way he will be able to hold on to the horse more firmly by his thighs;
and this erect attitude will enable him to hurl a javelin or to strike
a blow from horseback, if occasion calls, with more vigorous effect.
The leg and foot should hang loosely from the knee; by keeping the
leg stiff, the rider is apt to have it broken in collision with some
obstacle; whereas a flexible leg (9) will yield to the impact, and at
the same time not shift the thigh from its position. The rider should
also accustom the whole of his body above the hips to be as supple as
possible; for thus he will enlarge his scope of action, and in case of
a tug or shove be less liable to be unseated. Next, when the rider is
seated, he must, in the first place, teach his horse to stand quiet,
until he has drawn his skirts from under him, if need be, (10) and got
the reins an equal length and grasped his spear in the handiest fashion;
and, in the next place, he should keep his left arm close to his side.
This position will give the rider absolute ease and freedom, (11) and
his hand the firmest hold.

 (9) i.e. "below the knee"; "shin and calf."

 (10) Lit. "pulled up" (and arranged the folds of his mantle).

 (11) {eustalestatos}, "the most business-like deportment."

As to reins, we recommend those which are well balanced, without being
weak or slippery or thick, so that when necessary, the hand which holds
them can also grasp a spear.

As soon as the rider gives the signal to the horse to start, (12) he
should begin at a walking pace, which will tend to allay his excitement.
If the horse is inclined to droop his head, the reins should be held
pretty high; or somewhat low, if he is disposed to carry his head high.
This will set off the horse's bearing to the best advantage. Presently,
as he falls into a natural trot, (13) he will gradually relax his limbs
without the slightest suffering, and so come more agreeably to the
gallop. (14) Since, too, the preference is given to starting on the left
foot, it will best conduce to that lead if, while the horse is still
trotting, the signal to gallop should be given at the instant of making
a step with his right foot. (15) As he is on the point of lifting
his left foot he will start upon it, and while turning left will
simultaneously make the first bound of the gallop; (16) since, as a
matter of instinct, a horse, on being turned to the right, leads off
with his right limbs, and to the left with his left.

 (12) "Forwards!"

 (13) Or, "the true trot."

 (14) {epirrabdophorein}, "a fast pace in response to a wave of the
    whip."

 (15) See Berenger, i. p. 249; also the "Cavalry Drill Book," Part I.
    Equitation, S. 22, "The Canter."

 (16) {tes episkeliseos}, "he will make the forward stride of the
    gallop in the act of turning to the left." See Morgan ad loc.

As an exercise, we recommend what is called the volte, (17) since it
habituates the animal to turn to either hand; while a variation in the
order of the turn is good as involving an equalisation of both sides of
the mouth, in first one, and then the other half of the exercise. (18)
But of the two we commend the oval form of the volte rather than the
circular; for the horse, being already sated with the straight course,
will be all the more ready to turn, and will be practised at once in
the straight course and in wheeling. At the curve, he should be held
up, (19) because it is neither easy nor indeed safe when the horse is
at full speed to turn sharp, especially if the ground is broken (20) or
slippery.

 (17) {pede}, figure of eight.

 (18) Or, "on first one and then the other half of the manege."

 (19) {upolambanein}. See "Hipparch," iii. 14; "Hunting," iii. 10; vi.
    22, of a dog.

 (20) {apokroton}, al. {epikroton}, "beaten, hard-trodden ground."

But in collecting him, the rider should as little as possible sway the
horse obliquely with the bit, and as little as possible incline his own
body; or, he may rest assured, a trifle will suffice to stretch him and
his horse full length upon the ground. The moment the horse has his eyes
fixed on the straight course after making a turn, is the time to urge
him to full speed. In battle, obviously, these turns and wheelings
are with a view to charging or retiring; consequently, to practise
quickening the pace after wheeling is desirable. When the horse seems
to have had enough of the manege, it would be good to give him a slight
pause, and then suddenly to put him to his quickest, away from his
fellows first, (21) and now towards them; and then again to quiet him
down in mid-career as short as possible; (22) and from halt once more
to turn him right-about and off again full charge. It is easy to
predict that the day will come when there will be need of each of these
manoeuvres.

 (21) {mentoi}, "of course."

 (22) Or, "within the narrowest compass"; "as finely as possible."

When the moment to dismount has come, you should never do so among
other horses, nor near a group of people, (23) nor outside the
exercising-ground; but on the precise spot which is the scene of his
compulsory exertion there let the horse find also relaxation. (24)

 (23) Or, "a knot of bystanders"; cf. Thuc. ii. 21.

 (24) Or, as we say, "be caressed, and dismissed."



VIII

As there will, doubtless, be times when the horse will need to race
downhill and uphill and on sloping ground; times, also, when he will
need to leap across an obstacle; or, take a flying leap from off a bank;
(1) or, jump down from a height, the rider must teach and train himself
and his horse to meet all emergencies. In this way the two will have a
chance of saving each the other, and may be expected to increase their
usefulness.

 (1) {ekpedan} = exsilire in altum (Sturz, and so Berenger); "to leap
    over ditches, and upon high places and down from them."

And here, if any reader should accuse us of repeating ourselves, on
the ground that we are only stating now what we said before on the same
topics, (2) we say that this is not mere repetition. In the former case,
we confined ourselves to advising the purchaser before he concluded his
bargain to test whether the horse could do those particular things; (3)
what we are now maintaining is that the owner ought to teach his own
horse, and we will explain how this teaching is to be done.

 (2) Or, "treating of a topic already handled."

 (3) i.e. possessed a certain ability at the date of purchase.

With a horse entirely ignorant of leaping, the best way is to take him
by the leading rein, which hangs loose, and to get across the trench
yourself first, and then to pull tight on the leading-rein, to induce
him to leap across. If he refuses, some one with a whip or switch should
apply it smartly. The result will be that the horse will clear at a
bound, not the distance merely, but a far larger space than requisite;
and for the future there will be no need for an actual blow, the mere
sight of some one coming up behind will suffice to make him leap. As
soon as he is accustomed to leap in this way you may mount him and put
him first at smaller and then at larger trenches. At the moment of the
spring be ready to apply the spur; and so too, when training him to leap
up and leap down, you should touch him with the spur at the critical
instant. In the effort to perform any of these actions with the whole
body, the horse will certainly perform them with more safety to himself
and to his rider than he will, if his hind-quarters lag, in taking a
ditch or fence, or in making an upward spring or downward jump. (4)

 (4) Lit. "in making these jumps, springs, and leaps across or up or
    down."

To face a steep incline, you must first teach him on soft ground, and
finally, when he is accustomed to that, he will much prefer the downward
to the upward slope for a fast pace. And as to the apprehension, which
some people entertain, that a horse may dislocate the shoulder in
galloping down an incline, it should encourage them to learn that the
Persians and Odrysians all run races down precipitous slopes; (5) and
their horses are every bit as sound as our own. (6)

 (5) Cf. "Anab." IV. viii. 28; and so the Georgians to this day
    (Chardin ap. Courier, op. cit. p. 70, n. 1).

 (6) Lit. "as are those of the Hellenes."

Nor must we omit another topic: how the rider is to accommodate himself
to these several movements. (7) Thus, when the horse breaks off into a
gallop, the rider ought to bend forward, since the horse will be less
likely to slip from under; and so to pitch his rider off. So again in
pulling him up short (8) the rider should lean back; and thus escape a
shock. In leaping a ditch or tearing up a steep incline, it is no bad
plan to let go the reins and take hold of the mane, so that the animal
may not feel the burthen of the bit in addition to that of the ground.
In going down a steep incline the rider must throw himself right back
and hold in the horse with the bit, to prevent himself being hurled
headforemost down the slope himself if not his horse.

 (7) Or, "to each set of occurrences."

 (8) Al. "when the horse is being brought to a poise" (Morgan); and see
    Hermann ap. Schneid., {analambanein} = retinere equum, anhalten,
    pariren. i.e. "rein in" of the "Parade."

It is a correct principle to vary these exercises, which should be gone
through sometimes in one place and sometimes in another, and should
sometimes be shorter and sometimes longer in duration. The horse will
take much more kindly to them if you do not confine him to one place and
one routine.

Since it is a matter of prime necessity that the rider should keep his
seat, while galloping full speed on every sort of ground, and at the
same time be able to use his weapons with effect on horseback, nothing
could be better, where the country suits and there are wild animals,
than to practise horsemanship in combination with the chase. But when
these resources fail, a good exercise may be supplied in the combined
efforts of two horsemen. (9) One of them will play the part of fugitive,
retreating helter-skelter over every sort of ground, with lance reversed
and plying the butt end. The other pursues, with buttons on his javelins
and his lance similarly handled. (10) Whenever he comes within javelin
range he lets fly at the retreating foeman with his blunted missiles; or
whenever within spear thrust he deals the overtaken combatant a blow.
In coming to close quarters, it is a good plan first to drag the foeman
towards oneself, and then on a sudden to thrust him off; that is a
device to bring him to the ground. (11) The correct plan for the man so
dragged is to press his horse forward: by which action the man who is
being dragged is more likely to unhorse his assailant than to be brought
to the ground himself.

 (9) {ippota}. A poetic word; "cavaliers."

 (10) Or, "manipulated."

 (11) Or, "that may be spoken off as the 'purl trick'"; "it will
    unhorse him if anything."

If it ever happens that you have an enemy's camp in front, and cavalry
skirmishing is the order of the day (at one time charging the enemy
right up to the hostile battle-line, and again beating a retreat),
under these circumstances it is well to bear in mind that so long as the
skirmisher is close to his own party, (12) valour and discretion alike
dictate to wheel and charge in the vanguard might and main; but when he
finds himself in close proximity to the foe, he must keep his horse well
in hand. This, in all probability, will enable him to do the greatest
mischief to the enemy, and to receive least damage at his hands.

 (12) See "Hipparch," viii. 23.

The gods have bestowed on man, indeed, the gift of teaching man his duty
by means of speech and reasoning, but the horse, it is obvious, is not
open to instruction by speech and reasoning. If you would have a horse
learn to perform his duty, your best plan will be, whenever he does
as you wish, to show him some kindness in return, and when he is
disobedient to chastise him. This principle, though capable of being
stated in a few words, is one which holds good throughout the whole of
horsemanship. As, for instance, a horse will more readily take the bit,
if each time he accepts it some good befalls him; or, again, he will
leap ditches and spring up embankments and perform all the other feats
incumbent on him, if he be led to associate obedience to the word of
command with relaxation. (13)

 (13) Lit. "if every time he performs the word of command he is led to
    expect some relaxation."



IX

The topics hitherto considered have been: firstly, how to reduce the
chance of being cheated in the purchase of a colt or full-grown horse;
secondly, how to escape as much as possible the risk of injuring your
purchase by mishandling; and lastly, how to succeed in turning out a
horse possessed of all the qualities demanded by the cavalry soldier for
the purposes of war.

The time has come perhaps to add a few suggestions, in case the rider
should be called upon to deal with an animal either unduly spirited or
again unduly sluggish in disposition. The first point to recognise is,
that temper of spirit in a horse takes the place of passion or anger in
a man; and just as you may best escape exciting a man's ill-temper by
avoiding harshness of speech and act, so you will best avoid enraging a
spirited horse by not annoying him. Thus, from the first instant, in the
act of mounting him, you should take pains to minimise the annoyance;
and once on his back you should sit quiet for longer than the ordinary
time, and so urge him forward by the gentlest signs possible; next,
beginning at the slowest pace, gradually work him into a quicker
step, but so gradually that he will find himself at full speed without
noticing it. (1) Any sudden signal will bewilder a spirited horse, just
as a man is bewildered by any sudden sight or sound or other experience.
(I say one should be aware that any unexpected shock will produce
disturbance in a horse.) (2)

 (1) Or, "so that the horse may insensibly fall into a gallop."

 (2) L. Dindorf and others bracket, as spurious.

So if you wish to pull up a spirited horse when breaking off into a
quicker pace than requisite, you must not suddenly wrench him, but
quietly and gently bring the bit to bear upon him, coaxing him rather
than compelling him to calm down. It is the long steady course rather
than the frequent turn which tends to calm a horse. (3) A quiet pace
sustained for a long time has a caressing, (4) soothing effect, the
reverse of exciting. If any one proposes by a series of fast and
oft-repeated gallops to produce a sense of weariness in the horse, and
so to tame him, his expectation will not be justified by the result; for
under such circumstances a spirited horse will do his best to carry the
day by main force, (5) and with a show of temper, like a passionate man,
may contrive to bring on himself and his rider irreparable mischief.

 (3) Or, "long stretches rather than a succession of turns and counter
    turns," {apostrophai}.

 (4) Reading {katapsosi} with L. Dind.

 (5) {agein bia}, vi agere, vi uti, Sturz; al. "go his own gait by
    sheer force."

A spirited horse should be kept in check, so that he does not dash off
at full speed; and on the same principle, you should absolutely abstain
from setting him to race against another; as a general rule, your
fiery-spirited horse is only too fond of contention. (6)

 (6) Reading {skhedon gar kai phil oi thum}, or if {... oi thil kai
    th.} transl. "the more eager and ambitious a horse is, the more
    mettlesome he will tend to become."

Smooth bits are better and more serviceable than rough; if a rough bit
be inserted at all, it must be made to resemble a smooth one as much as
possible by lightness of hand.

It is a good thing also for the rider to accustom himself to keep a
quiet seat, especially when mounted on a spirited horse; and also to
touch him as little as possible with anything except that part of the
body necessary to secure a firm seat.

Again, it should be known that the conventional "chirrup" (7) to quiet
and "cluck" to rouse a horse are a sort of precept of the training
school; and supposing any one from the beginning chose to associate soft
soothing actions with the "cluck" sound, and harsh rousing actions
with the "chirrup," the horse could be taught to rouse himself at the
"chirrup" and to calm himself at the "cluck" sound. On this principle,
at the sound of the trumpet or the shout of battle the rider should
avoid coming up to his charger in a state of excitement, or, indeed,
bringing any disturbing influence to bear on the animal. As far
as possible, at such a crisis he should halt and rest him; and, if
circumstances permit, give him his morning or his evening meal. But the
best advice of all is not to get an over-spirited horse for the purposes
of war.

 (7) Al. "whistling," and see Berenger, ii. 68. {poppusmos}, a sound
    from the lips; {klogmos}, from the cheek.

As to the sluggish type of animal, I need only suggest to do everything
the opposite to what we advise as appropriate in dealing with an animal
of high spirit.



X

But possibly you are not content with a horse serviceable for war. You
want to find in him a showy, attractive animal, with a certain grandeur
of bearing. If so, you must abstain from pulling at his mouth with the
bit, or applying the spur and whip--methods commonly adopted by people
with a view to a fine effect, though, as a matter of fact, they thereby
achieve the very opposite of what they are aiming at. That is to say,
by dragging the mouth up they render the horse blind instead of alive
to what is in front of him; and what with spurring and whipping they
distract the creature to the point of absolute bewilderment and danger.
(1) Feats indeed!--the feats of horses with a strong dislike to being
ridden--up to all sorts of ugly and ungainly tricks. On the contrary,
let the horse be taught to be ridden on a loose bridle, and to hold
his head high and arch his neck, and you will practically be making him
perform the very acts which he himself delights or rather exults in; and
the best proof of the pleasure which he takes is, that when he is let
loose with other horses, and more particularly with mares, you will
see him rear his head aloft to the full height, and arch his neck with
nervous vigour, (2) pawing the air with pliant legs (3) and waving his
tail on high. By training him to adopt the very airs and graces which he
naturally assumes when showing off to best advantage, you have got what
you are aiming at--a horse that delights in being ridden, a splendid and
showy animal, the joy of all beholders.

 (1) Al. "the animals are so scared that, the chances are, they are
    thrown into disorder."

 (2) {gorgoumenos}, with pride and spirit, but with a suggestion of
    "fierceness and rage," as of Job's war-horse.

 (3) "Mollia crura reponit," Virg. "Georg." iii. 76; Hom. "Hymn. ad
    Merc."

How these desirable results are, in our opinion, to be produced, we will
now endeavour to explain. In the first place, then, you ought to have
at least two bits. One of these should be smooth, with discs of a good
size; the other should have heavy and flat discs (4) studded with sharp
spikes, so that when the horse seizes it and dislikes the roughness he
will drop it; then when the smooth is given him instead, he is delighted
with its smoothness, and whatever he has learnt before upon the rough,
he will perform with greater relish on the smooth. He may certainly, out
of contempt for its very smoothness, perpetually try to get a purchase
on it, and that is why we attach large discs to the smooth bit, the
effect of which is to make him open his mouth, and drop the mouthpiece.
It is possible to make the rough bit of every degree of roughness by
keeping it slack or taut.

 (4) See Morgan, op. cit. p. 144 foll.

But, whatever the type of bit may be, let it in any case be flexible.
If it be stiff, at whatever point the horse seizes it he must take it up
bodily against his jaws; just as it does not matter at what point a
man takes hold of a bar of iron, (5) he lifts it as a whole. The other
flexibly constructed type acts like a chain (only the single point
at which you hold it remains stiff, the rest hangs loose); and while
perpetually hunting for the portion which escapes him, he lets the
mouthpiece go from his bars. (6) For this reason the rings are hung in
the middle from the two axles, (7) so that while feeling for them with
his tongue and teeth he may neglect to take the bit up against his jaws.

 (5) Or, "poker," as we might say; lit. "spit."

 (6) Schneid. cf. Eur. "Hippol." 1223.

 (7) See Morgan, note ad loc. Berenger (i. 261) notes: "We have a small
    chain in the upset or hollow part of our bits, called a 'Player,'
    with which the horse playing with his tongue, and rolling it
    about, keeps his mouth moist and fresh; and, as Xenophon hints, it
    may serve likewise to fix his attention and prevent him from
    writhing his mouth about, or as the French call it, 'faire ses
    forces.'"

To explain what is meant by flexible and stiff as applied to a bit, we
will describe the matter. A flexible bit is one in which the axles have
their points of junction broad and smooth, (8) so as to bend easily; and
where the several parts fitting round the axles, being large of aperture
and not too closely packed, have greater flexibility; whereas, if the
several parts do not slide to and fro with ease, and play into each
other, that is what we call a stiff bit. Whatever the kind of bit may
be, the rider must carry out precisely the same rules in using it, as
follows, if he wishes to turn out a horse with the qualities described.
The horse's mouth is not to be pulled back too harshly so as to make
him toss his head aside, nor yet so gently that he will not feel the
pressure. But the instant he raises his neck in answer to the pull, give
him the bit at once; and so throughout, as we never cease repeating, at
every response to your wishes, whenever and wherever the animal performs
his service well, (9) reward and humour him. Thus, when the rider
perceives that the horse takes a pleasure in the high arching and
supple play of his neck, let him seize the instant not to impose severe
exertion on him, like a taskmaster, but rather to caress and coax
him, as if anxious to give him a rest. In this way the horse will be
encouraged and fall into a rapid pace.

 (8) i.e. "the ends of the axles (at the point of junction) which work
    into each other are broad and smooth, so as to play freely at the
    join."

 (9) "Behaves compliantly."

That a horse takes pleasure in swift movement, may be shown
conclusively. As soon as he has got his liberty, he sets off at a
trot or gallop, never at a walking pace; so natural and instinctive a
pleasure does this action afford him, if he is not forced to perform
it to excess; since it is true of horse and man alike that nothing is
pleasant if carried to excess. (10)

 (10) L. Dind. cf. Eur. "Med." 128, {ta de' uperballont oudena kairon}.

But now suppose he has attained to the grand style when ridden--we have
accustomed him of course in his first exercise to wheel and fall into
a canter simultaneously; assuming then, he has got that lesson well
by heart, if the rider pulls him up with the bit while simultaneously
giving him one of the signals to be off, the horse, galled on the one
hand by the bit, and on the other collecting himself in obedience to the
signal "off," will throw forward his chest and raise his legs aloft with
fiery spirit; though not indeed with suppleness, for the supple play
of the limbs ceases as soon as the horse feels annoyance. But now,
supposing when his fire is thus enkindled (11) you give him the rein,
the effect is instantaneous. Under the pleasurable sense of freedom,
thanks to the relaxation of the bit, with stately bearing and legs
pliantly moving he dashes forward in his pride, in every respect
imitating the airs and graces of a horse approaching other horses.
Listen to the epithets with which spectators will describe the type of
horse: the noble animal! and what willingness to work, what paces, (12)
what a spirit and what mettle; how proudly he bears himself (13)--a joy
at once, and yet a terror to behold.

 (11) Cf. "Hell." V. iv. 46, "kindled into new life."

 (12) {ipposten}, "a true soldier's horse."

 (13) {sobaron}, "what a push and swagger"; {kai ama edun te kai gorgon
    idein}, "a la fois doux et terrible a voir," see Victor
    Cherbuliez, "Un Cheval de Phidias," p. 148.

Thus far on this topic; these notes may serve perhaps to meet a special
need.



XI

If, however, the wish is to secure a horse adapted to parade and state
processions, a high stepper and a showy (1) animal, these are qualities
not to be found combined in every horse, but to begin with, the animal
must have high spirit and a stalwart body. Not that, as some think, a
horse with flexible legs will necessarily be able to rear his body. What
we want is a horse with supple loins, and not supple only but short and
strong (I do not mean the loins towards the tail, but by the belly the
region between the ribs and thighs). That is the horse who will be
able to plant his hind-legs well under the forearm. If while he is so
planting his hind-quarters, he is pulled up with the bit, he lowers his
hind-legs on his hocks (2) and raises the forepart of his body, so that
any one in front of him will see the whole length of his belly to the
sheath. (3) At the moment the horse does this, the rider should give
him the rein, so that he may display the noblest feats which a horse can
perform of his own free will, to the satisfaction of the spectators.

 (1) {lampros}. Cf. Isae. xi. 41 ("On the estate of Hagnias"), Lys.
    xix. 63 ("de Bon. Arist.").

 (2) See Berenger, ii. 68.

 (3) Lit. "testicles."

There are, indeed, other methods of teaching these arts. (4) Some do so
by touching the horse with a switch under the hocks, others employ an
attendant to run alongside and strike the horse with a stick under the
gaskins. For ourselves, however, far the best method of instruction, (5)
as we keep repeating, is to let the horse feel that whatever he does
in obedience to the rider's wishes will be followed by some rest and
relaxation.

 (4) Lit. "People, it must be admitted, claim to teach these arts in
    various ways--some by... others by bidding..."

 (5) Reading {didaskalion}, al. {didaskalion}, "systems." Schneid. cf.
    Herod. v. 58.

To quote a dictum of Simon, what a horse does under compulsion he does
blindly, and his performance is no more beautiful than would be that of
a ballet-dancer taught by whip and goad. The performances of horse or
man so treated would seem to be displays of clumsy gestures rather than
of grace and beauty. What we need is that the horse should of his own
accord exhibit his finest airs and paces at set signals. (6) Supposing,
when he is in the riding-field, (7) you push him to a gallop until he is
bathed in sweat, and when he begins to prance and show his airs to fine
effect, you promptly dismount and take off the bit, you may rely upon
it he will of his own accord another time break into the same
prancing action. Such are the horses on which gods and heroes ride,
as represented by the artist. The majesty of men themselves is best
discovered in the graceful handling of such animals. (8) A horse so
prancing is indeed a thing of beauty, a wonder and a marvel; riveting
the gaze of all who see him, young alike and graybeards. They will never
turn their backs, I venture to predict, or weary of their gazing so long
as he continues to display his splendid action.

 (6) Or, "by aids and signs," as we say.

 (7) Or, "exercising-ground."

 (8) Or, "and the man who knows how to manage such a creature
    gracefully himself at once appears magnificent."

If the possessor of so rare a creature should find himself by chance in
the position of a squadron leader or a general of cavalry, he must
not confine his zeal to the development of his personal splendour,
but should study all the more to make the troop or regiment a splendid
spectacle. Supposing (in accordance with the high praise bestowed upon
the type of animal) (9) the leader is mounted on a horse which with
his high airs and frequent prancing makes but the slightest movement
forward--obviously the rest of the troop must follow at a walking
pace, and one may fairly ask where is the element of splendour in the
spectacle? But now suppose that you, sir, being at the head of the
procession, rouse your horse and take the lead at a pace neither too
fast nor yet too slow, but in a way to bring out the best qualities in
all the animals, their spirit, fire, grace of mien and bearing ripe
for action--I say, if you take the lead of them in this style, the
collective thud, the general neighing and the snorting of the horses
will combine to render not only you at the head, but your whole company
(10) down to the last man a thrilling spectacle.

 (9) Reading as vulg. {os malista epainousi tous toioutous ippous, os}.
    L. Dind. omits the words as a gloss.

 (10) Reading {oi} (for {osoi}) {sumparepomenoi}. See Hartmann, "An.
    Xen. Nov." xiv. p. 343.

One word more. Supposing a man has shown some skill in purchasing his
horses, and can rear them into strong and serviceable animals, supposing
further he can handle them in the right way, not only in the training
for war, but in exercises with a view to display, or lastly, in the
stress of actual battle, what is there to prevent such a man from making
every horse he owns of far more value in the end than when he bought
it, with the further outlook that, unless some power higher than human
interpose, (11) he will become the owner of a celebrated stable, and
himself as celebrated for his skill in horsemanship.

 (11) Or, "there is nothing, humanly speaking, to prevent such a man."
    For the phrase see "Mem." I. iii. 5; cf. "Cyrop." I. vi. 18; and
    for the advice, "Econ." iii. 9, 10.



XII

We will now describe the manner in which a trooper destined to run the
risks of battle upon horseback should be armed. In the first place,
then, we would insist, the corselet must be made to fit the person;
since, if it fits well, its weight will be distributed over the whole
body; whereas, if too loose, the shoulders will have all the weight to
bear, while, if too tight, the corselet is no longer a defensive arm,
but a "strait jacket." (1) Again, the neck, as being a vital part, (2)
ought to have, as we maintain, a covering, appended to the corselet and
close-fitting. This will serve as an ornament, and if made as it ought
to be, will conceal the rider's face--if so he chooses--up to the nose.

 (1) Cf. "Mem." III. x.

 (2) L. Dind. cf. Hom. "Il." viii. 326:

{... othi kleis apoergei aukhena te stethos te, malista de kairion
estin.}

"Where the collar-bone fenceth off neck and breast, and where is the
most deadly spot" (W. Leaf).

As to the helmet, the best kind, in our opinion, is one of the Boeotian
pattern, (3) on the principle again, that it covers all the parts
exposed above the breastplate without hindering vision. Another point:
the corselet should be so constructed that it does not prevent its
wearer sitting down or stooping. About the abdomen and the genitals
and parts surrounding (4) flaps should be attached in texture and in
thickness sufficient to protect (5) that region.

 (3) Schneider cf. Aelian, "V. H." iii. 24; Pollux, i. 149.

 (4) Schneider cf. "Anab." IV. vii. 15, and for {kai ta kuklo}, conj.
    {kuklo}, "the abdomen and middle should be encircled by a skirt."

 (5) Lit. "let there be wings of such sort, size, and number as to
    protect the limbs."

Again, as an injury to the left hand may disable the horseman, we would
recommend the newly-invented piece of armour called the gauntlet, which
protects the shoulder, arm, and elbow, with the hand engaged in holding
the reins, being so constructed as to extend and contract; in addition
to which it covers the gap left by the corselet under the armpit. The
case is different with the right hand, which the horseman must needs
raise to discharge a javelin or strike a blow. Here, accordingly, any
part of the corselet which would hinder action out to be removed; in
place of which the corselet ought to have some extra flaps (6) at the
joints, which as the outstretched arm is raised unfold, and as the arm
descends close tight again. The arm itself, (7) it seems to us, will
better be protected by a piece like a greave stretched over it than
bound up with the corselet. Again, the part exposed when the right hand
is raised should be covered close to the corselet either with calfskin
or with metal; or else there will be a want of protection just at the
most vital point.

 (6) {prosthetai}, "moveable," "false." For {gigglumois} L. & S. cf.
    Hipp. 411. 12; Aristot. "de An." iii. 10. 9 = "ball-and-socket
    joints."

 (7) i.e. "forearm."

Moreover, as any damage done to the horse will involve his rider in
extreme peril, the horse also should be clad in armour--frontlet,
breastplate, and thigh-pieces; (8) which latter may at the same time
serve as cuisses for the mounted man. Beyond all else, the horse's
belly, being the most vital and defenceless part, should be protected.
It is possible to protect it with the saddle-cloth. The saddle itself
should be of such sort and so stitched as to give the rider a firm seat,
and yet not gall the horse's back.

 (8) Cf. "Cyrop." VI. iv. 1; VII. i. 2.

As regards the limbs in general, both horse and rider may be looked upon
as fully armed. The only parts remaining are the shins and feet, which
of course protrude beyond the cuisses, but these also may be armed
by the addition of gaiters made of leather like that used for making
sandals. And thus you will have at once defensive armour for the shins
and stockings for the feet.

The above, with the blessing of heaven, will serve for armour of
defence. To come to weapons of offence, we recommend the sabre rather
than the straight sword, (9) since from the vantage-ground of the
horse's position the curved blade will descend with greater force than
the ordinary weapon.

 (9) The {makhaira} (or {kopis}), Persian fashion, rather than the
    {xephos}. "Cyrop." I. ii. 13.

Again, in place of the long reed spear, which is apt to be weak and
awkward to carry, we would substitute two darts of cornel-wood; (10)
the one of which the skilful horseman can let fly, and still ply the one
reserved in all directions, forwards, backwards, (11) and obliquely; add
to that, these smaller weapons are not only stronger than the spear but
far more manageable.

 (10) For these reforms, the result of the author's Asiatic experiences
    perhaps, cf. "Hell." III. iv. 14; "Anab." I. viii. 3; "Cyrop." I.
    ii. 9.

 (11) Reading {eis toupisthen} after Leoncl.

As regards range of discharge in shooting we are in favour of the
longest possible, as giving more time to rally (12) and transfer the
second javelin to the right hand. And here we will state shortly the
most effective method of hurling the javelin. The horseman should throw
forward his left side, while drawing back his right; then rising bodily
from the thighs, he should let fly the missile with the point slightly
upwards. The dart so discharged will carry with the greatest force and
to the farthest distance; we may add, too, with the truest aim, if at
the moment of discharge the lance be directed steadily on the object
aimed at. (13)

 (12) Al. "to turn right-about."

 (13) "If the lance is steadily eyeing the mark at the instant of
    discharge."

This treatise, consisting of notes and suggestions, lessons and
exercises suited to a private individual, must come to a conclusion; the
theory and practice of the matter suited to a cavalry commander will be
found developed in the companion treatise. (14)

 (14) In reference to "The Cavalry General", or "Hipparch."





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of On Horsemanship, by Xenophon

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK ON HORSEMANSHIP ***

***** This file should be named 1176.txt or 1176.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/1/7/1176/

Produced by John Bickers

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
