The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and
Instruction--Volume 13, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mirror of Literature, Amusement, and Instruction--Volume 13
       Index to Vol. 13

Author: Various

Release Date: April 14, 2004 [EBook #12017]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE ***




Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Allen Siddle, and the Online Distributed
Proofreaders Team





[Illustration: PORTRAIT of the late SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, Bart.]

       *       *       *       *       *

THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE, AMUSEMENT, AND INSTRUCTION:

CONTAINING

ORIGINAL ESSAYS; HISTORICAL NARRATIVES; BIOGRAPHICAL MEMOIRS;
SKETCHES OF SOCIETY; TOPOGRAPHICAL DESCRIPTIONS;
NOVELS AND TALES; ANECDOTES;


SELECT EXTRACTS

FROM

NEW AND EXPENSIVE WORKS;
_POETRY, ORIGINAL AND SELECTED:_
THE SPIRIT OF THE PUBLIC JOURNALS;
DISCOVERIES IN THE ARTS AND SCIENCES;
_USEFUL DOMESTIC HINTS;_

&c. &c. &c.


       *       *       *       *       *

VOL. XIII.

       *       *       *       *       *


LONDON
PRINTED AND PUBLISHED BY J. LIMBIRD, 143, STRAND.
_(Near Somerset House.)_

1829


       *       *       *       *       *

PREFACE.

       *       *       *       *       *

We begin to think that a long Preface in this season of _ennui_ would be
almost as tiresome as tragedy in warm weather, and much more so than the
trite three-line Prologue in Hamlet. Our materials are collected from all
quarters, with but little of our own; so that we might praise all the
authors without the charge of uncommon vanity; but panegyric savours much
of the poppy, and we must use it accordingly.

Our thanks are first due to such Subscribers as have, by personal
observation and research, enabled us to throw a light on certain obsolete
customs or portions of our domestic history; for these contributions form
a prominent feature of the Correspondence of THE MIRROR; it being our
object, in this department, to gather facts rather than to draw only upon
the invention of our friends. In support of this system we could select
many specimens from the Correspondence of the present volume, the
interest of which is, we hope, be equal to any of its predecessors.

The _Selector_ will be found to contain many valuable extracts from New
and Costly Works, in almost every class of literature; and the piquancy
of the _Notes of a Reader_ may be turned to as a convenient little
treasury, into which readers of all tastes may dip with pleasure and
advantage.

The _Sketch Book_ contains rather an unusual number of Narratives, some
of them of extraordinary interest, and written in the best style of the
best authors.

The _Spirit of Discovery_ will be considered characteristic of our times,
by illustrating the real economy of science in its application to the
conveniences of every-day life. As a collateral branch of this division
is _The Naturalist,_ under which head we have endeavoured to identify THE
MIRROR with Zoology, as one of the most popular studies of the day.

The _Spirit of the Public Journals_ breathes not a few of the sweetest
and most recent poetical compositions from the pens of celebrated authors,
some of whose names are passports to high excellence.

The _Engravings_ have, probably, been criticised upon first impression;
so that we can only hope they have merited the applause of our
Subscribers. We may be permitted to remark that some of the illustrations
relate to scenes and subjects of no ordinary attraction in Antiquarian
Remains, and Architectural Improvements of yesterday; a few of these have
been executed at a considerable cost to the Proprietor; for which extra
exertion he has been more than requited by the increased demand.

Several current _Novelties_ will be found described at length in this
volume--as the circumstantial and accurate accounts of the Colosseum--and
the New Swan River Settlement, the last of which is illustrated with an
Engraved Chart.

Strenuous as have been our exertions for past patronage, we shall not
relax in the ensuing volume. An entirely new Type has been prepared for
this purpose, and we feel confident that we shall be enabled to keep pace
with the increased typographical beauty of the MIRROR, as well as with
the improved spirit of its Engravings.

June 27, 1829.




        *        *        *        *        *


LIST OF ENGRAVINGS.


VOL. XIII.


_PORTRAIT of the late SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, Bart._


Bruce Castle, Tottenham.

Old Elephant, Fenchurch Street.

Macclesfield Bridge, Regent's Park.

Rupert's Palace, Barbican.

Hanover Lodge, Regent's Park.

Grove House, ditto.

Colosseum, Exterior, ditto.

Marquess of Hertford's Villa, ditto.

Doric Villa, ditto.

Colosseum, Interior, ditto.

Kirkstall Abbey.

Warwick Castle.

Old Covent Garden Market.

York Terrace, Regent's Park.

Snow Flakes, Magnified.

Rugby School.

Miners of Derbyshire.

Fortune Playhouse, Barbican.

Epsom New Race Stand.

Old Charing Cross.

Exeter 'Change, Strand.

Hyde Park Grand Entrance.

Talipot Tree.

Glowworm.

Deathwatch, Magnified.

Chester Terrace, Regent's Park.

Guy's Cliff.

Roman Altar.

Gower's Tomb.

Hirlas Horn.

Old Somerset House.

Harrow School.

Sussex Place, Regent's Park.

Clarendon House, Piccadilly.

Relic of John Buryan.

Cornwall Terrace, Regent's Park.

Chart of the Swan River Settlement.

Laleham Park, the Residence of the Young Queen of Portugal.

Holland House, Kensington.

Cumberland Terrace, Regent's Park.

Residence of T. Campbell, Esq.

Labyrinth at Versailles.



       *       *       *       *       *


MEMOIR OF SIR HUMPHRY DAVY, BART.


The present may be regarded as a chemical age; for so extensive, rapid,
and important have been the late acquisitions in the science of chemistry,
that we may almost claim it as the exclusive discovery of our own times.
The popularity and high estimation in which it is held may be ascribed to
three causes: 1. The satisfaction which is afforded by its results.
2. Its utility in all the arts of life. 3. The little previous
preparation which an entrance on its study requires. To these may be
added, the new interest conferred upon the science by the discoveries of
Black, Priestly, and Lavoisier, which had already introduced into
chemical science the long-neglected requisites of close investigation and
logical deduction; but it was reserved for Sir HUMPHRY DAVY to
demonstrate the vast superiority of modern principles, by the most
brilliant career of discovery, which, since the days of Newton, have
graced the annals of science.

Sir Humphry Davy was born December 17, 1779, at Penzance, in Cornwall.
His family was ancient, and above the middle class; his paternal great
grandfather had considerable landed property in the parish of Budgwin,
and his father possessed a small paternal estate opposite St. Michael's
Mount, called Farfal, on which he died in 1795, after having injured his
fortune by expending considerable sums in attempting agricultural
improvements. Sir Humphry received the first rudiments of his education
at the grammar-schools of Penzance and Truro: at the former place, he
resided with Mr. John Tomkin, surgeon, a benevolent and intelligent man,
who had been intimately connected with his maternal grandfather, and
treated him with a degree of kindness little less than paternal. His
genius was originally inclined to poetry; and there are many natives of
Penzance who remember his poems and verses, written at the early age of
nine years. He cultivated this bias till his fifteenth year, when he
became the pupil of Mr. (since Dr.) Borlase, of Penzance, an ingenious
surgeon, intending to prepare himself for graduating as a physician at
Edinburgh. As a proof of his uncommon mind, at this early age, it is
worthy of mention, that Mr. Davy laid down for himself a plan of
education, which embraced the circle of the sciences. By his eighteenth
year he had acquired the rudiments of botany, anatomy, and physiology,
the simpler mathematics, metaphysics, natural philosophy, and chemistry.
But chemistry soon arrested his whole attention. Having made some
experiments on the air disengaged by sea-weeds from the water of the
ocean, which convinced him that these vegetables performed the same part
in purifying the air dissolved in water which land-vegetables act in the
atmosphere; he communicated them to Dr. Beddoes, who had at that time
circulated proposals for publishing a journal of philosophical
contributions from the West of England. This produced a correspondence
between Dr. Beddoes and Mr. Davy, in which the Doctor proposed, that
Mr. Davy, who was at this time only nineteen years of age, should suspend
his plan of going to Edinburgh, and take a part in experiments which were
then about to be instituted at Bristol, for investigating the medical
powers of factitious airs; to this proposal Mr. Davy consented, on
condition that he should have the uncontrolled superintendence of the
expements. About this time he became acquainted with Davies Gilbert, Esq.
M.P. a gentleman of high scientific attainments, (now President of the
Royal Society), with whom he formed a friendship which has always
continued; and to Mr. Gilbert's judicious advice may be attributed
Mr. Davy's adoption of and perseverance in the study of chemistry. With
Dr. Beddoes, Mr. Davy resided for a considerable time, and was constantly
occupied in new chemical investigations. Here, he discovered the
respirability of nitrous oxide, and made a number of laborious
experiments on gaseous bodies, which he afterwards published in
"Researches Chemical and Philosophical," a work that was universally well
received by the chemical world, and created a high reputation for its
author, at that time only twenty-one years of age. This led to his
introduction to Count Rumford, and to his being elected Professor of
Chemistry to the Royal Institution in Albemarle-street. On obtaining this
appointment Mr. Davy gave up all his views of the medical profession, and
devoted himself entirely to chemistry.

Mr. Davy's first experiments as Professor of Chemistry in the Royal
Institution, were made on the substance employed in the process of
tanning, with others to which similar properties were ascribed, in
consequence of the discovery made by M. Seguier, of Paris, of the
peculiar vegetable matter, now called tannin. He was, during the same
period, frequently occupied in experiments on galvanism.

To the agriculturist, chemistry is of the first consideration. The
dependence of agriculture upon chemical causes had been previously
noticed, but it was first completely demonstrated in a course of lectures
before the Board of Agriculture, which Mr. Davy commenced in the year
1802, and continued for ten years. This series of lectures contained much
popular and practical information, and belongs to the most useful of Mr.
Davy's scientific labours; for the application of chemistry to
agriculture is one of its most important results; and so rapid were the
discoveries of the author, that in preparing these discourses for
publication, a few years afterwards, he was under the necessity of making
several alterations, to adapt them to the improved state of chemical
knowledge, which his own labours had, in that short time, produced.

In 1803, he was chosen a fellow of the Royal Society, and in 1805, a
member of the Royal Irish Academy. He now enjoyed the friendship of most
of the distinguished literary men and philosophers of the metropolis, and
enumerated among his intimate friends, Sir Joseph Banks, Cavendish,
Hatchett, Wollaston, Children, Tennant, and other eminent men. At the
same time he corresponded with the principal chemists of every part of
Europe. In 1806, he was appointed to deliver, before the Royal Society,
the Bakerian lecture, in which he displayed some very interesting new
agencies of electricity, by means of the celebrated galvanic apparatus.[1]
Soon afterwards, he made one of the most brilliant discoveries of modern
times, in the decomposition of two fixed alkalies, which, in direct
refutation of the hypothesis previously adopted, were found to consist of
a peculiar metallic base united with a large quantity of oxygen. These
alkalies were potash and soda, and the metals thus discovered were called
potassium and sodium, Mr. Davy was equally successful in the application
of galvanism to the decomposition of the earths. About this time he
became Secretary of the Royal Society. In 1808, Mr. Davy received a prize
from the French Institute. During the greater part of 1810, he was
employed on the combinations of oxymuriatic gas and oxygen; and towards
the close of the same year, he delivered a course of lectures before the
Dublin Society, and received from Trinity College, Dublin, the honorary
degree of LL. D.

In the year 1812, Mr. Davy married his amiable lady, then Mrs. Apreece,
widow of Shuckburgh Ashby Apreece, Esq. and daughter and heiress of the
late Charles Kerr, of Kelso, Esq. By his union with this lady, Mr. Davy
acquired not only a considerable fortune, but the inestimable treasure of
an affectionate and exemplary wife, and a congenial friend and companion,
capable of appreciating his character and attainments. A few days
previously to his marriage, he received the honour of knighthood from his
Majesty, then Prince Regent, being the first person on whom he conferred
that dignity.

We now arrive at the most important result of Sir Humphry Davy's labours,
viz. the invention of the SAFETY-LAMP for coal mines, which has been
generally and successfully adopted throughout Europe. This invention has
been the means of preserving many valuable lives, and preventing horrible
mutilations, more terrible even than death; and were this Sir Humphry
Davy's only invention, it would secure him an immortality in the annals
of civilization and science. The general principle of this discovery may
be described as follows:

"The frequency of accidents, arising from the explosion of the fire-damp,
or inflammable gas of the coal mines, mixed with atmospherical air,
occasioned the formation of a committee at Sunderland, for the purpose of
investigating the causes of these calamities, and of endeavouring to
discover and apply a preventive. Sir Humphry received an invitation, in
1815, from Dr. Gray, one of the members of the committee; in consequence
of which he went to the North of England, and visiting some of the
principal collieries in the neighbourhood of Newcastle, soon convinced
himself that no improvement could be made in the mode of ventilation, but
that the desired preventive must be sought in a new method of lighting
the mines, free from danger, and which, by indicating the state of the
air in the part of the mine where inflammable air was disengaged, so as
to render the atmosphere explosive, should oblige the miners to retire
till the workings were properly cleared. The common means then employed
for lighting the dangerous part of the mines consisted of a steel wheel
revolving in contact with flint, and affording a succession of sparks:
but this apparatus always required a person to work it, and was not
entirely free from danger. The fire-damp was known to be light
carburetted hydrogen gas; but its relations to combustion had not been
examined. It is chiefly produced from what are called blowers or fissures
in the broken strata, near dykes. Sir Humphry made various experiments on
its combustibility and explosive nature; and discovered, that the
fire-damp requires a very strong heat for its inflammation; that azote and
carbonic acid, even in very small proportions, diminished the velocity of
the inflammation; that mixtures of the gas would not explode in metallic
canals or troughs, where their diameter was less than one-seventh of an
inch, and their depth considerable in proportion to their diameter; and
that explosions could not be made to pass through such canals, or through
very fine wire sieves, or wire gauze. The consideration of these facts
led Sir Humphry to adopt a lamp, in which the flame, by being supplied
with only a limited quantity of air should produce such a quantity of
azote and carbonic acid as to prevent the explosion of the fire-damp, and
which, by the nature of its apertures for giving admittance and egress to
the air, should be rendered incapable of communicating any explosion to
the external air. These requisites were found to be afforded by air-tight
lanterns, of various constructions, supplied with air from tubes or
canals of small diameter, or from apertures covered with wire-gauze,
placed below the flame, through which explosions cannot be communicated;
and having a chimney at the upper part, for carrying off the foul air.
Sir Humphry soon afterwards found that a constant flame might be kept up
from the explosive mixture issuing from the apertures of a wire-gauze
sieve. He introduced a very small lamp in a cylinder, made of wire-gauze,
having six thousand four hundred apertures in the square inch. He closed
all apertures except those of the gauze, and introduced the lamp, burning
brightly within the cylinder, into a large jar, containing several quarts
of the most explosive mixture of gas from the distillation of coal and
air; the flame of the wick immediately disappeared, or rather was lost,
for the whole of the interior of the cylinder became filled with a feeble
but steady flame of a green colour, which burnt for some minutes, till it
had entirely destroyed the explosive power of the atmosphere. This
discovery led to a most important improvement in the lamp, divested the
fire-damp of all its terrors, and applied its powers, formerly so
destructive, to the production of a useful light. Some minor
improvements, originating in Sir Humphry's researches into the nature of
flame, were afterwards effected. Experiments of the most satisfactory
nature were speedily made, and the invention was soon generally adopted.
Some attempts were made to dispute the honour of this discovery with its
author, but his claims were confirmed by the investigations of the first
philosophers of the age."[2]--The coal owners of the Tyne and Wear
evinced their sense of the benefits resulting from this invention, by
presenting Sir Humphry with a handsome service of plate worth nearly two
thousand pounds, at a public dinner at Newcastle, October 11, 1817.

In 1813, Sir Humphry was elected a corresponding member of the Institute
of France, and vice-president of the Royal Institution; in 1817, one of
the eight associates of the Royal Academy; in 1818 created a baronet, and
during the last ten years he has been elected a member of most of the
learned bodies of Europe.

We could occupy many pages with the interesting details of Sir Humphry
Davy's travels in different parts of Europe for scientific purposes,
particularly to investigate the causes of volcanic phenomena, to instruct
the miners of the coal districts in the application of his safety-lamp,
and to examine the state of the Herculaneum manuscripts and to illustrate
the remains of the chemical arts of the ancients. He analyzed the colours
used in painting by the ancient Greek and Roman artists. His experiments
were chiefly made on the paintings in the baths of Titus, the ruins
called the baths of Livia, in the remains of other palaces and baths of
ancient Rome, and in the ruins of Pompeii. By the kindness of his friend
Canova, who was charged with the care of the works connected with ancient
art in Rome, he was enabled to select with his own hands specimens of the
different pigments, that had been formed in vases discovered in the
excavations, which had been lately made beneath the ruins of the palace
of Titus, and to compare them with the colours fixed on the walls, or
detached in fragments of stucco. The results of all these researches were
published in the Transactions of the Royal Society for 1815, and are
extremely interesting. The concluding observations, in which he impresses
on artists the superior importance of permanency to brilliancy in the
colours used in painting, are especially worthy the attention of artists.
On his examination of the Herculaneum manuscripts, at Naples, in 1818-19,
he was of opinion they had not been acted upon by fire, so as to be
completely carbonized, but that their leaves were cemented together by a
substance formed during the fermentation and chemical change of ages. He
invented a composition for the solution of this substance, but he could
not discover more than 100 out of 1,265 manuscripts, which presented any
probability of success.

Sir Humphry returned to England in 1820, and in the same year his
respected friend, Sir Joseph Banks, President of the Royal Society, died.
Several discussions took place respecting a proper successor, when
individuals of high and even very exalted rank were named as candidates.
But science, very properly in this case, superseded rank. Amongst the
philosophers whose labours had enriched the Transactions of the Royal
Society, two were most generally adverted to, Sir Humphry Davy and Dr.
Wollaston; but Dr. Wollaston very modestly declined being a candidate
after his friend had been nominated, and received from the council of the
Society the unanimous compliment of being placed in the chair of the
Royal Society, till the election by the body in November.[3] A trifling
opposition was made to Sir Humphry Davy's election, by some unknown
persons, who proposed Lord Colchester, but Sir Humphry was placed in the
chair by a majority of 200 to 13. For this honour no one could be more
completely qualified. Sir Humphry retained his seat as President till the
year 1827, when, in consequence of procrastinated ill health, in great
measure brought on by injuries occasioned to his constitution by
scientific experiments, he was induced, by medical advice, to retire to
the continent. He accordingly resigned his seat as President of the Royal
Society, the chair being filled, _pro tem_, by Davies Gilbert, Esq. who,
at the Anniversary Meeting, Nov. 30, 1827, was unanimously elected
President.

Since his retirement, Sir Humphry Davy resided principally at Rome, where
a short time ago he had an alarming attack of a paralytic nature, but
from which he was apparently, though slowly, recovering. Lady Davy, who
had been detained in England by her own ill health, joined Sir Humphry,
at Rome, on hearing of his alarming state. Thence he travelled by easy
stages to Geneva, without feeling any particular inconvenience, and
without any circumstances which denoted the approach of dissolution: but
on Friday, May 29, 1829, the illustrious philosopher closed his mortal
career, in the fifty-first year of his age, having only reached Geneva on
the day previous. Lady Davy had the gratification of contributing, by
her soothing care, to the comfort of his last days during their stay in
Italy, and on their journey to Geneva, where they intended to pass the
summer, and hoped to have derived benefit from the eminent practitioners
of that city. Sir Humphry had also been joined by his brother, Dr. John
Davy, physician to the forces in Malta, whence he came on receiving the
intelligence of his brother's danger. But all human art and skill were
of no avail. The last and fatal attack took place at half-past two on
Friday morning, and the pulse ceased to beat shortly after. The event was
no sooner known, than the afflicted widow received the condolence and
affectionate offer of services from the most distinguished individuals of
Geneva; amongst whom we must mention M. A. de Condolle, the eminent
botanist, and M. Sismondi, the historian, both equally beloved for their
amiable character, as illustrious throughout Europe for their works. M.
de Condolle obligingly took charge of all the details of the interment of
his illustrious colleague; and the governor of the Canton, the Academy of
Geneva, the Consistory of the Geneva Church, the Society of Arts and of
Natural Philosophy and History, together with nearly all the English
resident there, accompanied the remains to the burial-ground, where the
English service was performed by the Rev. Mr. John Magers of Queen's
College, and the Rev. Mr. Burgess. The members of the Academy, in the
absence of any relation of the deceased, took their place in the funeral
procession; and the invitations to the syndicate, and to the learned
bodies who accompanied it, were made by that body in the same character.
The whole was conducted with much appropriate order and decency, and
whilst every attention and respect were paid to the memory of the
deceased, nothing was attempted beyond the unostentatious simplicity
which the deceased had frequently declared to be his wish, whenever his
mortal remains should be consigned to their last home; and which in
accordance to that wish, had been expressly enjoined to her kind friends
by the afflicted widow. In the procession, which followed the corporate
bodies and the countrymen of the deceased, were many of the most eminent
manufacturers of Geneva, and a large body of mechanics, who were anxious
to pay this tribute of regard and gratitude to one whom they deservedly
looked upon as a great benefactor to the arts, and promoter of sciences,
by the application of which they earn their livelihood.[4]

During his retirement on the Continent, Sir Humphry continued to
communicate the splendid results of his labours to the Royal Society,
and at the anniversary meeting of the year 1827, the royal medal was
awarded to him for a series of brilliant discoveries developing the
relation between electricity and chemistry.[5] Upon this interesting
occasion, Mr. Davies Gilbert spoke at some length, commencing as
follows: "It is with feelings most gratifying to myself that I now
approach to the award of a royal medal to Sir Humphry Davy; and I esteem
it a most fortunate occurrence, that this award should have taken place
during the short period of my having to discharge the duties attached to
the office of president; having witnessed the whole progress of Sir
Humphry Davy's advancement in science and in reputation, from his first
attempts in his native town to vary some of Dr. Priestly's experiments
on the extraction of oxygen from marine vegetables to the point of
eminence which we all know him to have reached. It is not necessary for
me more than to advert to his discovery of nitrous oxyde; to his
investigation of the action of light on gases; on the nature of heat; to
his successful discrimination of proximate vegetable elements; nor to
his most scientific, ingenious, and useful invention, the
safety-lamp,--an invention reasoned out from its principles, with all
the accuracy and precision of mathematical deduction."

The course of Sir Humphry Davy to the highest rank as a chemical
philosopher, was, after his appointment at the Royal Institution, rapid
and brilliant; and if he was previously aided by as few of the advantages
of fortune as any man living, he had then at his disposal whatever his
industry and talents chose to command. We have given but a hasty outline
of his labours; but it is possible that he may have left behind him much,
not yet made public, for which, science will be still further indebted to
him. His works, papers, and letters are numerous, and the greatest
portion of them are contained in the Transactions of the Royal Society.
One of the most popular and interesting of his recent papers is that on
the _Phenomena of Volcanoes_. This contains a series of investigations of
Vesuvius, made by the author during a residence at Naples in 1819-20, and
bearing upon a previous hypothesis, "that metals of the alkalies and
earth might exist in the interior of the globe, and on being exposed to
the action of air and water, give rise to volcanic fires, and to the
production of lavas, by the slow cooling of which basaltic and other
crystalline rocks might subsequently be formed." We have not space for
the details of these investigations, interesting as they would prove to
an unscientific reader; but we give an abstract of the result of Sir
Humphry's observations:

"The phenomena observed by the author afforded a sufficient refutation of
all the ancient hypotheses, in which volcanic fires were ascribed to such
chemical causes as the combustion of mineral coal, or the action of
sulphur upon iron; and are perfectly consistent with the supposition of
their depending upon the oxidation of the metals of the earths upon an
extensive scale, in immense subterranean cavities, to which water or
atmospheric air may occasionally have access. The subterranean thunder
heard at great distances under Vesuvius, prior to an eruption, indicates
the vast extent of these cavities; and the existence of a subterranean
communication between the Solfattara and Vesuvius, is established by the
fact that whenever the latter is in an active state, the former is
comparatively tranquil. In confirmation of these views, the author
remarks, that almost all the volcanoes of considerable magnitude in the
old world, are in the vicinity of the sea; and in those where the sea is
more distant, as in the volcanoes of South America, the water may be
supplied from great subterranean lakes; for Humboldt states that some of
them throw up quantities of fish. The author acknowledges, however, that
the hypothesis of the nucleus of the globe being composed of matter
liquefied by heat, offers a still more simple solution of the phenomena
of volcanic fires."[6]

We have hitherto spoken of Sir Humphry Davy as a philosopher. He was,
however, in every respect, an accomplished scholar, and was well
acquainted with foreign languages. He always retained a strong taste for
literary pleasures; and when his continued illness retarded his
scientific pursuits, he made literature his recreation. In this manner he
wrote _Salmonia: or Days of Fly-fishing_, in a series of conversations,
we gather from the Preface:--"These pages formed the occupation of the
Author during several months of severe and dangerous illness, when he was
wholly incapable of attending to more useful studies, or of following
more serious pursuits. They formed his amusement in many hours, which
otherwise would have been unoccupied and tedious." "The conversational
and discursive style were chosen as best suited to the state of the
health of the author, who was incapable of considerable efforts and long
continued exertion." The volume is dedicated to Dr. Babington, "in
remembrance of some delightful days passed in his society, and in
gratitude for an uninterrupted friendship of quarter of a century:" and
the likeness of one of the characters in the conversations to that
estimable physician abovenamed, has been considered well drawn, and
easily recognisable by those who enjoy his acquaintance.

The philosophical works of Sir Humphry Davy are written in a clear and
perspicuous style, by which means he has contributed more to the
diffusion of scientific knowledge than any other writer of his time. His
three principal works, "Chemical and Philosophical Researches," "Elements
of Chemical Philosophy," and "Elements of Agricultural Chemistry," are in
a popular and familiar style, and the two last are excellently adapted
for elementary study. His numerous pamphlets and contributions to the
Transactions of the Royal Society have the same rare merit of conveying
experimental knowledge in the most attractive form, and thus reducing
abstract theory to the practice and purposes of life and society. The
results of his investigations and experiments were not therefore pent up
in the laboratory or lecture-room where they were made, but by this
valuable mode of communication, they have realized what ought to be the
highest aim of science,--the improvement of the condition and comforts of
every class of his fellow-creatures. Thus, beautiful theories were
illustrated by inventions of immediate utility, as in the safety-lamp for
mitigating the dangers to which miners are exposed in their labours, and
the application of a newly-discovered principle in preserving the life of
the adventurous mariner. Yet splendid as were Sir Humphry's talents, and
important as have been their application, he received the honours and
homage of the scientific world with that becoming modesty which
universally characterizes great genius.

Apart from the scientific value of Sir Humphry's labours and researches,
they are pervaded by a tone and temper, and an enthusiastic love of
nature which are as admirably expressed as their influence is excellent.
In proof of this feeling we could almost from memory, quote many
passages from his works. Thus, speaking of the divine _Study of Nature_,
he has the following reflective truths:--"If we look with wonder upon
the great remains of human works, such as the columns of Palmyra, broken
in the midst of the desert, the temples of Paestum, beautiful in the
decay of twenty centuries, or the mutilated fragments of Greek sculpture
in the Acropolis of Athens, or in our own Museum, as proofs of the
genius of artists, and power and riches of nations now past away; with
how much deeper feeling of admiration must we consider those grand
monuments of Nature, which mark the revolutions of the globe; continents
broken into islands; one land produced, another destroyed; the bottom of
the ocean become a fertile soil; whole races of animals extinct; and the
bones and exuviae of one class, covered with the remains of another, and
upon the graves of past generations--the marble or rocky tomb, as it
were, of a former animated world--new generations rising, and order and
harmony established, and a system of life and beauty produced, as it
were out of chaos and death; proving the infinite power, wisdom, and
goodness, of the GREAT CAUSE OF ALL BEING!" Here we cannot trace any
co-mixture of science and scepticism, and in vain shall we look for the
spawn of infidel doctrine. The same excellent feeling breathes
throughout _Salmonia_, one of the most delightful labours of leisure we
have ever seen. Not a few of the most beautiful phenomena of Nature are
here lucidly explained, yet the pages have none of the varnish of
philosophical unbelief or finite reasoning. "In my opinion," says one of
the characters in the Dialogue, (to be identified as the author,)
"profound minds are the most likely to think lightly of the resources of
human reason; and it is the pert superficial thinker who is generally
strongest in every kind of unbelief. The deep philosopher sees changes
of causes and effects, so wonderfully and strangely linked together,
that he is usually the last person to decide upon the impossibility of
any two series of events being independent of each other; and in
science, so many natural miracles, as it were, have been brought to
light,--such as the fall of stones from meteors in the atmosphere, the
disarming a thundercloud by a metallic point, the production of fire
from ice by a metal white as silver, and referring certain laws of
motions of the sea to the moon,--that the physical inquirer is seldom
disposed to assert, confidently, on any abstruse subjects belonging to
the order of natural things, and still less so on those relating to the
more mysterious relations of moral events and intellectual natures."[7]

Many other passages in _Salmonia_ gush forth with great force and beauty,
and sometimes soar into sublime truths. Thus says the eloquent author:

"A full and clear river is, in my opinion, the most poetical object in
nature. Pliny has, as well as I recollect, compared a river to human life.
I have never read the passage in his works, but I have been a hundred
times struck with the analogy, particularly amidst mountain scenery. The
river, small and clear in its origin, gushes forth from rocks, falls into
deep glens, and wantons and meanders through a wild and picturesque
country, nourishing only the uncultivated tree or flower by its dew or
spray. In this, its state of infancy and youth, it may be compared to the
human mind in which fancy and strength of imagination are predominant--it
is more beautiful than useful. When the different rills or torrents join,
and descend into the plain, it becomes slow and stately in its motions;
it is applied to move machinery, to irrigate meadows, and to bear upon
its bosom the stately barge;--in this mature state, it is deep, strong,
and useful. As it flows on towards the sea, it loses its force and its
motion, and at last, as it were, becomes lost and mingled with the mighty
abyss of waters."

"I envy no quality of the mind or intellect in others; not genius, power,
wit, or fancy: but if I could choose what would be most delightful, and I
believe most useful to me, I should prefer a firm religious belief to
every other blessing; for it makes life a discipline of goodness--creates
new hopes, when all earthly hopes vanish; and throws over the decay, the
destruction of existence, the most gorgeous of all lights; awakens life
even in death, and from corruption and decay calls up beauty and divinity:
makes an instrument of torture and of shame the ladder of ascent to
paradise; and, far above all combinations of earthly hopes, calls up the
most delightful visions of palms and amaranths, the gardens of the blest,
the security of everlasting joys, where the sensualist and the sceptic
view only gloom, decay, annihilation, and despair!"

Few of those whose fame and fortune are their own creation, enjoy, as did
Sir Humphry Davy, in the meridian of life, the enviable consciousness of
general esteem and respect, and the certainty of a distinguished place in
history, among the illustrious names of their country. "A great light has
gone out,"--short but brilliant has been his career; yet let us hope he
has but exchanged his worldly fame for unearthly immortality, to shine
amidst the never-dying lights of true glory.


[1] This apparatus is of immense power, and consists of 200
    separate parts, each part composed of ten double plates, and each
    plate containing 32 square inches. The whole number of double plates
    is 2,000, and the whole surface 126,000 square inches.

[2] Memoir--New Monthly Magazine, Vol. I. Mr. Dillon has lately invented
    an _Improved Safety Lamp_, an Engraving of which will be found at
    page 137, Vol. XII. of the MIRROR.

[3] It deserves notice, that two of the most illustrious philosophers of
    our times, Sir H. Davy and Dr. Wollaston, have died within the
    present year.

[4] Extract of a Letter from Geneva, dated June 1, 1829--_Times_.

[5] These experiments, the last which engaged Sir Humphry Davy's
    attention to any extent, were on the application of electrical
    combinations, for the purpose of preserving the copper sheathing of
    ships' bottoms. To this subject Sir Humphry gave much of his time,
    and personally inspected all the boats and vessels on which the
    trials were made. Although the theory upon which they were conducted
    proved eminently correct, no advantage could be ultimately taken of
    the plans which it suggested. The saving of the copper was wholly
    counterbalanced by an accumulation of shell-fish and sea-weed on the
    sheathing, which became sufficient, in a short time, to prevent the
    proper command of the ship at the helm.

[6] Abridged in the Arcana of Science and Arts for 1829.

[7] _Salmonia_, 1st. Edition, page 161. Several beautiful Extracts from
    which, will be found in Vol. XII. of the MIRROR.

       *       *       *       *       *



INDEX TO VOL. XIII

Abernetheyana
Actor, The
African Festivities
  Nurse
  Widow
Agave Americana
Air Balloon, Lines on
Alderman, Antiquity of
Alehouse Signs
Algiers, Sketch of the battle of
Alnwick Freemen
Altitude of Public Buildings
Alvise Sanuto, a story
Ambition, Lines on
American Comforts
  Law
  Sea Serpent
  Song Birds
Anecdotes of Canning and Moore
Animal Food
Anne Boleyne, Marriage of
Anne of Geierstein, by Sir Walter Scott
  Outline of the Story, &c.
Anticipation, Lines on
April Fools, Lines on
Arab, Lay of the Wandering
Arctic Adventures
Auctioneer's Ode to Mercury
Auctions, Antiquity of
Aurora Borealis
Austin Friars, Church of
Avver Bread
Bachelors, Advice to
Bad Writing
Ball, Lines on
Balloon Ascent, Recent
Bamborough Castle
Banana Tree
Banditti, South American
Bannockburn, a ballad
Baron's Trumpet
Bazaar, Oxford-street
Bears on the Ice
Beauty, On
Bees, Food of
  Instinct of
  Management of
Beet Root Sugar
Bird of the Tomb, a poem
Birds, Crop of
Birds' Nests
Bishops, Magnificent
Blackheath, Cave at
Blind Girl, The
Boarding, Custom of
Bolivar, Memoir of
Book-machinery
Box-tree, The
Boxes, The
Brazilian Slave Trade
British Artists' Society
  Diorama
Broiling Steaks, a Story
Broken Heart, The
Brandon, Charles, of Suffolk
Bruce Castle, Description of
Bubble and Squeak, To make
Buckingham Palace described
Bull Fights at Lima
Bunyan's Syllabub Pot
Byron, Lord, Anecdotes of
Calenture, or Maladie de Pays
Callender, N.B.
Canadian Indians
Capuchin Interment
Carmarthen, Description of
Cat and Fiddle, Origin of
Cedar of Lebanon
Charing Cross, Old
Chart of Swan River Colony
Chatterton, the Poet
Chertsey Abbey, Stanzas on
Chester Terrace, Regent's Park
Chiltern Hundreds
Chimneys
Chinese Cities
Chinese Novels
Chosen One, The
Chromate of Iron
Church Spires
Clapperton, Captain, Death of
Clarendon House, Piccadilly
Classical Corrections
Cliffords of Craven, Legend of
Clouds and Sunshine
Coals, History of
Cochineal Insect, The
Coinage, Ancient British
College Dreams
Collop Monday
Colosseum, Description of the
Common Rights
Companion to the Almanack
  Theatres
Content, Lines on
Convict's Dream, The
  in New South Wales
Cook and the Cranes
Cookery and Confectionery
Cornwall Terrace, Regent's Park
Cottage Gardens
Cotton Spinning
Covent Garden Market
Country Character
Cowes Regatta described
Creating Wants
Crime in Paris
Crosses, Ancient, in England
Crusades, Epitome of
Crushing to Death, Legal
Cuccu, The, Old Song
Cumberland Landlord, The
  Terrace, Regent's Park
Curaçoa, To make
Curious Extracts
Currants, To Preserve
Dancing, Old
  Lines on
Daubenton, Death of
Dauphin of France
Davy, Sir Humphry, Death of
Days Departed, a Poem
Dead, Tributes to the
Deathwatch Magnified
Denmark, Education in
Derby and Nottingham
Dinner and Tea Table
Diorama, Regent's Park
Discovery, Expeditions of
Dorchester Church
Douglas, Tragedy of
Dreams, Lines on
Drinking, Hints on
Drunken Frolic
Dutch Language
  Tale
Ear, The Human
Eating, Hints on
Eggs, To Preserve
Egyptian MS. discovered
El Borracho, a Spanish Sketch
Electricity on Animals
Elm, the Witch
Elephant Hunt in India
  Skeleton
  Public-house, Fenchurch-st.
Emigration to America
  Swan River
Encyclopaedias, German
England and her Colonies
Epicures, English and Foreign
Epsom New Race Stand
Erie, Lake, described
Eskdale Anecdote
European Manufactures consumed in South America
Exeter 'Change, Old
Falkirk described
Falling Stones, Phenomena of
Famine in England
Farriery, Ancient, Lines on
Fashions, English
Fashion, Great World of
Field of Forty Steps
Fight in a Church
Figs
Fir Tree, Immense
First and Last Appearance
  Crime
First Love, a Sketch
Fitzmaurice, the Magician
Five Nights of St. Albans
Flowers on the Alps
Flute-Playing, Lindsay on
Fontainbleau, Royal Hunt at
Foote, Miss, Lines on
Forget-Me-Not, Lines on
Fortune Playhouse described
Fossil Fish
  Remains, Gigantic
Fountain, a Ballad
France, Road-Book of
Fraud, Lines on
Freezing Mixture
French Authors, Anecdotes of
  Carpet
  Country Life
  English
  Pigs
  Theatres
Frogs, To tell the Weather by
Frosts, Hard in England
Fruit, Ripening
Fulminating Powder, To make
Funeral Rites of the Greeks
Gaming in S. America
Gardens, Gleanings on
Gay Widow, a Sketch
Geneva, City of
Genii, Light and Dark
Gentlemen's Fashions
Geological Changes
Geology, Conversations on
German Life
  Schools
  Students
Gibeon, Battle of
Gipsy's Malison
Glancin E'e
Glow-worm, The
Gold Size, To make
Good Deeds, Lines on
Good and Evil Days
Gower, the Poet, his Tomb
Grammatical Learning
Gravitation, Novel Theory of
Great Seal of England
Gresham College
Grove House, Regent's Park
Growth of Trees and Animals
Gude News
Guy's Cliff, Description of
H., Lines on the Letter
Halcyon, The
Handel, Anecdote of
Hanover Lodge, Regent's Park
Haro, or Harol, Power of
Harrow School, Description of
Hatching Birds
Heaven, Lines on
Hebrew Melodies
Hertford, (Marquess) his Villa
Hillah on the Euphrates
Himalaya Mountains
Hirlas Horn, The
Hogarth, Anecdotes of
  's Paintings
Holland House, Kensington
Honest Prejudices
Hood's New Songs
Horsham, Description of
Hudson and his Pigs
Hugonots, The
Humboldt's Journey to Siberia
Hundred Pound Note
Hunted Stag, a Sketch
Hyde Park Entrance
Hydrophobia
Hieroglyphics
Idiot Girl, The, a Sketch
Idler, The
I'll come to your Ball
Image Boy, The
Independence, Irish
India, Voyage to
Indian Claystone
  Corn
  Mills
Indian Plaster
Insects, Changes of
Instantaneous Lights
Invitations, Various
Iona, Lines on visiting
Irish Deed of Gift
  Names made English
Iron Trade, British
Isabella Colour
Italian Improvisatri
Jack of both Sides
Jerusalem, Lines on
John Bullism, Maxims of
John Dory, The
John of Gaunt
Johnson, Dr.
Journey from the Bank to Barnes
Judy, Lines to
Kenilworth, Romance of
King's Evil, Curing the
  Speech in
  Stag, The
Kirkstall Abbey
Kiss, Lines on
Kissing, Chapter on
Kitchineriana
Konigstein, Great Tun of
La Perouse, Fate of
Lady-Poets of England
Laleham Park
Lawyer, Epitaph on
Lead Miners of Derby
Ledyard to his Mistress
Legal Pearl Divers
Legends of the Lakes of Ireland
Leicester, Derby, and Nottingham
Lilly, the Astrologer
Lime, Effects of
Linlithgow
Loch Katrine
  Lomond
London Birds
  Improvements
  Levels
  Lines on Leaving
  Lyrics
  Old
  Stone, Ode to
    Reply of
Long Stories
Love, Course of
Lover Student, The
Lower Classes, Education of the
Luxuries, Ancient and Modern
Macclesfield Bridge, Regent's Park
Mahogany Tree
Mahomet's Standard
Man, Lines on
Man-Mountain, The
Marcel, the dancer
March, Story on a
Marlborough, Duke of
Marriage, Lines on
Mars, Mlle. and Napoleon
Matrimonial Advertisement
May Day Custom
Mekka, Description of
Melting Subject
Memento Mori
Mercy and Justice, Lines on
Mexico, or New Spain
Microscopic Examination of the Blood
Mines of Hayna, Discovery of
  Mexico
Mock Suns
Moliere, Anecdotes of
Monkey, Anecdotes of
Moore, the poet
Morning Star, Lines to
Morse, or Sea-horse
Mount Arafat and Mekka
Mug-house Club, Long Acre
Murder-Hole, a Legend
Murderer's Last Night
Mushrooms, Wholesomeness of
Mutton cold, Eating
Mutton Hams
Mexican Navy
Monumental Alteration
Nancy Dawson
Napoleon, Anecdotes of
  young, Anecdotes of
National Debt, Plans to pay
Navarino, Battle of
Neck, Tradition of the
New South Wales, Population of
New Year's Custom
Newton, Sir Isaac
Noses, Chapter of
Nostalagia, or Calenture
Oak, Beauty of the
Ode from the Persian
Ohio, Scenery of the
Old Rose and burn the bellows
Old Mansions
Oratorios
Oratory, British
Ornithology, Mr. Jennings on
O'Sullivan's Punch Bowl
Ossian's Hall
Othello, Performance of
Otway's Plays
Painting, Moral effects of
Palermo, Party at
Paper linen, Manufactory of
Park, Mungo, Fate of
Parliaments, Epitome of
Parr, Dr., Anecdotes of
Peg Tankards
Pendrils, Family of
Persia, Royal life in
Persian Cavalier
Petrifaction Manufactory
Planting, Notes on
Pocket Books, Useful
Poesy, The dream of
Poetical Will
Polishing Stones
Pompeii, Recent visit to
Posture-masters, Ancient
Potato Chestnuts
  Growth of
Practice of Cookery
Pre-aux-clercs at Paris
Public Improvements
Punch, Anecdote of
Puns and Conundrums
Pyrometer, New
Pyrothonide
Quarterly Review, Notes from
Quartre Bras, Battle of
Queen of Portugal
Rank and Talent, a novel
Regal Tablet
Residence, Choice of a
Rest, Lines on
Retentive Memory
Riches, Lines on
River Melodies
Roads of England
Robin Hood's Grave
Robinson Crusoe's Island
Roman Altar, Description of
Rome, Effect of, on the traveller
Rooks
Roses, Culture of
Rover, dog, Anecdotes of
Roué's interpretation of death
Royal Academy Exhibition
Rugby School described
Rupert's, Prince, Palace, Barbican
Russian Botanical Garden
Russian Navy, The
Sabbath, The
Sacred Poetry
St. Christopher's, Island of
St. Paul's Cathedral
Sanctuaries, Ancient
Sarcophagus, Lines on
Sawston Hall described
Schinderhannes, the German robber
School and College
Scotch Marriages
Scottish Inns
Scotland, Road-book of
Scott, Sir Walter, Portrait of
Screws and Screw Presses
Seal's Wedding
Sensitive Plant, The
Shakspeare, a fragment
Shaving in Churchyards
Sherwood and Robin Hood
Shrubs, Transplantation of
Sight, Lines on
Silk Trade
Sleeping Girl, The
Slugs, To destroy
Sneezing among the Ancients
Snow magnified
Snow, a long one
Snow-woman's Story
Soliman the Great
Solitariness, Lines on
Somerset House, Old
Song
Songs for children
Sorrows of Rosalie, a poem
South American Manners
Spiders, Gossamer threads of
Spittlefields in former days
Spots on the sun
Spoons, Antiquity of
Springs, Temperature of
Stage, The modern
Stanging custom
Stealing a Sheet
Stroll, near London
Sugar made from Rags
Superstition
Sussex Place, Regent's Park
Swan River Colony, Described
Swearing by proxy
Tailors, On
Talipot Tree
Tanning, New process of
Tea-drinking
Temperance, Lines on
Theatres, ancient and modern
  Fire in
  Royal visits to
Theatrical bill of 1511
Thorwaldsen, The sculptor
Throwing stones at the devil
Tigers, To catch
Timber Trees, Description of
Tim Marcks and the Walking Scull
Times Newspaper
Travelling, Expeditious
Travelling on the Continent
Trial by Jury
Truth, a fable
Turkish Prophecy
Twenty-eight & Twenty-nine, years
University, in Yorkshire
Valdemaro, Vision of
Valentine's Day
Van Diemen's Land, Aborigines of
Vary weel while it lasts
Vegetables, To make tender
Vicar, the, Lines on
Vidocq, the French policeman
Village Funeral
Villas in the Regent's Park
Vine, The, from the German
Violets, Complaint of
Wanderer, Recollections of
War, Miseries of
Warwick Castle, Description of
Waste lands, Cultivation of
Watch, Mechanism of
Watering-place arrivals
Water bewitched
Waterloo, Battle of described
Waverley Novels
Whigs and Tories
Whitehall, Description of
Whitsun Ale
Windsor as it was
Witnesses on trials
Woman
Wonders of Art
Wreck, The, a sketch
Yew-tree, The
York Minster, Fire in
York Terrace, Regent's Park
Zoological Society, Report of





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mirror of Literature, Amusement,
and Instruction--Volume 13, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE MIRROR OF LITERATURE ***

***** This file should be named 12017-8.txt or 12017-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/0/1/12017/

Produced by Jonathan Ingram, Allen Siddle, and the Online Distributed
Proofreaders Team


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Each eBook is in a subdirectory of the same number as the eBook's
eBook number, often in several formats including plain vanilla ASCII,
compressed (zipped), HTML and others.

Corrected EDITIONS of our eBooks replace the old file and take over
the old filename and etext number.  The replaced older file is renamed.
VERSIONS based on separate sources are treated as new eBooks receiving
new filenames and etext numbers.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

EBooks posted prior to November 2003, with eBook numbers BELOW #10000,
are filed in directories based on their release date.  If you want to
download any of these eBooks directly, rather than using the regular
search system you may utilize the following addresses and just
download by the etext year. For example:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/etext06

    (Or /etext 05, 04, 03, 02, 01, 00, 99,
     98, 97, 96, 95, 94, 93, 92, 92, 91 or 90)

EBooks posted since November 2003, with etext numbers OVER #10000, are
filed in a different way.  The year of a release date is no longer part
of the directory path.  The path is based on the etext number (which is
identical to the filename).  The path to the file is made up of single
digits corresponding to all but the last digit in the filename.  For
example an eBook of filename 10234 would be found at:

     https://www.gutenberg.org/1/0/2/3/10234

or filename 24689 would be found at:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/2/4/6/8/24689

An alternative method of locating eBooks:
     https://www.gutenberg.org/GUTINDEX.ALL


