The Project Gutenberg EBook of Lyrics of Earth, by Archibald Lampman

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Lyrics of Earth

Author: Archibald Lampman

Release Date: July 11, 2007 [EBook #12664]
[This file was first posted on June 19, 2004]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LYRICS OF EARTH ***


Produced by Andrew Sly.

Thank you to Canadian Poetry [http://www.canadianpoetry.ca] for
providing the source text.

Revised by Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









           LYRICS OF EARTH

                  BY

          ARCHIBALD LAMPMAN


            [Illustration]


                BOSTON

           COPELAND AND DAY

               MDCCCXCV


 Copyright by Copeland and Day, 1895.




CONTENTS


The Sweetness of Life        5

God-speed to the Snow        7

April in the Hills           8

Forest Moods                 9

The Return of the Year      10

Favorites of Pan            11

The Meadow                  14

In May                      17

Life and Nature             19

With the Night              20

June                        21

Distance                    24

The Bird and the Hour       25

After Rain                  25

Cloud-break                 27

The Moon-path               28

Comfort of the Fields       29

At the Ferry                32

September                   35

A Re-assurance              38

The Poet's Possession       39

An Autumn Landscape         39

In November                 40

By an Autumn Stream         42

Snowbirds                   44

Snow                        45

Sunset                      46

Winter-store                48

The Sun Cup                 56




TO MY MOTHER


    Mother, to whose valiant will,
      Battling long ago,
    What the heaping years fulfil,
      Light and song, I owe;
    Send my little book a-field,
      Fronting praise or blame
    With the shining flag and shield
      Of your name.




THE SWEETNESS OF LIFE


    It fell on a day I was happy,
      And the winds, the concave sky,
    The flowers and the beasts in the meadow
      Seemed happy even as I;
    And I stretched my hands to the meadow,
      To the bird, the beast, the tree:
    "Why are ye all so happy?"
      I cried, and they answered me.

    What sayest thou, Oh meadow,
      That stretches so wide, so far,
    That none can say how many
      Thy misty marguerites are?
    And what say ye, red roses,
      That o'er the sun-blanched wall
    From your high black-shadowed trellis
      Like flame or blood-drops fall?
        "We are born, we are reared, and we linger
          A various space and die;
        We dream, and are bright and happy,
          But we cannot answer why."

    What sayest thou, Oh shadow,
      That from the dreaming hill
    All down the broadening valley
      Liest so sharp and still?
    And thou, Oh murmuring brooklet,
      Whereby in the noonday gleam
    The loosestrife burns like ruby,
      And the branchèd asters dream?
        "We are born, we are reared, and we linger
          A various space and die;
        We dream and are very happy,
          But we cannot answer why."

    And then of myself I questioned,
      That like a ghost the while
    Stood from me and calmly answered,
      With slow and curious smile:
    "Thou art born as the flowers, and wilt linger
      Thine own short space and die;
    Thou dream'st and art strangely happy,
      But thou canst not answer why."




GOD-SPEED TO THE SNOW


    March is slain; the keen winds fly;
    Nothing more is thine to do;
    April kisses thee good-bye;
    Thou must haste and follow too;
    Silent friend that guarded well
    Withered things to make us glad,
    Shyest friend that could not tell
    Half the kindly thought he had.
    Haste thee, speed thee, O kind snow;
    Down the dripping valleys go,
    From the fields and gleaming meadows,
    Where the slaying hours behold thee,
    From the forests whose slim shadows,
    Brown and leafless cannot fold thee,
    Through the cedar lands aflame
    With gold light that cleaves and quivers,
    Songs that winter may not tame,
    Drone of pines and laugh of rivers.
    May thy passing joyous be
    To thy father, the great sea,
    For the sun is getting stronger;
    Earth hath need of thee no longer;
    Go, kind snow, God-speed to thee!




APRIL IN THE HILLS


    To-day the world is wide and fair
    With sunny fields of lucid air,
    And waters dancing everywhere;
      The snow is almost gone;
    The noon is builded high with light,
    And over heaven's liquid height,
    In steady fleets serene and white,
      The happy clouds go on.

    The channels run, the bare earth steams,
    And every hollow rings and gleams
    With jetting falls and dashing streams;
      The rivers burst and fill;
    The fields are full of little lakes,
    And when the romping wind awakes
    The water ruffles blue and shakes,
      And the pines roar on the hill.

    The crows go by, a noisy throng;
    About the meadows all day long
    The shore-lark drops his brittle song;
      And up the leafless tree
    The nut-hatch runs, and nods, and clings;
    The bluebird dips with flashing wings,
    The robin flutes, the sparrow sings,
      And the swallows float and flee.

    I break the spirit's cloudy bands,
    A wanderer in enchanted lands,
    I feel the sun upon my hands;
      And far from care and strife
    The broad earth bids me forth. I rise
    With lifted brow and upward eyes.
    I bathe my spirit in blue skies,
      And taste the springs of life.

    I feel the tumult of new birth;
    I waken with the wakening earth;
    I match the bluebird in her mirth;
      And wild with wind and sun,
    A treasurer of immortal days,
    I roam the glorious world with praise,
    The hillsides and the woodland ways,
      Till earth and I are one.




FOREST MOODS


    There is singing of birds in the deep wet woods,
    In the heart of the listening solitudes,
    Pewees, and thrushes, and sparrows, not few,
    And all the notes of their throats are true.

    The thrush from the innermost ash takes on
    A tender dream of the treasured and gone;
    But the sparrow singeth with pride and cheer
    Of the might and light of the present and here.

    There is shining of flowers in the deep wet woods,
    In the heart of the sensitive solitudes,
    The roseate bell and the lily are there,
    And every leaf of their sheaf is fair.

    Careless and bold, without dream of woe,
    The trilliums scatter their flags snow;
    But the pale wood-daffodil covers her face,
    Agloom with the doom of a sorrowful race.




THE RETURN OF THE YEAR


    Again the warm bare earth, the noon
      That hangs upon her healing scars,
    The midnight round, the great red moon,
      The mother with her brood of stars,

    The mist-rack and the wakening rain
      Blown soft in many a forest way,
    The yellowing elm-trees, and again
      The blood-root in its sheath of gray.

    The vesper-sparrow's song, the stress
      Of yearning notes that gush and stream,
    The lyric joy, the tenderness,
      And once again the dream! the dream!

    A touch of far-off joy and power,
      A something it is life to learn,
    Comes back to earth, and one short hour
      The glamours of the gods return.

    This life's old mood and cult of care
      Falls smitten by an older truth,
    And the gray world wins back to her
      The rapture of her vanished youth.

    Dead thoughts revive, and he that heeds
      Shall hear, as by a spirit led,
    A song among the golden reeds:
      "The gods are vanished but not dead!"

    For one short hour; unseen yet near,
      They haunt us, a forgotten mood,
    A glory upon mead and mere,
      A magic in the leafless wood.

    At morning we shall catch the glow
      Of Dian's quiver on the hill,
    And somewhere in the glades I know
      That Pan is at his piping still.




FAVORITES OF PAN


    Once, long ago, before the gods
      Had left this earth, by stream and forest glade,
    Where the first plough upturned the clinging sods,
      Or the lost shepherd strayed,

    Often to the tired listener's ear
      There came at noonday or beneath the stars
    A sound, he knew not whence, so sweet and clear,
      That all his aches and scars

    And every brooded bitterness,
      Fallen asunder from his soul took flight,
    Like mist or darkness yielding to the press
      Of an unnamed delight,--

    A sudden brightness of the heart,
      A magic fire drawn down from Paradise,
    That rent the cloud with golden gleam apart,--
      And far before his eyes

    The loveliness and calm of earth
      Lay like a limitless dream remote and strange,
    The joy, the strife, the triumph and the mirth,
      And the enchanted change;

    And so he followed the sweet sound,
      Till faith had traversed her appointed span,
    And murmured as he pressed the sacred ground:
      "It is the note of Pan!"

    Now though no more by marsh or stream
      Or dewy forest sounds the secret reed--
    For Pan is gone--Ah yet, the infinite dream
      Still lives for them that heed.

    In April, when the turning year
      Regains its pensive youth, and a soft breath
    And amorous influence over marsh and mere
      Dissolves the grasp of death,

    To them that are in love with life,
      Wandering like children with untroubled eyes,
    Far from the noise of cities and the strife,
      Strange flute-like voices rise

    At noon and in the quiet of the night
      From every watery waste; and in that hour
    The same strange spell, the same unnamed delight,
      Enfolds them in its power.

    An old-world joyousness supreme,
      The warmth and glow of an immortal balm,
    The mood-touch of the gods, the endless dream,
      The high lethean calm.

    They see, wide on the eternal way,
      The services of earth, the life of man;
    And, listening to the magic cry they say:
      "It is the note of Pan!"

    For, long ago, when the new strains
      Of hostile hymns and conquering faiths grew keen,
    And the old gods from their deserted fanes,
      Fled silent and unseen,

    So, too, the goat-foot Pan, not less
      Sadly obedient to the mightier hand,
    Cut him new reeds, and in a sore distress
      Passed out from land to land;

    And lingering by each haunt he knew,
      Of fount or sinuous stream or grassy marge,
    He set the syrinx to his lips, and blew
      A note divinely large;

    And all around him on the wet
      Cool earth the frogs came up, and with a smile
    He took them in his hairy hands, and set
      His mouth to theirs awhile,

    And blew into their velvet throats;
      And ever from that hour the frogs repeat
    The murmur of Pan's pipes, the notes,
      And answers strange and sweet;

    And they that hear them are renewed
      By knowledge in some god-like touch conveyed,
    Entering again into the eternal mood,
      Wherein the world was made.




THE MEADOW


    Here when the cloudless April days begin,
        And the quaint crows flock thicker day by day,
    Filling the forests with a pleasant din,
        And the soiled snow creeps secretly away,
    Comes the small busy sparrow, primed with glee,
        First preacher in the naked wilderness,
        Piping an end to all the long distress
    From every fence and every leafless tree.

    Now with soft slight and viewless artifice
        Winter's iron work is wondrously undone;
    In all the little hollows cored with ice
        The clear brown pools stand simmering in the sun,
    Frail lucid worlds, upon whose tremulous floors
        All day the wandering water-bugs at will,
        Shy mariners whose oars are never still,
    Voyage and dream about the heightening shores.

    The bluebird, peeping from the gnarlèd thorn,
        Prattles upon his frolic flute, or flings,
    In bounding flight across the golden morn,
        An azure gleam from off his splendid wings.
    Here the slim-pinioned swallows sweep and pass
        Down to the far-off river; the black crow
        With wise and wary visage to and fro
    Settles and stalks about the withered grass.

    Here, when the murmurous May-day is half gone,
        The watchful lark before my feet takes flight,
    And wheeling to some lonelier field far on,
        Drops with obstreperous cry; and here at night,
    When the first star precedes the great red moon,
        The shore-lark tinkles from the darkening field,
        Somewhere, we know not, in the dusk concealed,
    His little creakling and continuous tune.

    Here, too, the robins, lusty as of old,
        Hunt the waste grass for forage, or prolong
    From every quarter of these fields the bold,
        Blithe phrases of their never-finished song.
    The white-throat's distant descant with slow stress
        Note after note upon the noonday falls,
        Filling the leisured air at intervals
    With his own mood of piercing pensiveness.

    How often from this windy upland perch,
        Mine eyes have seen the forest break in bloom,
    The rose-red maple and the golden birch,
        The dusty yellow of the elms, the gloom
    Of the tall poplar hung with tasseled black;
        Ah, I have watched, till eye and ear and brain
        Grew full of dreams as they, the moted plain,
    The sun-steeped wood, the marsh-land at its back,

    The valley where the river wheels and fills,
        Yon city glimmering in its smoky shroud,
    And out at the last misty rim the hills
        Blue and far off and mounded like a cloud,
    And here the noisy rutted road that goes
        Down the slope yonder, flanked on either side
        With the smooth-furrowed fields flung black and wide,
    Patched with pale water sleeping in the rows.

    So as I watched the crowded leaves expand,
        The bloom break sheath, the summer's strength uprear,
    In earth's great mother's heart already planned
        The heaped and burgeoned plenty of the year,
    Even as she from out her wintry cell
        My spirit also sprang to life anew,
        And day by day as the spring's bounty grew,
    Its conquering joy possessed me like a spell.

    In reverie by day and midnight dream
        I sought these upland fields and walked apart,
    Musing on Nature, till my thought did seem
        To read the very secrets of her heart;
    In mooded moments earnest and sublime
        I stored the themes of many a future song,
        Whose substance should be Nature's, clear and strong,
    Bound in a casket of majestic rhyme.

    Brave bud-like plans that never reached the fruit,
        Like hers our mother's who with every hour,
    Easily replenished from the sleepless root,
        Covers her bosom with fresh bud and flower;
    Yet I was happy as young lovers be,
        Who in the season of their passion's birth
        Deem that they have their utmost worship's worth,
    If love be near them, just to hear and see.




IN MAY


    Grief was my master yesternight;
        To-morrow I may grieve again;
        But now along the windy plain
          The clouds have taken flight.

    The sowers in the furrows go;
        The lusty river brimmeth on;
        The curtains from the hills are gone;
          The leaves are out; and lo,

    The silvery distance of the day,
        The light horizons, and between
        The glory of the perfect green,
          The tumult of the May.

    The bobolinks at noonday sing
        More softly than the softest flute,
        And lightlier than the lightest lute
          Their fairy tambours ring.

    The roads far off are towered with dust;
        The cherry-blooms are swept and thinned;
        In yonder swaying elms the wind
          Is charging gust on gust.

    But here there is no stir at all;
        The ministers of sun and shadow
        Horde all the perfumes of the meadow
          Behind a grassy wall.

    An infant rivulet wind-free
        Adown the guarded hollow sets,
        Over whose brink the violets
          Are nodding peacefully.

    From pool to pool it prattles by;
        The flashing swallows dip and pass,
        Above the tufted marish grass,
          And here at rest am I.

    I care not for the old distress,
        Nor if to-morrow bid me moan;
        To-day is mine, and I have known
          An hour of blessedness.




LIFE AND NATURE


    I passed through the gates of the city,
      The streets were strange and still,
    Through the doors of the open churches
      The organs were moaning shrill.

    Through the doors and the great high windows
      I heard the murmur of prayer,
    And the sound of their solemn singing
      Streamed out on the sunlit air;

    A sound of some great burden
      That lay on the world's dark breast,
    Of the old, and the sick, and the lonely,
      And the weary that cried for rest.

    I strayed through the midst of the city
      Like one distracted or mad.
    "Oh, Life! Oh, Life!" I kept saying,
      And the very word seemed sad.

    I passed through the gates of the city,
      And I heard the small birds sing,
    I laid me down in the meadows
      Afar from the bell-ringing.

    In the depth and the bloom of the meadows
      I lay on the earth's quiet breast,
    The poplar fanned me with shadows,
      And the veery sang me to rest.

    Blue, blue was the heaven above me,
      And the earth green at my feet;
    "Oh, Life! Oh, Life!" I kept saying,
      And the very word seemed sweet.




WITH THE NIGHT


    O doubts, dull passions, and base fears,
      That harassed and oppressed the day,
    Ye poor remorses and vain tears,
      That shook this house of clay:

    All heaven to the western bars
      Is glittering with the darker dawn;
    Here with the earth, the night, the stars,
      Ye have no place: begone!




JUNE


    Long, long ago, it seems, this summer morn
        That pale-browed April passed with pensive tread
        Through the frore woods, and from its frost-bound bed
    Woke the arbutus with her silver horn;
            And now May, too, is fled,
    The flower-crowned month, the merry laughing May,
        With rosy feet and fingers dewy wet,
    Leaving the woods and all cool gardens gay
        With tulips and the scented violet.

    Gone are the wind-flower and the adder-tongue
        And the sad drooping bellwort, and no more
        The snowy trilliums crowd the forest's floor;
    The purpling grasses are no longer young,
            And summer's wide-set door
    O'er the thronged hills and the broad panting earth
        Lets in the torrent of the later bloom,
    Haytime, and harvest, and the after mirth,
        The slow soft rain, the rushing thunder plume.

    All day in garden alleys moist and dim,
        The humid air is burdened with the rose;
        In moss-deep woods the creamy orchid blows;
    And now the vesper-sparrows' pealing hymn
            From every orchard close
    At eve comes flooding rich and silvery;
        The daisies in great meadows swing and shine;
    And with the wind a sound as of the sea
        Roars in the maples and the topmost pine.

    High in the hills the solitary thrush
        Tunes magically his music of fine dreams,
        In briary dells, by boulder-broken streams;
    And wide and far on nebulous fields aflush
            The mellow morning gleams.
    The orange cone-flowers purple-bossed are there,
        The meadow's bold-eyed gypsies deep of hue,
    And slender hawkweed tall and softly fair,
        And rosy tops of fleabane veiled with dew.

    So with thronged voices and unhasting flight
        The fervid hours with long return go by;
        The far-heard hylas piping shrill and high
    Tell the slow moments of the solemn night
            With unremitting cry;
    Lustrous and large out of the gathering drouth
        The planets gleam; the baleful Scorpion
    Trails his dim fires along the droused south;
        The silent world-incrusted round moves on.

    And all the dim night long the moon's white beams
        Nestle deep down in every brooding tree,
        And sleeping birds, touched with a silly glee,
    Waken at midnight from their blissful dreams,
            And carol brokenly.
    Dim surging motions and uneasy dreads
        Scare the light slumber from men's busy eyes,
    And parted lovers on their restless beds
        Toss and yearn out, and cannot sleep for sighs.

    Oft have I striven, sweet month, to figure thee,
        As dreamers of old time were wont to feign,
        In living form of flesh, and striven in vain;
    Yet when some sudden old-world mystery
            Of passion fired my brain,
    Thy shape hath flashed upon me like no dream,
        Wandering with scented curls that heaped the breeze,
    Or by the hollow of some reeded stream
        Sitting waist-deep in white anemones;

    And even as I glimpsed thee thou wert gone,
        A dream for mortal eyes too proudly coy,
        Yet in thy place for subtle thought's employ
    The golden magic clung, a light that shone
            And filled me with thy joy.
    Before me like a mist that streamed and fell
        All names and shapes of antique beauty passed
    In garlanded procession with the swell
        Of flutes between the beechen stems; and last,

    I saw the Arcadian valley, the loved wood,
        Alpheus stream divine, the sighing shore,
        And through the cool green glades, awake once more,
    Psyche, the white-limbed goddess, still pursued,
            Fleet-footed as of yore,
    The noonday ringing with her frighted peals,
        Down the bright sward and through the reeds she ran,
    Urged by the mountain echoes, at her heels
        The hot-blown cheeks and trampling feet of Pan.




DISTANCE


    To the distance! Ah, the distance!
        Blue and broad and dim!
    Peace is not in burgh or meadow,
        But beyond the rim.

    Aye, beyond it, far beyond it;
        Follow still my soul,
    Till this earth is lost in heaven,
        And thou feel'st the whole.




THE BIRD AND THE HOUR


    The sun looks over a little hill
      And floods the valley with gold--
            A torrent of gold;
    And the hither field is green and still;
      Beyond it a cloud outrolled,
      Is glowing molten and bright;
    And soon the hill, and the valley and all,
            With a quiet fall,
      Shall be gathered into the night.
      And yet a moment more,
            Out of the silent wood,
      As if from the closing door
    Of another world and another lovelier mood,
      Hear'st thou the hermit pour--
            So sweet! so magical!--
    His golden music, ghostly beautiful.




AFTER RAIN


    For three whole days across the sky,
    In sullen packs that loomed and broke,
    With flying fringes dim as smoke,
    The columns of the rain went by;
    At every hour the wind awoke;
        The darkness passed upon the plain;
        The great drops rattled at the pane.

    Now piped the wind, or far aloof
    Fell to a sough remote and dull;
    And all night long with rush and lull
    The rain kept drumming on the roof:
    I heard till ear and sense were full
        The clash or silence of the leaves,
        The gurgle in the creaking eaves.

    But when the fourth day came--at noon,
    The darkness and the rain were by;
    The sunward roofs were steaming dry;
    And all the world was flecked and strewn
    With shadows from a fleecy sky.
        The haymakers were forth and gone,
        And every rillet laughed and shone.

    Then, too, on me that loved so well
    The world, despairing in her blight,
    Uplifted with her least delight,
    On me, as on the earth, there fell
    New happiness of mirth and might;
        I strode the valleys pied and still;
        I climbed upon the breezy hill.

    I watched the gray hawk wheel and drop,
    Sole shadow on the shining world;
    I saw the mountains clothed and curled,
    With forest ruffling to the top;
    I saw the river's length unfurled,
        Pale silver down the fruited plain,
        Grown great and stately with the rain.

    Through miles of shadow and soft heat,
    Where field and fallow, fence and tree,
    Were all one world of greenery,
    I heard the robin ringing sweet,
    The sparrow piping silverly,
        The thrushes at the forest's hem;
        And as I went I sang with them.




CLOUD-BREAK


    With a turn of his magical rod,
    That extended and suddenly shone,
    From the round of his glory some god
    Looks forth and is gone.

    To the summit of heaven the clouds
    Are rolling aloft like steam;
    There's a break in their infinite shrouds,
    And below it a gleam.
    O'er the drift of the river a whiff
    Comes out from the blossoming shore;
    And the meadows are greening, as if
    They never were green before.

    The islands are kindled with gold
    And russet and emerald dye;
    And the interval waters outrolled
    Are more blue than the sky.
    From my feet to the heart of the hills
    The spirits of May intervene,
    And a vapor of azure distills
    Like a breath on the opaline green.

    Only a moment!--and then
    The chill and the shadow decline,
    On the eyes of rejuvenate men
    That were wide and divine.




THE MOON-PATH


    The full, clear moon uprose and spread
      Her cold, pale splendor o'er the sea;
    A light-strewn path that seemed to lead
      Outward into eternity.
    Between the darkness and the gleam
      An old-world spell encompassed me:
    Methought that in a godlike dream
      I trod upon the sea.

    And lo! upon that glimmering road,
      In shining companies unfurled,
    The trains of many a primal god,
      The monsters of the elder world;
    Strange creatures that, with silver wings,
      Scarce touched the ocean's thronging floor,
    The phantoms of old tales, and things
      Whose shapes are known no more.

    Giants and demi-gods who once
      Were dwellers of the earth and sea,
    And they who from Deucalion's stones,
      Rose men without an infancy;
    Beings on whose majestic lids
      Time's solemn secrets seemed to dwell,
    Tritons and pale-limbed Nereids,
      And forms of heaven and hell.

    Some who were heroes long of yore,
      When the great world was hale and young;
    And some whose marble lips yet pour
      The murmur of an antique tongue;
    Sad queens, whose names are like soft moans,
      Whose griefs were written up in gold;
    And some who on their silver thrones
      Were goddesses of old.

    As if I had been dead indeed,
      And come into some after-land,
    I saw them pass me, and take heed,
      And touch me with each mighty hand;
    And evermore a murmurous stream,
      So beautiful they seemed to me,
    Not less than in a godlike dream
      I trod the shining sea.




COMFORT OF THE FIELDS


    What would'st thou have for easement after grief,
      When the rude world hath used thee with despite,
      And care sits at thine elbow day and night,
    Filching thy pleasures like a subtle thief?
    To me, when life besets me in such wise,
    'Tis sweetest to break forth, to drop the chain,
      And grasp the freedom of this pleasant earth,
      To roam in idleness and sober mirth,
    Through summer airs and summer lands, and drain
    The comfort of wide fields unto tired eyes.

    By hills and waters, farms and solitudes,
      To wander by the day with wilful feet;
      Through fielded valleys wide with yellowing wheat;
    Along gray roads that run between deep woods,
    Murmurous and cool; through hallowed slopes of pine,
      Where the long daylight dreams, unpierced, unstirred,
      And only the rich-throated thrush is heard;
    By lonely forest brooks that froth and shine
      In bouldered crannies buried in the hills;
    By broken beeches tangled with wild vine,
      And log-strewn rivers murmurous with mills.

    In upland pastures, sown with gold, and sweet
      With the keen perfume of the ripening grass,
      Where wings of birds and filmy shadows pass,
    Spread thick as stars with shining marguerite;
    To haunt old fences overgrown with brier,
      Muffled in vines, and hawthorns, and wild cherries,
      Rank poisonous ivies, red-bunched elderberries,
    And pièd blossoms to the heart's desire,
      Gray mullein towering into yellow bloom,
      Pink-tasseled milkweed, breathing dense perfume,
    And swarthy vervain, tipped with violet fire.

    To hear at eve the bleating of far flocks,
      The mud-hen's whistle from the marsh at morn;
      To skirt with deafened ears and brain o'erborne
    Some foam-filled rapid charging down its rocks
    With iron roar of waters; far away
      Across wide-reeded meres, pensive with noon,
      To hear the querulous outcry of the loon;
    To lie among deep rocks, and watch all day
      On liquid heights the snowy clouds melt by;
    Or hear from wood-capped mountain-brows the jay
      Pierce the bright morning with his jibing cry.

    To feast on summer sounds; the jolted wains,
      The thrasher humming from the farm near by,
      The prattling cricket's intermittent cry,
    The locust's rattle from the sultry lanes;
    Or in the shadow of some oaken spray,
      To watch, as through a mist of light and dreams,
      The far-off hay-fields, where the dusty teams
    Drive round and round the lessening squares of hay,
      And hear upon the wind, now loud, now low,
    With drowsy cadence half a summer's day,
      The clatter of the reapers come and go.

    Far violet hills, horizons filmed with showers,
      The murmur of cool streams, the forest's gloom,
      The voices of the breathing grass, the hum
    Of ancient gardens overbanked with flowers:
    Thus, with a smile as golden as the dawn,
      And cool fair fingers radiantly divine,
      The mighty mother brings us in her hand,
    For all tired eyes and foreheads pinched and wan,
    Her restful cup, her beaker of bright wine:
      Drink, and be filled, and ye shall understand!




AT THE FERRY


    On such a day the shrunken stream
      Spends its last water and runs dry;
    Clouds like far turrets in a dream
      Stand baseless in the burning sky.
    On such a day at every rod
      The toilers in the hay-field halt,
    With dripping brows, and the parched sod
      Yields to the crushing foot like salt.

    But here a little wind astir,
      Seen waterward in jetting lines,
    From yonder hillside topped with fir
      Comes pungent with the breath of pines;
    And here when all the noon hangs still,
      White-hot upon the city tiles,
    A perfume and a wintry chill
      Breathe from the yellow lumber-piles.

    And all day long there falls a blur
      Of noises upon listless ears,
    The rumble of the trams, the stir
      Of barges at the clacking piers;
    The champ of wheels, the crash of steam,
      And ever, without change or stay,
    The drone, as through a troubled dream,
      Of waters falling far away.

    A tug-boat up the farther shore
      Half pants, half whistles, in her draught;
    The cadence of a creaking oar
      Falls drowsily; a corded raft
    Creeps slowly in the noonday gleam,
      And wheresoe'er a shadow sleeps
    The men lie by, or half a-dream,
      Stand leaning at the idle sweeps.

    And all day long in the quiet bay
      The eddying amber depths retard,
    And hold, as in a ring, at play,
      The heavy saw-logs notched and scarred;
    And yonder between cape and shoal,
      Where the long currents swing and shift,
    An aged punt-man with his pole
      Is searching in the parted drift.

    At moments from the distant glare
      The murmur of a railway steals
    Round yonder jutting point the air
      Is beaten with the puff of wheels;
    And here at hand an open mill,
      Strong clamor at perpetual drive,
    With changing chant, now hoarse, now shrill,
      Keeps dinning like a mighty hive.

    A furnace over field and mead,
      The rounding noon hangs hard and white;
    Into the gathering heats recede
      The hollows of the Chelsea height;
    But under all to one quiet tune,
      A spirit in cool depths withdrawn,
    With logs, and dust, and wrack bestrewn,
      The stately river journeys on.

    I watch the swinging currents go
      Far down to where, enclosed and piled,
    The logs crowd, and the Gatineau
      Comes rushing from the northern wild.
    I see the long low point, where close
      The shore-lines, and the waters end,
    I watch the barges pass in rows
      That vanish at the tapering bend.

    I see as at the noon's pale core--
      A shadow that lifts clear and floats--
    The cabin'd village round the shore,
      The landing and the fringe of boats;
    Faint films of smoke that curl and wreathe,
      And upward with the like desire
    The vast gray church that seems to breathe
      In heaven with its dreaming spire.

    And there the last blue boundaries rise,
      That guard within their compass furled
    This plot of earth: beyond them lies
      The mystery of the echoing world;
    And still my thought goes on, and yields
      New vision and new joy to me,
    Far peopled hills, and ancient fields,
      And cities by the crested sea.

    I see no more the barges pass,
      Nor mark the ripple round the pier,
    And all the uproar, mass on mass,
      Falls dead upon a vacant ear.
    Beyond the tumult of the mills,
      And all the city's sound and strife,
    Beyond the waste, beyond the hills,
      I look far out and dream of life.




SEPTEMBER


    Now hath the summer reached her golden close,
      And, lost amid her corn-fields, bright of soul,
    Scarcely perceives from her divine repose
      How near, how swift, the inevitable goal:
    Still, still, she smiles, though from her careless feet
      The bounty and the fruitful strength are gone,
      And through the soft long wondering days goes on
    The silent sere decadence sad and sweet.

    The kingbird and the pensive thrush are fled,
      Children of light, too fearful of the gloom;
    The sun falls low, the secret word is said,
      The mouldering woods grow silent as the tomb;
    Even the fields have lost their sovereign grace,
      The cone-flower and the marguerite; and no more,
      Across the river's shadow-haunted floor,
    The paths of skimming swallows interlace.

    Already in the outland wilderness
      The forests echo with unwonted dins;
    In clamorous gangs the gathering woodmen press
      Northward, and the stern winter's toil begins.
    Around the long low shanties, whose rough lines
      Break the sealed dreams of many an unnamed lake,
      Already in the frost-clear morns awake
    The crash and thunder of the falling pines.

    Where the tilled earth, with all its fields set free,
      Naked and yellow from the harvest lies,
    By many a loft and busy granary,
      The hum and tumult of the thrashers rise;
    There the tanned farmers labor without slack,
      Till twilight deepens round the spouting mill,
      Feeding the loosened sheaves, or with fierce will,
    Pitching waist-deep upon the dusty stack.

    Still a brief while, ere the old year quite pass,
      Our wandering steps and wistful eyes shall greet
    The leaf, the water, the beloved grass;
      Still from these haunts and this accustomed seat
    I see the wood-wrapt city, swept with light,
      The blue long-shadowed distance, and, between,
      The dotted farm-lands with their parcelled green,
    The dark pine forest and the watchful height.

    I see the broad rough meadow stretched away
      Into the crystal sunshine, wastes of sod,
    Acres of withered vervain, purple-gray,
      Branches of aster, groves of goldenrod;
    And yonder, toward the sunlit summit, strewn
      With shadowy boulders, crowned and swathed with weed,
      Stand ranks of silken thistles, blown to seed,
    Long silver fleeces shining like the noon.

    In far-off russet corn-fields, where the dry
      Gray shocks stand peaked and withering, half concealed
    In the rough earth, the orange pumpkins lie,
      Full-ribbed; and in the windless pasture-field
    The sleek red horses o'er the sun-warmed ground
      Stand pensively about in companies,
      While all around them from the motionless trees
    The long clean shadows sleep without a sound.

    Under cool elm-trees floats the distant stream,
      Moveless as air; and o'er the vast warm earth
    The fathomless daylight seems to stand and dream,
      A liquid cool elixir--all its girth
    Bound with faint haze, a frail transparency,
      Whose lucid purple barely veils and fills
      The utmost valleys and the thin last hills,
    Nor mars one whit their perfect clarity.

    Thus without grief the golden days go by,
      So soft we scarcely notice how they wend,
    And like a smile half happy, or a sigh,
      The summer passes to her quiet end;
    And soon, too soon, around the cumbered eaves
      Sly frosts shall take the creepers by surprise,
      And through the wind-touched reddening woods shall rise
    October with the rain of ruined leaves.




A RE-ASSURANCE


    With what doubting eyes, oh sparrow,
        Thou regardest me,
    Underneath yon spray of yarrow,
        Dipping cautiously.

    Fear me not, oh little sparrow,
        Bathe and never fear,
    For to me both pool and yarrow
        And thyself are dear.




THE POET'S POSSESSION


    Think not, oh master of the well-tilled field,
    This earth is only thine; for after thee,
    When all is sown and gathered and put by,
    Comes the grave poet with creative eye,
    And from these silent acres and clean plots,
    Bids with his wand the fancied after-yield,
    A second tilth and second harvest, be,
    The crop of images and curious thoughts.




AN AUTUMN LANDSCAPE


    No wind there is that either pipes or moans;
      The fields are cold and still; the sky
        Is covered with a blue-gray sheet
        Of motionless cloud; and at my feet
      The river, curling softly by,
    Whispers and dimples round its quiet gray stones.

    Along the chill green slope that dips and heaves
      The road runs rough and silent, lined
        With plum-trees, misty and blue-gray,
        And poplars pallid as the day,
      In masses spectral, undefined,
    Pale greenish stems half hid in dry gray leaves.

    And on beside the river's sober edge
      A long fresh field lies black. Beyond,
        Low thickets gray and reddish stand,
        Stroked white with birch; and near at hand,
      Over a little steel-smooth pond,
    Hang multitudes of thin and withering sedge.

    Across a waste and solitary rise
      A ploughman urges his dull team,
        A stooped gray figure with prone brow
        That plunges bending to the plough
      With strong, uneven steps. The stream
    Rings and re-echoes with his furious cries.

    Sometimes the lowing of a cow, long-drawn,
      Comes from far off; and crows in strings
        Pass on the upper silences.
        A flock of small gray goldfinches,
      Flown down with silvery twitterings,
    Rustle among the birch-cones and are gone.

    This day the season seems like one that heeds,
      With fixèd ear and lifted hand,
        All moods that yet are known on earth,
        All motions that have faintest birth,
      If haply she may understand
    The utmost inward sense of all her deeds.




IN NOVEMBER


    With loitering step and quiet eye,
    Beneath the low November sky,
    I wandered in the woods, and found
    A clearing, where the broken ground
    Was scattered with black stumps and briers,
    And the old wreck of forest fires.
    It was a bleak and sandy spot,
    And, all about, the vacant plot
    Was peopled and inhabited
    By scores of mulleins long since dead.
    A silent and forsaken brood
    In that mute opening of the wood,
    So shrivelled and so thin they were,
    So gray, so haggard, and austere,
    Not plants at all they seemed to me,
    But rather some spare company
    Of hermit folk, who long ago,
    Wandering in bodies to and fro,
    Had chanced upon this lonely way,
    And rested thus, till death one day
    Surprised them at their compline prayer,
    And left them standing lifeless there.

    There was no sound about the wood
    Save the wind's secret stir. I stood
    Among the mullein-stalks as still
    As if myself had grown to be
    One of their sombre company,
    A body without wish or will.
    And as I stood, quite suddenly,
    Down from a furrow in the sky
    The sun shone out a little space
    Across that silent sober place,
    Over the sand heaps and brown sod,
    The mulleins and dead goldenrod,
    And passed beyond the thickets gray,
    And lit the fallen leaves that lay,
    Level and deep within the wood,
    A rustling yellow multitude.

    And all around me the thin light,
    So sere, so melancholy bright,
    Fell like the half-reflected gleam
    Or shadow of some former dream;
    A moment's golden revery
    Poured out on every plant and tree
    A semblance of weird joy, or less,
    A sort of spectral happiness;
    And I, too, standing idly there,
    With muffled hands in the chill air,
    Felt the warm glow about my feet,
    And shuddering betwixt cold and heat,
    Drew my thoughts closer, like a cloak,
    While something in my blood awoke,
    A nameless and unnatural cheer,
    A pleasure secret and austere.




BY AN AUTUMN STREAM


    Now overhead,
    Where the rivulet loiters and stops,
    The bittersweet hangs from the tops
    Of the alders and cherries
    Its bunches of beautiful berries,
    Orange and red.

    And the snowbirds flee,
    Tossing up on the far brown field,
    Now flashing and now concealed,
    Like fringes of spray
    That vanish and gleam on the gray
    Field of the sea.

    Flickering light,
    Come the last of the leaves down borne,
    And patches of pale white corn
    In the wind complain,
    Like the slow rustle of rain
    Noticed by night.

    Withered and thinned,
    The sentinel mullein looms,
    With the pale gray shadowy plumes
    Of the goldenrod;
    And the milkweed opens its pod,
    Tempting the wind.

    Aloft on the hill,
    A cloudrift opens and shines
    Through a break in its gorget of pines,
    And it dreams at my feet
    In a sad, silvery sheet,
    Utterly still.

    All things that be
    Seem plunged into silence, distraught,
    By some stern, some necessitous thought:
    It wraps and enthralls
    Marsh, meadow, and forest; and falls
    Also on me.




SNOWBIRDS


    Along the narrow sandy height
      I watch them swiftly come and go,
        Or round the leafless wood,
      Like flurries of wind-driven snow,
    Revolving in perpetual flight,
        A changing multitude.

    Nearer and nearer still they sway,
      And, scattering in a circled sweep,
        Rush down without a sound;
      And now I see them peer and peep,
    Across yon level bleak and gray,
        Searching the frozen ground,--

    Until a little wind upheaves,
      And makes a sudden rustling there,
        And then they drop their play,
      Flash up into the sunless air,
    And like a flight of silver leaves
        Swirl round and sweep away.




SNOW


    White are the far-off plains, and white
        The fading forests grow;
    The wind dies out along the height,
        And denser still the snow,
    A gathering weight on roof and tree,
        Falls down scarce audibly.

    The road before me smooths and fills
        Apace, and all about
    The fences dwindle, and the hills
        Are blotted slowly out;
    The naked trees loom spectrally
        Into the dim white sky.

    The meadows and far-sheeted streams
        Lie still without a sound;
    Like some soft minister of dreams
        The snow-fall hoods me round;
    In wood and water, earth and air,
        A silence everywhere.

    Save when at lonely intervals
        Some farmer's sleigh, urged on,
    With rustling runners and sharp bells,
        Swings by me and is gone;
    Or from the empty waste I hear
        A sound remote and clear;

    The barking of a dog, or call
        To cattle, sharply pealed,
    Borne echoing from some wayside stall
        Or barnyard far a-field;
    Then all is silent, and the snow
        Falls, settling soft and slow.

    The evening deepens, and the gray
        Folds closer earth and sky;
    The world seems shrouded far away;
        Its noises sleep, and I,
    As secret as yon buried stream,
        Plod dumbly on, and dream.




SUNSET


    From this windy bridge at rest,
    In some former curious hour,
    We have watched the city's hue,
    All along the orange west,
    Cupola and pointed tower,
    Darken into solid blue.

    Tho' the biting north wind breaks
    Full across this drifted hold,
    Let us stand with icèd cheeks
    Watching westward as of old;

    Past the violet mountain-head
    To the farthest fringe of pine,
    Where far off the purple-red
    Narrows to a dusky line,
    And the last pale splendors die
    Slowly from the olive sky;

    Till the thin clouds wear away
    Into threads of purple-gray,
    And the sudden stars between
    Brighten in the pallid green;

    Till above the spacious east,
    Slow returnèd one by one,
    Like pale prisoners released
    From the dungeons of the sun,
    Capella and her train appear
    In the glittering Charioteer;

    Till the rounded moon shall grow
    Great above the eastern snow,
    Shining into burnished gold;
    And the silver earth outrolled,
    In the misty yellow light,
    Shall take on the width of night.




WINTER-STORE


    Subtly conscious, all awake,
    Let us clear our eyes, and break
    Through the cloudy chrysalis,
    See the wonder as it is.
    Down a narrow alley, blind,
    Touch and vision, heart and mind;
    Turned sharply inward, still we plod,
    Till the calmly smiling god
    Leaves us, and our spirits grow
    More thin, more acrid, as we go.
    Creeping by the sullen wall,
    We forego the power to see,
    The threads that bind us to the All,
    God or the Immensity;
    Whereof on the eternal road
    Man is but a passing mode.

    Too blind we are, too little see
    Of the magic pageantry,
    Every minute, every hour,
    From the cloudflake to the flower,
    Forever old, forever strange,
    Issuing in perpetual change
    From the rainbow gates of Time.

    But he who through this common air
    Surely knows the great and fair,
    What is lovely, what sublime,
    Becomes in an increasing span,
    One with earth and one with man,
    One, despite these mortal scars,
    With the planets and the stars;
    And Nature from her holy place,
    Bending with unveilèd face,
    Fills him in her divine employ
    With her own majestic joy.

    Up the fielded slopes at morn,
    Where light wefts of shadow pass,
    Films upon the bending corn,
    I shall sweep the purple grass.
    Sun-crowned heights and mossy woods,
    And the outer solitudes,
    Mountain-valleys, dim with pine,
    Shall be home and haunt of mine.
    I shall search in crannied hollows,
    Where the sunlight scarcely follows,
    And the secret forest brook
    Murmurs, and from nook to nook
    Forever downward curls and cools,
    Frothing in the bouldered pools.

    Many a noon shall find me laid
    In the pungent balsam shade,
    Where sharp breezes spring and shiver
    On some deep rough-coasted river,
    And the plangent waters come,
    Amber-hued and streaked with foam;
    Where beneath the sunburnt hills
    All day long the crowded mills
    With remorseless champ and scream
    Overlord the sluicing stream,
    And the rapids' iron roar
    Hammers at the forest's core;
    Where corded rafts creep slowly on,
    Glittering in the noonday sun,
    And the tawny river-dogs,
    Shepherding the branded logs,
    Bind and heave with cadenced cry;
    Where the blackened tugs go by,
    Panting hard and straining slow,
    Laboring at the weighty tow,
    Flat-nosed barges all in trim,
    Creeping in long cumbrous line,
    Loaded to the water's brim
    With the clean, cool-scented pine.

    Perhaps in some low meadow-land,
    Stretching wide on either hand,
    I shall see the belted bees
    Rocking with the tricksy breeze
    In the spirèd meadow-sweet,
    Or with eager trampling feet
    Burrowing in the boneset blooms,
    Treading out the dry perfumes.
    Where sun-hot hay-fields newly mown
    Climb the hillside ruddy brown,
    I shall see the haymakers,
    While the noonday scarcely stirs,
    Brown of neck and booted gray,
    Tossing up the rustling hay,
    While the hay-racks bend and rock,
    As they take each scented cock,
    Jolting over dip and rise;
    And the wavering butterflies
    O'er the spaces brown and bare
    Light and wander here and there.

    I shall stray by many a stream,
    Where the half-shut lilies gleam.
    Napping out the sultry days
    In the quiet secluded bays;
    Where the tasseled rushes tower,
    O'er the purple pickerel-flower.
    And the floating dragon-fly--
    Azure glint and crystal gleam--
    Watches o'er the burnished stream
    With his eye of ebony;
    Where the bull-frog lolls at rest
    On his float of lily-leaves,
    That the swaying water weaves,
    And distends his yellow breast,
    Lowing out from shore to shore
    With a hollow vibrant roar;
    Where the softest wind that blows
    As it lightly comes and goes,
    O'er the jungled river meads,
    Stirs a whisper in the reeds,
    And wakes the crowded bull-rushes
    From their stately reveries,
    Flashing through their long-leaved hordes
    Like a brandishing of swords;
    There, too, the frost-like arrow-flowers
    Tremble to the golden core,
    Children of enchanted hours,
    Whom the rustling river bore
    In the night's bewildered noon,
    Woven of water and the moon.

    I shall hear the grasshoppers
    From the parched grass rehearse,
    And with drowsy note prolong
    Evermore the same thin song.
    I shall hear the crickets tell
    Stories by the humming well,
    And mark the locust, with quaint eyes,
    Caper in his cloak of gray
    Like a jester in disguise
    Rattling by the dusty way.

    I shall dream by upland fences,
    Where the season's wealth condenses
    Over many a weedy wreck,
    Wild, uncared-for, desert places,
    That sovereign Beauty loves to deck
    With her softest, dearest graces.
    There the long year dreams in quiet,
    And the summer's strength runs riot.
    Shall I not remember these,
    Deep in winter reveries?
    Berried brier and thistle-bloom,
    And milkweed with its dense perfume;
    Slender vervain towering up
    In a many-branchèd cup,
    Like a candlestick, each spire
    Kindled with a violet fire;
    Matted creepers and wild cherries,
    Purple-bunchèd elderberries,
    And on scanty plots of sod
    Groves of branchy goldenrod.

    What though autumn mornings now,
    Winterward with glittering brow,
    Stiffen in the silver grass;
    And what though robins flock and pass,
    With subdued and sober call,
    To the old year's funeral;
    Though October's crimson leaves
    Rustle at the gusty door,
    And the tempest round the eaves
    Alternate with pipe and roar;
    I sit, as erst, unharmed, secure,
    Conscious that my store is sure,
    Whatsoe'er the fencèd fields,
    Or the untilled forest yields
    Of unhurt remembrances,
    Or thoughts, far-glimpsed, half-followed, these
    I have reaped and laid away,
    A treasure of unwinnowed grain,
    To the garner packed and gray
    Gathered without toil or strain.

    And when the darker days shall come,
    And the fields are white and dumb;
    When our fires are half in vain,
    And the crystal starlight weaves
    Mockeries of summer leaves,
    Pictured on the icy pane;
    When the high aurora gleams
    Far above the Arctic streams
    Like a line of shifting spears,
    And the broad pine-circled meres,
    Glimmering in that spectral light,
    Thunder through the northern night;
    Then within the bolted door
    I shall con my summer store;
    Though the fences scarcely show
    Black above the drifted snow,
    Though the icy sweeping wind
    Whistle in the empty tree,
    Safe within the sheltered mind,
    I shall feed on memory.

    Yet across the windy night
    Comes upon its wings a cry;
    Fashioned forms and modes take flight,
    And a vision sad and high
    Of the laboring world down there,
    Where the lights burn red and warm,
    Pricks my soul with sudden stare,
    Glowing through the veils of storm.
    In the city yonder sleep
    Those who smile and those who weep,
    Those whose lips are set with care,
    Those whose brows are smooth and fair;
    Mourners whom the dawning light
    Shall grapple with an old distress;
    Lovers folded at midnight
    In their bridal happiness;
    Pale watchers by belovèd beds,
    Fallen a-drowse with nodding heads,
    Whom sleep captured by surprise,
    With the circles round their eyes;
    Maidens with quiet-taken breath,
    Dreaming of enchanted bowers;
    Old men with the mask of death;
    Little children soft as flowers;
    Those who wake wild-eyed and start
    In some madness of the heart;
    Those whose lips and brows of stone
    Evil thoughts have graven upon,
    Shade by shade and line by line,
    Refashioning what was once divine.

    All these sleep, and through the night,
    Comes a passion and a cry,
    With a blind sorrow and a might,
    I know not whence, I know not why,
    A something I cannot control,
    A nameless hunger of the soul.
    It holds me fast. In vain, in vain,
    I remember how of old
    I saw the ruddy race of men,
    Through the glittering world outrolled,
    A gay-smiling multitude,
    All immortal, all divine,
    Treading in a wreathèd line
    By a pathway through a wood.




THE SUN CUP


    The earth is the cup of the sun,
    That he filleth at morning with wine,
    With the warm, strong wine of his might
    From the vintage of gold and of light,
    Fills it, and makes it divine.

    And at night when his journey is done,
    At the gate of his radiant hall,
    He setteth his lips to the brim,
    With a long last look of his eye,
    And lifts it and draineth it dry,
    Drains till he leaveth it all
    Empty and hollow and dim.

    And then, as he passes to sleep,
    Still full of the feats that he did,
    Long ago in Olympian wars,
    He closes it down with the sweep
    Of its slow-turning luminous lid,
    Its cover of darkness and stars,
    Wrought once by Hephæstus of old
    With violet and vastness and gold.




The first edition of this book consists of five hundred copies, printed
by the Boston Engraving and McIndoe Printing Company, Boston, during
March, 1896, with fifty additional copies on Arnold paper.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Lyrics of Earth, by Archibald Lampman

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK LYRICS OF EARTH ***

***** This file should be named 12664-8.txt or 12664-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/2/6/6/12664/

Produced by Thierry Alberto, Jana Srna and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This file was produced
from images generously made available by the Canadian Institute for
Historical Microreproductions (www.canadiana.org))


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
