The Project Gutenberg EBook of International Weekly Miscellany, Vol. 1,
No. 5, July 29, 1850, by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: International Weekly Miscellany, Vol. 1, No. 5, July 29, 1850

Author: Various

Release Date: August 21, 2004 [EBook #13241]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTERNATIONAL WEEKLY ***




Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, William Flis, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.





INTERNATIONAL WEEKLY MISCELLANY

Of Literature, Art, and Science.

       *       *       *       *       *

Vol. I. NEW YORK, JULY 29, 1850. No. 5.

       *       *       *       *       *




TEA-SMUGGLING IN RUSSIA.

The history of smuggling in all countries abounds in curiosities of
which but few ever reach the eye of the public, the parties generally
preferring to keep their adventures to themselves. There often exist,
however, along frontier lines the traditions of thrilling exploits or
amusing tricks, recounted by old smugglers from the recollections
of their own youthful days or the narratives of their predecessors.
Perhaps no frontier is so rich in these tales as that between Spain
and France, where the mountainous recesses of the Pyrenees offer
secure retreats to the half-robber who drives the contraband trade, as
well as safe routes for the transportation of his merchandise. On the
line between the Russian Empire and Germany the trade is greater in
amount than elsewhere, but is devoid of the romantic features which it
possesses in other countries. There, owing to the universal corruption
of the servants of the Russian government, the smuggler and the
custom-house officer are on the best terms with each Other and often
are partners in business. We find in a late number of the _Deutsche
Reform_, a journal of Berlin, an interesting illustration of the
extent and manner in which these frauds on the Russian revenue are
carried on, and translate it for the _International_:

"The great annual tea-burning has just taken place at Suwalki:
25,000 pounds were destroyed at it. This curious proceeding is thus
explained. Of all contraband articles that on the exclusion of which
the most weight is laid, is the tea which is brought in from Prussia.
In no country is the consumption of tea so great as in Poland and
Russia. That smuggled in from Prussia, being imported from China by
ship, can be sold ten times cheaper than the so-called caravan-tea,
which is brought directly overland by Russian merchants. This overland
trade is one of the chief branches of Russian commerce, and suffers
serious injury from the introduction of the smuggled article.
Accordingly the government pays in cash, the extraordinary premium of
fifty cents per pound for all that is seized, a reward which is the
more attractive to the officers on the frontiers for the reason that
it is paid down and without any discount. Formerly the confiscated
tea was sold at public auction on the condition that the buyer should
carry it over the frontier; Russian officers were appointed to take
charge of it and deliver it in some Prussian frontier town in order
to be sure of its being carried out of the country. The consequence
was that the tea was regularly carried back again into Poland the
following night, most frequently by the Russian officers themselves.
In order to apply a radical cure to this evil, destruction by fire was
decreed as the fate of all tea that should be seized thereafter. Thus
it is that from 20,000 to 40,000 pounds are yearly destroyed in the
chief city of the province. About this the official story is, that it
is tea smuggled from Prussia, while the truth is that it is usually
nothing but brown paper or damaged tea that is consumed by the fire.
In the first place the Russian officials are too rational to burn
up good tea, when by chance a real confiscation of that article has
taken place; in such a case the gentlemen take the tea, and put upon
the burning pile an equal weight of brown paper or rags done up to
resemble genuine packages. In the second place, it is mostly damaged
or useless tea that is seized. The premium for seizures being so
high, the custom-house officers themselves cause Polish Jews to buy
up quantities of worthless stuff and bring it over the lines for the
express purpose of being seized. The time and place for smuggling it
are agreed upon. The officer lies in wait with a third person whom he
takes with him. The Jew comes with the goods, is hailed by the officer
and takes to flight. The officer pursues the fugitive, but cannot
reach him, and fires his musket after him. Hereupon the Jew drops
the package which the officer takes and carries to the office, where
he gets his reward. The witness whom he has with him--by accident of
course--testifies to the zeal of his exertions, fruitless though they
were, for the seizure of the unknown smuggler. The smuggler afterward
receives from the officer the stipulated portion of the reward. This
trick is constantly practiced along the frontier, and to meet the
demand the Prussian dealers keep stocks of good-for-nothing tea, which
they sell generally at five silver groschen (12-1/2 cents) a pound."

       *       *       *       *       *

MORE OF LEIGH HUNT.[1]

Although a large portion, perhaps more than half, of these volumes has
been given to the world in previous publications, yet the work carries
this recommendation with it, that it presents in an accessible and
consecutive form a great deal of that felicitous portrait-painting,
hit off in a few words, that pleasant anecdote, and cheerful wisdom,
which lie scattered about in books not now readily to be met with, and
which will be new and acceptable to the reading generation which has
sprung up within the last half-score years. Mr. Hunt almost disarms
criticism by the candid avowal that this performance was commenced
under circumstances which committed him to its execution, and he tells
us that it would have been abandoned at almost every step, had these
circumstances allowed. We are not sorry that circumstances did not
allow of its being abandoned, for the autobiography, altogether apart
from its stores of pleasant readable matter, is pervaded throughout by
a beautiful tone of charity and reconcilement which does honor to the
writer's heart, and proves that the discipline of life has exercised
on him its most chastening and benign influence:--

                  For he has learned
  To look on Nature, not as in the hour
  Of thoughtless youth, but hearing oftentimes
  The still, sad, music of Humanity,
  Nor harsh nor grating, though of ample power
  To chasten and subdue.

The reader will find numerous striking exemplifications of this spirit
as he goes along with our author. From the serene heights of old age,
"the gray-haired boy whose heart can never grow old," ever and anon
regrets and rebukes some egotism or assumption, or petty irritation
of bygone years, and confesses that he can now cheerfully accept
the fortunes, good and bad, which have occurred to him, "with the
disposition to believe them the best that could have happened, whether
for the correction of what was wrong in him, or the improvement of
what was right."

The concluding chapters contain a brief account of Mr. Hunt's
occupations during the last twenty-five years; his residence
successively at Highgate, Hampstead, Chelsea, and Kensington, and of
his literary labors while living at these places. Many interesting
topics are touched upon--among which we point to his remarks on the
difficulties experienced by him in meeting the literary requirements
of the day, and the peculiar demands of editors; his opinion of Mr.
Carlyle; the present condition of the stage, the absurd pretensions of
actors, and the delusions attempted respecting the "legitimate" drama;
the question of the laureateship, and his own qualifications for
holding that office; his habits of reading; and finally an avowal of
his religious opinions. We miss some account of Mr. Hazlitt. Surely
we had a better right to expect at the hands of Hunt a sketch of that
remarkable writer, than of Coleridge, of whom he saw comparatively
little. We also expected to find some allusion to the "Round Table," a
series of essays which appeared in the _Examiner_, about 1815, written
chiefly by Hazlitt, but amongst which are about a dozen by Hunt
himself, some of them perhaps the best things he has written: we need
only allude to "A Day by the Fire," a paper eminently characteristic
of the author, and we doubt not fully appreciated by those who know
his writings. Hunt regrets having re-cast the "Story of Rimini," and
tells us that a new edition of the poem is meditated, in which, while
retaining the improvement in the versification, he proposes to restore
the narrative to its first course.

We take leave of the work, with a few more characteristic passages.

       *       *       *       *       *

A GLIMPSE OF PITT AND FOX.--Some years later, I saw Mr. Pitt in a
blue coat, buckskin breeches and boots, and a round hat, with powder
and pigtail. He was thin and gaunt, with his hat off his forehead,
and his nose in the air. Much about the same time I saw his friend,
the first Lord Liverpool, a respectable looking old gentleman, in a
brown wig. Later still, I saw Mr. Fox, fat and jovial, though he was
then declining. He, who had been a "bean" in his youth, then looked
something quaker-like as to dress, with plain colored clothes, a
broad round hat, white waistcoat, and, if I am not mistaken, white
stockings. He was standing in Parliament street, just where the street
commences as you leave Whitehall; and was making two young gentlemen
laugh heartily at something which he seemed to be relating.

       *       *       *       *       *

COOKE'S EDITION OF THE BRITISH POETS.--In those times, Cooke's edition
of the British Poets came up. I had got an odd volume of Spenser; and
I fell passionately in love with Collins and Gray. How I loved those
little sixpenny numbers, containing whole poets! I doated on their
size; I doated on their type, on their ornaments, on their wrappers
containing lists of other poets, and on the engraving from Kirk. I
bought them over and over again, and used to get up select sets, which
disappeared like buttered crumpets; for I could resist neither giving
them away nor possessing them. When the master tormented me, when
I used to hate and loathe the sight of Homer, and Demosthenes, and
Cicero, I would comfort myself with thinking of the sixpence in my
pocket, with which I should go out to Paternoster Row, when school
was over, and buy another number of an English poet.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHILDREN'S BOOKS: "SANDFORD AND MERTON."--The children's books
in those days were Hogarth's pictures taken in their most literal
acceptation. Every good boy was to ride in his coach, and be a lord
mayor; and every bad boy was to be hung, or eaten by lions. The
gingerbread was gilt, and the books were gilt like the gingerbread:
a "take in" the more gross, inasmuch as nothing could be plainer
or less dazzling than the books of the same boys when they grew a
little older. There was a lingering old ballad or so in favor of the
gallanter apprentices who tore out lions' hearts and astonished gazing
sultans; and in antiquarian corners, Percy's "Reliques" were preparing
a nobler age, both in poetry and prose. But the first counteraction
came, as it ought, in the shape of a new book for children. The pool
of mercenary and time-serving ethics was first blown over by the fresh
country breeze of Mr. Day's "Sandford and Merton," a production that
I well remember, and shall ever be grateful for. It came in aid of my
mother's perplexities, between delicacy and hardihood, between courage
and conscientiousness. It assisted the cheerfulness I inherited from
my father; showed me that circumstances were not to check a healthy
gaiety, or the most masculine self-respect; and helped to supply me
with the resolution of standing by a principle, not merely as a point
of lowly or lofty sacrifice, but as a matter of common sense and duty,
and a simple coöperation with the elements natural warfare.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHRIST'S HOSPITAL.--Perhaps there is not foundation in the country
so truly English, taking that word to mean what Englishmen wish it to
mean:--something solid, unpretending, of good character, and free to
all. More boys are to be found in it, who issue from a greater variety
of ranks, than in any other school in the kingdom and as it is the
most various, so it is the largest, of all the free schools. Nobility
do not go there except as boarders. Now and then a boy of a noble
family may be met with, and he is reckoned an interloper, and against
the charter; but the sons of poor gentry and London citizens abound;
and with them, an equal share is given to the sons of tradesmen of the
very humblest description, not omitting servants. I would not take
my oath, but I have a strong recollection that in my time there were
two boys, one of whom went up into the drawing-room to his father,
the master of the house; and the other, down into the kitchen to his
father, the coachman. One thing, however, I know to be certain, and it
is the noblest of all; namely, that the boys themselves (at least it
was so in my time) had no sort of feeling of the difference of one
another's ranks out of doors. The cleverest boy was the noblest, let
his father be who he might.

       *       *       *       *       *

AN INTENSE YOUTHFUL FRIENDSHIP.--If I had reaped no other benefit
from Christ Hospital, the school would be ever dear to me from the
recollection of the friendships I formed in it, and of the first
heavenly taste it gave me of that most spiritual of the affections.
I use the word "heavenly" advisedly; and I call friendship the most
spiritual of the affections, because even one's kindred, in partaking
of our flesh and blood, become, in a manner, mixed up with our
entire being. Not that I would disparage any other form of affection,
worshiping, as I do, all forms of it, love in particular, which, in
its highest state, is friendship and something more. But if ever I
tasted a disembodied transport on earth, it was in those friendships
which I entertained at school, before I dreamt of any maturer feeling.
I shall never forget the impression it first made on me. I loved my
friend for his gentleness, his candor, his truth, his good repute,
his freedom even from my own livelier manner, his calm and reasonable
kindness. It was not any particular talent that attracted me to him
or anything striking whatsoever. I should say in one word, it was
his goodness. I doubt whether he ever had a conception of a tithe of
the regard and respect I entertained for him; and I smile to think
of the perplexity (though he never showed it) which he probably felt
sometimes at my enthusiastic expressions; for I thought him a kind of
angel. It is no exaggeration to say, that, take away the unspiritual
part of it--the genius and the knowledge--and there is no height of
conceit indulged in by the most romantic character in Shakspeare,
which surpassed what I felt toward the merits I ascribed to him, and
the delight which I took in his society. With the other boys I played
antics, and rioted in fantastic jests; but in his society, or whenever
I thought of him, I fell into a kind of Sabbath state of bliss; and I
am sure I could have died for him.

       *       *       *       *       *

ANECDOTE OF MATHEWS.--One morning, after stopping all night at this
pleasant house, I was getting up to breakfast, when I heard the noise
of a little boy having his face washed. Our host was a merry bachelor,
and to the rosiness of a priest might, for aught I knew, have added
the paternity; but I had never heard of it, and still less expected
to find a child in his house. More obvious and obstreperous proofs,
however, of the existence of a boy with a dirty face, could not have
been met with. You heard the child crying and objecting; then the
woman remonstrating; then the cries of the child snubbed and swallowed
up in the hard towel; and at intervals out came his voice bubbling
and deploring, and was again swallowed up. At breakfast, the child
being pitied, I ventured to speak about it, and was laughing and
sympathizing in perfect good faith, when Mathews came in, and I found
that the little urchin was he.

       *       *       *       *       *

SHELLEY'S GENEROSITY.--As an instance of Shelley's extraordinary
generosity, a friend of his, a man of letters, enjoyed from him
at that period a pension of a hundred a year, though he had but
a thousand of his own; and he continued to enjoy it till fortune
rendered it superfluous. But the princeliness of his disposition
was seen most in his behavior to another friend, the writer of this
memoir, who is proud to relate that, with money raised with an
effort, Shelley once made him a present of fourteen hundred pounds,
to extricate him from debt. I was not extricated, for I had not yet
learned to be careful; but the shame of not being so, after such
generosity, and the pain which my friend afterward underwent when
I was in trouble and he was helpless, were the first causes of my
thinking of money matters to any purpose. His last sixpence was ever
at my service, had I chosen to share it. In a poetical epistle
written some years after, and published in the volume of "Posthumous
Poems," Shelley, in alluding to his friend's circumstances, which
for the second time were then straitened, only made an affectionate
lamentation that he himself was poor; never once hinting that he had
himself drained his purse for his friend.

       *       *       *       *       *

MRS. JORDAN.--Mrs. Jordan was inimitable in exemplifying the
consequences of too much restraint in ill-educated country girls, in
romps, in hoydens, and in wards on whom the mercenary have designs.
She wore a bib and tucker, and pinafore, with a bouncing propriety,
fit to make the boldest spectator alarmed at the idea of bringing
such a household responsibility on his shoulders. To see her when
thus attired, shed blubbering tears for some disappointment, and eat
all the while a great thick slice of bread and butter, weeping, and
moaning, and munching, and eyeing at very bite the part she meant
to bite next, was a lesson against will and appetite worth a hundred
sermons, and no one could produce such an impression in favor of
amiableness as she did, when she acted in gentle, generous, and
confiding character. The way in which she would take a friend by
the cheek and kiss her, or make up a quarrel with a lover, or coax a
guardian into good humor, or sing (without accompaniment) the song
of, "Since then I'm doom'd," or "In the dead of the night," trusting,
as she had a right to do, and as the house wished her to do, to the
sole effect of her sweet, mellow, and loving voice--the reader will
pardon me, but tears of pleasure and regret come into my eyes at
the recollection, as if she personified whatsoever was happy at that
period of life, and which has gone like herself. The very sound of the
familiar word 'bud' from her lips (the abbreviation of husband,) as
she packed it closer, as it were, in the utterance, and pouted it up
with fondness in the man's face, taking him at the same time by the
chin, was a whole concentrated world of the power of loving.

       *       *       *       *       *

RESIDENCE AT CHELSEA.--REMOTENESS IN NEARNESS.--From the noise and
dust of the New Road, my family removed to a corner in Chelsea where
the air of the neighboring river was so refreshing, and the quiet of
the "no-thoroughfare" so full of repose, that, although our fortunes
were at their worst, and my health almost of a piece with them, I
felt for some weeks as if I could sit still for ever, embalmed in
the silence. I got to like the very cries in the street for making
me the more aware of it for the contrast. I fancied they were unlike
the cries in other quarters of the suburbs, and that they retained
something of the old quaintness and melodiousness which procured them
the reputation of having been composed by Purcell and others. Nor
is this unlikely, when it is considered how fond those masters were
of sporting with their art, and setting the most trivial words to
music in their glees and catches. The primitive cries of cowslips,
primroses, and hot cross buns, seemed never to have quitted this
sequestered region. They were like daisies in a bit of surviving
field. There was an old seller of fish in particular, whose cry of
"Shrimps as large as prawns," was such a regular, long-drawn, and
truly pleasing melody, that in spite of his hoarse, and I am afraid,
drunken voice, I used to wish for it of an evening, and hail it
when it came. It lasted for some years, then faded, and went out;
I suppose, with the poor old weather-beaten fellow's existence.
This sense of quiet and repose may have been increased by an early
association of Chelsea with something out of the pale; nay, remote.
It may seem strange to hear a man who has crossed the Alps talk of
one suburb as being remote from another. But the sense of distance is
not in space only; it is in difference and discontinuance. A little
back-room in a street in London is further removed from the noise,
than a front room in a country town. In childhood, the farthest local
point which I reached anywhere, provided it was quiet, always seemed
to me a sort of end of the world; and I remembered particularly
feeling this, the only time when I had previously visited Chelsea,
which was at that period of life.... I know not whether the corner I
speak of remains as quiet as it was. I am afraid not; for steamboats
have carried vicissitude into Chelsea, and Belgravia threatens it with
her mighty advent. But to complete my sense of repose and distance,
the house was of that old-fashioned sort which I have always loved
best, familiar to the eyes of my parents, and associated with
childhood. It had seats in the windows, a small third room on the
first floor, of which I made a _sanctum_, into which no perturbation
was to enter, except to calm itself with religious and cheerful
thoughts (a room thus appropriated in a house appears to me an
excellent thing;) and there were a few lime-trees in front, which in
their due season diffused a fragrance.

[Footnote 1: The Autobiography of Leigh Hunt. Two volumes. Harper &
Brothers. 1850.]

       *       *       *       *       *

LAMARTINE'S NEW ROMANCE.

The great poet of affairs, philosophy, and sentiment, before leaving
the scenes of his triumphs and misfortunes for his present visit
to the East, confided to the proprietors of _Le Constitutionel_
a new chapter of his romanticized memoirs to be published in the
_feuilleton_ of that journal, under the name of "Genevieve." This
work, which promises to surpass in attractive interest anything
Lamartine has given to the public in many years, will be translated as
rapidly as the advanced sheets of it are received here, by Mr. Fayette
Robinson, whose thorough apprehension and enjoyment of the nicest
delicacies of the French language, and free and manly style of
English, qualify him to do the fullest justice to such an author
and subject. His version of "Genevieve" will be issued, upon its
completion, by the publishers of _The International_. We give a
specimen of its quality in the following characteristic description,
of Marseilles, premising that the work is dedicated to "Mlle.
Reine-Garde, seamstress, and formerly a servant, at Aix, in Provence."

"Before I commence with the history of Genevieve, this series of
stories and dialogues used by country people, it is necessary to
define the spirit which animated their composition and to tell why
they were written. I must also tell why I dedicate this first story to
Mlle. Reine-Garde, seamstress and servant at Aix in Provence. This is
the reason.

"I had passed a portion of the summer of 1846 at that Smyrna of
France, called Marseilles, that city, the commercial activity of which
has become the chief _ladder_ of national enterprise, and the general
rendezvous, of those steam caravans of the West, our railroads; a city
the Attic taste of which justifies it in assuming to itself all the
intellectual cultivation, like the Asiatic Smyrna, inherent in the
memory of great poets. I lived outside of the city, the heat of which
was too great for an invalid, in one of those villas formerly called
_bastides_, so contrived as to enable the occupants during the
calmness of a summer evening--and no people in the world love nature
so well--to watch the white sails and look on the motion of the
southern breeze. Never did any other people imbibe more of the spirit
of poetry than does that of Marseilles. So much does climate do for
it.

"The garden of the little villa in which I dwelt opened by a gateway
to the sandy shore of the sea. Between it and the water was a long
avenue of plane trees, behind the mountain of Notre Dame de la Garde,
and almost touching the little lily-bordered stream which surrounded
the beautiful park and villa of the Borelli. We heard at our windows
every motion of the sea as it tossed on its couch and pillow of sand,
and when the garden gate was opened, the sea foam reached almost
the wall of the house, and seemed to withdraw so gradually as if to
deceive and laugh at any hand which would seek to bedew itself with
its moisture. I thus passed hour after hour seated on a huge stone
beneath a fig-tree, looking on that mingling of light and motion which
we call _the Sea_. From time to time the sail of a fisherman's boat,
or the smoke which hung like drapery above the pipe of a steamer,
rose above the chord of the arc which formed the gulf, and afforded a
relief to the monotony of the horizon.

"On working days, this vista was almost a desert, but when Sunday
came, it was made lively by groups of sailors, rich and _idle_
citizens, and whole families of mercantile men who came to bathe or
rest themselves, there enjoying the luxury both of the shade and
of the sea. The mingled murmur of the voices both of men, women and
children, enchanted with sunlight and with repose, united with the
babbling of the waves which seemed to fall on the shore light and
elastic as sheets of steel. Many boats either by sails or oars, were
wafted around the extremity of Cape Notre-Dame de la Garde, with its
heavy grove of shadowy pines; as they crossed the gulf, they touched
the very margin of the water, to be able to reach the opposite bank.
Even the palpitations of the sail were audible, the cadence of
the oars, conversation, song, the laughter of the merry flower and
orange-girls of Marseilles, those true daughters of the gulf, so
passionately fond of the wave, and devoted to the luxury of wild
sports with their native element were heard.

"With the exception of the patriarchal family of the Rostand, that
great house of ship-owners, which linked Smyrna, Athens, Syria and
Egypt to France by their various enterprises, and to whom I had been
indebted for all the pleasures of my first voyage to the East; with
the exception of M. Miege, the general agent of all our maritime
diplomacy in the Mediterranean, with the exception of Joseph Autran,
that oriental poet who refuses to quit his native region because
he prefers his natural elements to glory, I knew but few persons at
Marseilles. I wished to make no acquaintances and sought isolation
and leisure, leisure and study. I wrote the history of one revolution,
without a suspicion that the spirit of another convulsion looked over
my shoulder, hurrying me from the half finished page, to participate
not with the pen, but manually, in another of the great Dramas of
France.

"Marseilles is however hospitable as its sea, its port, and its
climate. A beautiful nature there expands the heart. Where heaven
smiles man also is tempted to be mirthful. Scarcely had I fixed myself
in the faubourg, when the men of letters, of politics,--the merchants
who had proposed great objects to themselves, and who entertained
extended views; the youth, in the ears of whom yet dwelt the echoes
of my old poems; the men who lived by the labor of their own hands,
many of whom however write, study, sing, and make verses, come to my
retreat, bringing with them, however, that delicate reserve which is
the modesty and grace of hospitality. I received pleasure without any
annoyances from this hospitality and attention. I devoted my mornings
to study, my days to solitude and to the sea, my evenings to a small
number of unknown friends, who came from the city to speak to me of
travels, literature, and commerce.

"Commerce at Marseilles is not a matter of paltry traffic, or trifling
parsimony and retrenchments of capital. Marseilles looks on all
questions of commerce as a dilation and expansion of French capital,
and of the raw material exported and imported from Europe and Asia.
Commerce at Marseilles is a lucrative diplomacy, at the same time,
both local and national. Patriotism animates its enterprises, honor
floats with its flag, and policy presides over every departure. Their
commerce is one eternal battle, waged on the ocean at their own peril
and risk, with those rivals who contend with France for Asia and
Africa, and for the purpose of extending the French name and fame over
the opposite continents which touch on the Mediterranean.

"One Sunday, after a long excursion on the sea with Madame Lamartine,
we were told that a woman, modest and timid in her deportment, had
come in the diligence from Aix to Marseilles, and for four or five
hours had been waiting for us in a little orange grove next between
the villa and the garden. I suffered my wife to go into the house, and
passed myself into the orange grove to receive the stranger. I had
no acquaintance with any one at Aix, and was utterly ignorant of the
motive which could have induced my visitor to wait so long and so
patiently for me.

"When I went into the orange grove, I saw a woman still youthful, of
about thirty-six or forty years of age. She wore a working-dress which
betokened little ease and less luxury, a robe of striped _Indienne_,
discolored and faded; a cotton handkerchief on her neck, her black
hair neatly braided, but like her shoes, somewhat soiled by the dust
of the road. Her features were fine and graceful, with that mild
and docile Asiatic expression, which renders any muscular tension
impossible, and gives utterance only to inspiring and attractive
candor. Her mouth was possibly a line too large, and her brow was
unwrinkled as that of a child. The lower part of her face was very
full, and was joined by full undulations, altogether feminine however
in their character, to a throat which was large and somewhat distended
at the middle, like that of the old Greek statues. Her glance had the
expression of the moonlight of her country rather than of its sun.
It was the expression of timidity mingled with confidence in the
indulgence of another, emanating from a forgetfulness of her own
nature. In fine, it was the image of good-feeling, impressed as well
on her air as on her heart, and which seem confident that others are
like her. It was evident that this woman, who was yet so agreeable,
must in her youth have been most attractive. She yet had what the
people (the language of which is so expressive) call the _seed of
beauty_, that _prestige_, that ray, that star, that essence, that
indescribable something, which attracts, charms, and enslaves us. When
she saw me, her embarrassment and blushes enabled me to contemplate
her calmly and to feel myself at once at ease with her. I begged her
to sit down at once on an orange-box over which was thrown a Syrian
mat, and to encourage her sat down in front of her. Her blushes
continued to increase, and she passed her dimpled but rather large
hand more than once over her eyes. She did not know how to begin
nor what to say. I sought to give her confidence, and by one or two
questions assisted her in opening the conversation she seemed both to
wish for and to fear."

[This girl is Reine-Garde, a peasant woman, attracted by a passionate
love of his poetry to visit Lamartine. She unfolds to him much that is
exquisitely reproduced in Genevieve. The romance bids fair to be one
of the most interesting this author has yet produced.]

"Madame ----," said I to her. She blushed yet more.

"I have no husband, Monsieur. I am an unmarried woman."

"Ah! Mlle, will you be pleased to tell me why you have come so far,
and why you waited so long to speak with me? Can I be useful to you
in any manner? Have you any letter to give me from any one in your
neighborhood?"

"Ah, Monsieur, I have no letter, I have nothing to ask of you, and the
last thing in the world that I should have done, would have been to
get a letter from any of the gentlemen in my neighborhood to you. I
would not even have suffered them to know that I came to Marseilles
to see you. They would have thought me a vain creature, who sought to
magnify her importance by visiting people who are so famous. Ah, that
would never do!"

"What then do you wish to say?"

"Nothing, _Monsieur_."

"How can that be? You should not _for nothing_ have wasted two days in
coming from Aix to Marseilles, and should not have waited for me here
until sunset, when to-morrow you must return home."

"It is, however, true, Monsieur. I know you will think me very
foolish, but ... I have nothing to tell you, and not for a fortune
would I consent that people at Aix should know whither I am gone."

"Something however induced you to come--you are not one of those
triflers who go hither and thither without a motive. I think you are
intellectual and intelligent. Reflect. What induced you to take a
place in the diligence and come to see me? Eh!"

"Well, sir," said she, passing her hands over her cheeks as if to wipe
away all blushes and embarrassment, and at the same time pushing her
long black curls, moist as they were with perspiration, beyond her
ears, "I had an idea which permitted me neither to sleep by day nor
night; I said to myself, Reine, you must be satisfied. You must say
nothing to any one. You must shut up your shop on Saturday night as
you are in the habit of doing. You must take a place in the night
diligence and go on Sunday to Marseilles. You will go to see that
gentleman, and on Monday morning you can again be at work. All will
then be over and for once in your life you will have been satisfied
without your neighbors having once fancied for a moment that you have
passed the limits of the street in which you live."

"Why, however, did you wish so much to see me? How did you even know
that I was here?"

"Thus, Monsieur: a person came to Aix who was very kind to me, for I
am the dressmaker of his daughters, having previously been a servant
in his mother's country-house. The family has always been kind
and attentive, because in Provence, the nobles do not despise the
peasants. Ah! it is far otherwise--some are lofty and others humble,
but their hearts are all alike. _Monsieur_ and the young ladies knew
how I loved to read, and that I am unable to buy books and newspapers.
They sometimes lent books to me, when they saw anything which they
fancied would interest me, such as fashion plates, engravings of
ladies' bonnets, interesting stories, like that of Reboul, the baker
of Nimes, Jasmin, the hairdresser of Agen, or _Monsieur_, the history
of your own life. They know, Monsieur, that above all things I love
poetry, especially that which brings tears into the eyes."

"Ah, I know," said I with a smile, "you are poetical as the winds
which sigh amid your olive-groves, or the dews which drip from your
fig trees."

"No, Monsieur, I am only a mantua-maker--a poor seamstress in ...
street, in Aix, the name of which I am almost ashamed to tell you. I
am no finer lady than was my mother. Once I was servant and nurse in
the house of M.... Ah! they were good people and treated me always as
if I belonged to the family. I too thought I did. My health however,
obliged me to leave them and establish myself as a mantua-maker, in
one room, with no companion but a goldfinch. That, however, is not the
question you asked me,--why I have come hither? I will tell you."

       *       *       *       *       *

Truth is altogether ineffably, holily beautiful. Beauty has always
truth in it, but seldom unadulterated.

       *       *       *       *       *

The poet's soul should be like the ocean, able to carry navies, yet
yielding to the touch of a finger.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGINAL POETRY

AZELA.

BY MISS ALICE CAREY.

  From the pale, broken ruins of the heart,
  The soul's bright wing, uplifted silently,
  Sweeps thro' the steadfast depths of the mind's heaven,
  Like the fixed splendor of the morning star--
  Nearer and nearer to the wasteless flame
  That in the centres of the universe
  Burns through the o'erlapping centuries of time.
  And shall it stagger midway on its path,
  And sink its radiance low as the dull dust,
  For the death-flutter of a fledgling hope?
  Or, with the headlong phrensy of a fiend,
  Front the keen arrows of Love's sunken sun,
  For that, with nearer vision it discerns
  What in the distance like ripe roses seemed
  Crimsoning with odorous beauty the gray rocks
  Are the red lights of wreckers!
                                Just as well
  The obstinate traveler might in pride oppose
  His puny shoulder to the icy slip
  Of the blind avalanche, and hope for life;
  Or Beauty press her forehead in the grave,
  And think to rise as from the bridal bed.
  But let the soul resolve its course shall be
  Onward and upward, and the walls of pain
  May build themselves about it as they will,
  Yet leave it all-sufficient to itself.
    How like the very truth a lie may seem!--
  Led by that bright curse, Genius, some have gone
  On the broad wake of visions wonderful
  And seemed, to the dull mortals far below,
  Unraveling the web of fate, at will.
  And leaning on their own creative power,
  As on the confident arm of buoyant Love.
  But from the climbing of their wildering way
  Many have faltered, fallen,--some have died,
  Still wooing from across the lapse of years
  The faded splendour of a morning dream,
  And feeding sorrow with remembered smiles.
  Love, that pale passion-flower of the heart,
  Nursed into bloom and beauty by a breath,
  With the resplendence of its broken light,
  Even on the outposts of mortality,
  Dims the still watchfires of the waiting soul.
    O, tender-visaged Pity, stoop from heaven,
  And from the much-loved bosom of the past
  Draw back the nestling hand of Memory,
  Though it be quivering and pale with pain;
  And with the dead dust of departed Hope
  Choke up and wither into barrenness
  The sweetest fountain of the human heart,
  And stay its channels everlastingly
  From the endeavor of the loftier soul.
  Nay, 'twere a task outbalancing thy power,
  Nor can the almost-omnipotence of mind
  Away from aching bind the bleeding heart,
  Or keep at will its mighty sorrow down.
  And, were the white flames of the world below
  Binding my forehead with undying pain,
  The lily crowns of heaven I would put back,
  If thou wert there, lost light of my young dream!--
  Hope, opening with the faint flowers of the wood,
  Bloomed crimson with the summer's heavy kiss,
  But autumn's dim feet left it in the dust,
  And like tired reapers my lorn thoughts went down
  To the gloom-harvest of a hopeless love,
  For past all thought I loved thee: Listening close
  From the soft hour when twilight's rosy hedge
  Sprang from the fires of sunset, till deep night
  Swept with her cloud of stars the face of heaven,
  For the quick music, from the pavement rung
  Where beat the impatient hoof-strokes of the steed,
  Whose mane of silver, like a wave of light,
  Bathed the caressing hand I pined to clasp!
  It is as if a song-lark, towering high
  In pride of place, should stoop her sun-bathed wing,
  Low as the poor hum of the grasshopper.
    I scorn thee not, old man; no haunting ghost
  Born of the darkness of thy perjury
  Crosses the white tent of my dreaming now
  But for myself, that I should so have loved!--
  The sweet folds of that blessed charity,
  Pure as the cold veins of Pentelicus,
  Were all too narrow now to hide away
  One burning spot of shame--the wretched price
  Of proving traitor to the wondrous star
  That with a cloud of splendor wraps my way.
  And yet, from the bright wine-cup of my life,
  The rosy vintage, bubbling to the brim,
  Thou With a passionate lip didst drain away
  And to God's sweet gift--human sympathy--
  Making my bosom dumb as the dark grave,
  Didst leave me drifting on the waste of life,
  A fruitless pillar of the desert dust;
  For, from the ashes of a ruined hope
  There springs no life but an unwearied woe
  That feeding upon sunken lip and cheek
  Pushes its victims from mortality.
  Vainly the light rain of the summer time
  Waters the dead limbs of the blasted oak.
    Love is the worker of all miracles;
  And if within some cold and sunless cave
  Thou hadst lain lost and dying, prompted not
  My feet had struck that pathway, and I could,
  With the neglected sunshine of my hair,
  Have clasped thee from the hungry jaws of Death,
  And on my heart, as on a wave of light
  Have lulled thee to the beauty of soft dreams.
    Weak, weak imagination! be dissolved
  Like a chance snowflake in a sea of fire.
  Let the poor-spirited children of Despair
  Hang on the sepulchre of buried Hope
  The fadeless garlands of undying song.
  Though such gift turned on its pearly hinge
  Sweet Mercy's gate, I would not so debase me.
  Shut out from heaven, I, by the arch-fiend's wing,
  As by a star, would move, and radiantly
  Go down to sleep in Fame's bright arms the while
  Hard by, her handmaids, the still centuries
  Lilies and sunshine braided for my brow.
    Angel of Darkness, give, O give me hate
  For the blind weakness of my passionate love!
  And if thou knowest sweet pity, stretch thy wing,
  Spotted with sin and seamed with veins of fire,
  Between the gate of heaven and my life's prayer.
  For loving, thou didst leave me; and, for that
  The lowly straw-roof of a peasant's shed
  Sheltered my cradle slumbers, and that Morn,
  Clasping about my neck her dewy arms,
  Drew to the mountains my unfashioned youth,
  Where sunbeams built bright arches, and the wind
  Winnowed the roses down about my feet
  And as their drift of leaves my bosom was,
  Till the cursed hour, when pride was pillowed there,
  Crimsoned its beauty with the fires of hell.
  God hide from me the time when first I knew
  Thy shame to call a low-born maiden, Bride!
  Methinks I could have lifted my pale hands
  Though bandaged back with grave-clothes, in that hour
  To cover my hot forehead from thy kiss.
  For the heart strengthens when its food is truth,
  And o'er the passion-shaken bosom, trail
  And burn the lightnings of its love-lit fires
  Like a bright banner streaming on the storm.
    The day was almost over; on the hills
  The parting light was flitting like a ghost,
  And like a trembling lover eve's sweet star,
  In the dim leafy reach of the thick woods,
  Stood gazing in the blue eyes of the night.
  But not the beauty of the place nor hour
  Moved my wild heart with tempests of such bliss
  As shake the bosom of a god, new-winged,
  When first in his blue pathway up the skies
  He feels the embrace of immortality.
    A little moment, and the world was changed--
  Truth, like a planet striking through the dark,
  Shone cold and clear, and I was what I am,
  Listening along the wilderness of life
  For faint echoes of lost melody.
  The moonlight gather'd itself back from me
  And slanted its pale pinions to the dust.
  The drowsy gust, bedded in luscious blooms,
  Startled, as 'twere at the death-throes of peace,
  Down through the darkness moaningly fled off.
    O mournful Past! how thou dost cling and cling--
  Like a forsaken maiden to false hope--
  To the tired bosom of the living hour,
  Which, from thy weak embrace, the future time
  Jocundly beckons with a roseate hand.
  And, round about me honeyed memories drift
  From the fair eminences of young hope,
  Like flowers blown down the hills of Paradise,
  By some soft wave of golden harmony,
  Until the glorious smile of summers gone
  Lights the dull offing of the sea of Death.
  And though no friend nor brother ever made
  My soul the burden of one prayer to Heaven,
  I dread to go alone into the grave,
  And fold my cold arms emptily away
  From the bright shadow of such loveliness.
    Can the dull mist where swart October hides
  His wrinkled front and tawny cheek, wind-shorn,
  Be sprinkled with the orange fire that binds
  Away from her soft lap o'erbrimmed with flowers,
  The dew-wet tresses of the virgin May?
  Or can the heart just sunken from the day
  Feed on the beauty of the noontide smile?--
  O it is well life's fair things fade so soon,
  Else we could never take our clinging hands
  From Beauty's nestling bosom--never put
  The red wine of love's kisses sternly back,
  And feel the dull dust sitting on our lips
  Until the very grass grew over us.
  O it is well! else for this beautiful life
  Our overtempted hearts would sell away
  The shining coronals of Paradise.

  In the gray branches of the oaks, starlit,
  I hear the heavy murmurs of the winds,
  Like the low plains of evil witches, held
  By drear enchantments from their demon loves.
  Another night-time, and I shall have found
  A refuge from their mournful prophecies.

  Come, dear one, from my forehead smooth away
  Those long and heavy tresses, still as bright
  As when they lay 'neath the caressing hand
  That unto death betrayed me. Nay, 'tis well!
  I pray you do not weep; or soon or late,
  Were this sad doom unsaid, their light had filled
  The empty bosom of the waiting grave.
  There, now I think I have no further need--
  For unto all at last there comes a time
  When no sweet care can do us any good!
  Not in my life that I remember of,
  Could my neglect have injured any one,
  And if I have by my officious love,
  Thrown harmful shadows in the way of some,
  Be piteous to my natural weakness, friends:
  I never shall offend you any more!

  And now, most melancholy messenger,
  Touch my eyes gently with Sleep's heavy dew.
  I have no wish to struggle from thy arms,
  Nor is there any hand would hold me back.
  To die, is but the common heritage;
  But to unloose the clasp that to the heart
  Folds the dear dream of love, is terrible--
  To see the wildering visions fade away,
  As the bright petals of the young June rose
  Shook by some sudden tempest. On the grave
  Light from the open sepulchre is laid,
  And Faith leans yearningly away to heaven,
  But life hath glooms wherein no light may come!

  The night methinks is dismal, yet I see
  Over yon hill one bright and steady star
  Divide the darkness with its fiery wedge,
  And sprinkle glory on the lap of earth.
  Even so, above the still homes of the dead
  The benedictions of the living lie.
  Gatherers of waifs of beauty are we here,
  Building up homes of love for alien hearts
  That hate us for our trouble. When we see
  The tempest hiding from us the sun's face,
  About our naked souls we build a wall
  Of unsubstantial shadows, and sit down
  Hugging false peace upon the edge of doom.
  From the voluptuous lap of time that is,
  Like a sick child from a kind nurse's arms,
  We lean away, and long for the far off.
  And when our feet through weariness and toll
  Have gained the heights that showed so brightly well,
  Our blind and dizzied vision sees too late
  The cool broad shadows trailing at the base.
  And then our wasted arms let slip the flowers,
  And our pained bosoms wrinkle from the fair
  And smooth proportions of our primal years,
  And so our sun goes down, and wistful death
  Withdraws love's last delusion from our hearts,
  And mates us with the darkness. Well, 'tis well!

       *       *       *       *       *

TWO COUNTRY SONNETS.

I.--THE CONTRAST

  But yester e'en the city's streets I trod
    And breathed laboriously the fervid air;
    Panting and weary both with toil and care,
  I sighed for cooling breeze and verdant sod.
  This morn I rose from slumbers calm and deep,
    And through the casement of a rural inn,
    I saw the river with its margins green,
  All placid and delicious as my sleep.
  Like pencilled lines upon a tinted sheet
    The city's spires rose distant on the sky;
  Nor sound familiar to the crowded street
    Assailed my ear, nor busy scene mine eye;
  I saw the hills, the meadows and the river--
  I heard cool waters plash and green leaves quiver.

II.--PLEASURE.

  These sights and sounds refreshed me more than wine;
    My pulses bounded with a reckless play,
    My heart exalted like the rising day.
  Now--did my lips exclaim--is pleasure mine;
  A sweet delight shall fold me in its thrall;
    To day, at least, I'll feel the bliss of life;
    Like uncaged bird,--each limb with freedom rife--
  I'll sip a thousand sweets--enjoy them all!
    The will thus earnest could not be denied;
    I beckoned Pleasure and she gladly came:
  O'er hill and vale I roamed at her dear side--
    And made the sweet air vocal with her name:
  She all the way of weariness beguiled,
  And I was happy as a very child!

July, 1850.

T. ADDISON RICHARDS

       *       *       *       *       *

ORIGINAL CORRESPONDENCE.

RAMBLES IN THE PENINSULA.

NO III.

BARCELONA, MAY 27, 1850.

My dear friend--I have been exceedingly pleased with what I have seen
and experienced during the time I have already spent in this handsome
and agreeable city. At present I have no traveling companion, and have
moreover only encountered one of my countrymen (with the exception of
the consuls) since my departure from Madrid, in January last. Besides,
I seldom hear the United States mentioned, never see any papers,
associate almost altogether with Spaniards, and converse chiefly in
their language.

The American Consul here (who is by the way a Spaniard) has been very
attentive and kind to me. We have taken several walks together, in
which he has pointed out to me the most notable edifices of Barcelona.
Among these is the magnificent theater called El Siceo, which is one
of the grandest in the world. It is certainly the most splendid of the
kind I have ever seen. It was built by subscription, at an expense of
about half a million of dollars, and is capable of containing nearly
six thousand persons. To my regret it is now closed. There is another
very fine theater here called El Principal, which is open every
evening. Last night I went to see the amusing opera of Don Pasquale,
by Donizetti, which was quite laudably performed. In fact I go most
every night, as I have nothing else to do, and have an excellent seat
at my disposal, with which the consul has been so kind as to favor
me. The appearance and manners of the audience are more interesting
to me than those of the stage-actors. Besides, I like to accustom my
ear to the Spanish, which I now speak with considerable fluency and
correctness. I have devoted much study to this and the French language
since I have been in Spain, and am now making some progress in the
Italian, through the Spanish. I am convinced that no man can properly
understand a people without knowing something of their language, which
is in a great degree the index of their character. Moreover it is an
indispensable condition to comfortable travel.

Among the distinguished characters in town is the famous Governor
Tacon, who so admirably conducted the affairs of state in the island
of Cuba some years since. He is staying with a particular friend of
the consul, who is an immensely wealthy man and lives in the most
princely style. I visited the house a few days since, before the
arrival of the governor, and was delighted with the splendid taste
displayed in the fresco of the ceiling, the stucco of the walls,
and indeed with every article of furniture with which the rooms
were supplied. On the parterre, or lower roof, was a little gem of a
garden, with raised beds, blooming with beautiful plants and flowers,
while in the middle was a fountain and on each side a miniature arbor
of grapes. Really, nothing could be more charming and luxurious. It
was like peeping into the bygone days of fairydom.

Barcelona is one of the best places in Spain for one to be during
the observance of remarkable festivals. The celebration of Corpus
Christi, which commences on the 30th, is said to be conducted here on
a most magnificent scale. Of this I can form some conception from the
brilliant procession which I witnessed yesterday afternoon, it being
Trinity Sunday. The procession was preceded by two men on mules, over
whose necks were strung a pair of tambours, (a kind of drum,) upon
which the men were vigorously beating. Then came a priest, bearing
a large and elaborately worked cross; after him came the body of the
procession in regular order, consisting of young priests in white
gowns, chanting as they marched; citizens in black, with white
waistcoats and without hats; little girls representing the angels, in
snowy gauze dresses with flowers, garlands, and a light azure scarf
flowing from their heads; numerous bands of music, some of them
playing solemn airs, others quick-steps and polkas; a fine display of
infantry, and after all a noble body of cavalry, on fine horses, in
striking uniform, each of them carrying a spear-topped banner in their
hands. The general appearance of this procession, (each member of
which, with the exception of the soldiers, carried a lighted candle
or torch in his hand,) marching through one of the superb but narrow
streets, while from almost every balcony was suspended a gay "trede,"
(a scarf-like awning,) either of blue, or crimson, or yellow, the
balconies themselves being crowded with clusters of bright-eyed
girls,--constituted one of the most brilliant and attractive
spectacles that I ever witnessed. Yet they tell me that the procession
of Corpus Christi will be infinitely more splendid and elaborate.

I am living here very comfortably. My rooms are pleasant and overlook
the charming Rambla. My mornings are generally spent in reading and
studying Spanish. At four o'clock my Irish friend and myself proceed
to the fine restaurant where we are accustomed to dine: here we meet
an intelligent Spanish gentleman, who completes our party, and as he
does not speak English, all conversation is conducted at the table
in the Spanish language. Dinner being over, we next visit a palverine
cafe, where we meet a number of Spanish acquaintances, with whom we
take coffee and a cigar. We all sally out together, and walk for an
hour or two, either in the environs of the city, or along their mural
terrace, overlooking the blue waters of the Mediterranean, closing our
promenade at length upon the crowded and animated Rambla. After the
theater, a stroll in the moonlight upon this magnificent promenade,
and as the clock strikes the hour of midnight we retire, and bathe in
the waters of oblivion till morn. My days in Spain are drawing near
their end. I am ready to leave, though I shall cast many a lingering
thought, many a fond recollection behind; and in future years, I shall
sadly recall these hours, which, I fear, can never be recalled. But
away with the enervating reflections of grief! Read nothing in the
past but lessons for the future. When you think of its pleasures,
think also of the cares they produced and the anxieties they cost
you. Behold, they are ended, and forever. Have you reaped from them
a moral, or have you been poisoned with their sting? Have you not
discovered that pleasure is a phantom, which vanishes in proportion
to the eagerness with which it is pursued? that by itself it fatigues
without satisfying--that it knows no limits or bounds to gratify
the restless and unfettered soul--that it is a _feeble soil_, which,
without the sweat of labor and the tears of sorrow, produces nothing
but the weeds of sin and the thorny briars of remorse? Have you
learned all this, and are you not a wiser and a better man? Let all
who have traveled for pleasure answer the question to themselves.

Truly your friend,

JOHN E. WARREN.

       *       *       *       *       *

The Rev Henry Giles, in a lecture on "Manliness," thus designates
the four great characteristics which have distinguished mankind. "The
Hebrew was mighty by the power of Faith--the Greek by Knowledge and
Art--the Roman by Arms--but the might of the Modern Man is placed in
Work. This is shown by the peculiar pride of each. The pride of the
Hebrew was in Religion--the pride of the Greek was in Wisdom--the
pride of the Roman was in Power--the pride of the Modern Man is placed
in Wealth."

       *       *       *       *       *

Carlyle and Emerson.--They are not finished writers, but great
quarries of thought and imagery. Of the two, Emerson is much the finer
spirit. He has not the radiant range of imagination or any of the
rough power of Carlyle, but his placid, piercing insight irradiates
the depth of truth further and clearer than do the strained glances of
the latter. A higher mental altitude than Carlyle has mounted, by most
strenuous effort, Emerson has serenely assumed.

       *       *       *       *       *

AUTHORS AND BOOKS.

The Literature of Supernaturalism was never more in request than since
the Seeresses of Rochester commenced their levees at Barnum's Hotel.
The journals have been filled with jesting and speculation upon the
subject,--mountebank tricksters and shrewd professors have plied their
keenest wits to discover the processes of the rappings--and Mrs. Fish
and the Foxes in spite of them all preserve their secret, or at least
are as successful as ever in persuading themselves and others that
they are admitted to communications with the spiritual world. For
ourselves, while we can suggest no explanation of these phenomena,
and while in every attempted explanation of them which we have seen,
we detect some such difficulty or absurdity as makes necessary its
rejection, we certainly could never for a moment be tempted to a
suspicion that there is anything supernatural in the matter. Such
an idea is simply ridiculous, and will be tolerated only by the
ignorant, the feeble-minded, or the insane. Still, the "knockings"
are sufficiently mysterious, and if unexposed, sufficiently fruitful
of evil, to be legitimate subjects of investigation, and he who under
such circumstances is so careful of his dignity as to disregard the
subject altogether, is as much mistaken as the gravest buffoon of
the circus. We reviewed a week or two ago "The Phantom World," just
republished by Mr. Hart; the Appletons have recently printed an
original work which we believe has considerable merit, entitled
"Credulity and Superstition;" and Mr. Redfield has in press and nearly
ready, an edition of "The Night Side of Nature," by Miss Crowe, author
of "Susan Hopley." This we believe is the cleverest performance upon
ghosts and ghost-seers that has appeared in English since the days
of Richard Glanvill; and with the others, it will be of service in
checking the progress of the pitiable superstition which has been
readily accepted by a large class of people, so peculiarly constituted
that they could not help rejecting the Christian religion for its
"unreasonableness and incredibility!"

       *       *       *       *       *

"Some Honest Opinions upon Authors, Books, and other subjects," is
the title of a new volume by the late Edgar A. Poe, which Mr. Redfield
will publish during the Fall. It will embrace besides several of the
author's most elaborate æsthetical essays, those caustic personalities
and criticisms from his pen which, during several years, attracted so
much attention in our literary world. Among his subjects are Bryant,
Cooper, Pauldings, Hawthorne, Willis, Longfellow, Verplanck, Bush,
Anthon, Hoffman, Cornelius Mathews, Henry B. Hirst, Mrs. Oakes Smith,
Mrs. Hewitt, Mrs. Lewis, Margaret Fuller, Miss Sedgwick, and many
more of this country, beside Macaulay, Bulwer, Dickens, Horne, Miss
Barrett, and some dozen others of England.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. Dudley Bean occupies the first two sheets of the last
_Knickerbocker_ with a very erudite and picturesque description of
the attack upon Ticonderoga by the grand army under Lords Amherst and
Howe, in "the old French War." Mr. Bean is an accomplished merchant,
of literary abilities and a taste for antiquarian research, and he is
probably better informed than any other person living upon the history
and topography of all the country for many miles about Lake George,
which is the most classical region of the United States. He has
treated the chief points of this history in many interesting papers
which he has within a few years contributed to the journals, and we
have promise of a couple of octavos, embracing the whole subject, from
his pen, at an early day. We know of nothing in the literature of our
local and particular history that is more pleasing than the specimens
of his quality in this way which have fallen under our notice.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mr. William Young, the thoroughly accomplished editor of the _Albion_,
is to be our creditor in the coming autumn for two hundred songs of
Beranger, in English, with the pictorial illustrations which graced
the splendid edition of the great lyrist's works recently issued in
Paris. Mr. Young may be said to be as familiar with the niceties of
the French language as the eloquent and forcible editorials of the
_Albion_ show him to be with those of his vernacular; and he has
studied Beranger with such a genial love and diligence, that he
would probably be one of his best editors, even in Paris. In literal
truth and elaborate finish, we think his volume will show him to be
a capital, a nearly faultless, translator. But Beranger is a very
difficult author to turn into English, and we believe all who have
hitherto essayed this labor have found his spirit too evanescent for
their art. The learned and brilliant "Father Prout" has been in some
respects the most successful of them all; but his versions are not to
be compared with Mr. Young's for adherence either to the bard's own
meaning or music. In pouring out the Frenchman's champagne, the latter
somehow suffers the sparkle and bead to escape, while the former
cheats us by making his stale liquor foam with London soda. We shall
be impatient for Mr. Young's book, which will be published by Putnam,
in a style of unusual beauty.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dr. Achilli, whose history, so full of various and romantic
vicissitudes, has become familiar in consequence of his imprisonments
in the Roman Inquisition, is now in London, at the head of a
congregation of Protestant Italians. He has intimated to Dr. Baird his
intention to visit this country within a few months. He resided here
many years ago.

       *       *       *       *       *

Shirley, by the author of Jane Eyre, has been translated into French,
and is appearing as the _feuilleton_ of the _National_, newspaper. Mr.
LIVERMORE, one of our most learned bibliopoles, has a very interesting
article upon Public Libraries, in the last _North American Review_.
He notices in detail several generally inaccessible reports on the
libraries of Europe and this country; after referring to the number
and extent of libraries here and elsewhere, and showing that in this
respect we rank far below most of the countries of Europe, though
second to none in general intelligence and the means of common
education, he urges the institution of a large national library, and
sees in the foundation of the Smithsonian Institution a prospect that
the subject is likely to receive speedy and efficient attention.

       *       *       *       *       *

PROFESSOR JOHNSON, author of the well-known work on Agricultural
Chemistry, has been delivering lectures upon the results of his recent
tour in the British Provinces and the United States, in one of which
he observed, "In New Brunswick, New England, Vermont, New Hampshire,
Connecticut, and New York, the growth of wheat has almost ceased; and
it is now gradually receding farther and farther westward. Now, when
I tell you this, you will see that it will not be very long before
America is unable supply us with wheat in any large quantity. If we
could bring Indian corn into general use, we might get plenty of it;
but I do not think that the United States need be any bug bear to
you." Prof. J. was in New York last March.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHARLOTTE CUSHMAN, with Miss Hayes, the translator of George Sand's
best works, was at the last dates on a visit to the popular poetess
of the milliner and chambermaid classes, Eliza Cook, who was very ill.
Miss Cushman is really quite as good a poet as Miss Cook, though by no
means so fluent a versifier. She will return to the United States in a
few weeks to fulfill some professional engagements.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. Mr. MOUNTFORD, an English Unitarian clergyman, who recently came
to this country, and who is known in literature and religion as the
author of the two very clever works, "Martyria" and "Euthanasia," has
become minister of a congregation at Gloucester, in Massachusetts.

       *       *       *       *       *

BENJAMIN PERLEY POORE, author of "The Life and Times of Louis
Philippe," &c., invited the corps of Massachusetts Volunteers,
commanded by him in the Mexican campaign, to celebrate the anniversary
of their return, at his pleasant residence on Indian Hill Farm, in
West Newbury, last Friday.

       *       *       *       *       *

Rev. WARREN BURTON, a graceful writer and popular preacher among the
Unitarians, has resigned the pastoral office in Worcester to give his
undivided attention to the advocacy of certain theories he has formed
for the moral education of the young.

       *       *       *       *       *

RICHARD S. MCCULLOCH, Professor of Natural Philosophy at Princeton
College, and some time since melter and refiner of the United States
Mint, has addressed a letter to the Secretary of the Treasury, in
which he states that he has discovered a new, quick, and economical
method of refining argentiferous and other gold bullion, whereby the
work may be done in one-half the present time, and a large saving
effected in interest upon the amount refined.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATE SIR JOSEPH BANKS lies buried in Heston Church. There is
neither inscription, nor monument, nor memorial window to mark the
place of his sepulture; even his hatchment has been removed from its
place. Surely, as President of the Royal Society, a member of so many
foreign institutions, as well as a man who had traveled so much, he
should have been thought worthy of some slight mark of respect.

       *       *       *       *       *

ELIHU BURRITT is presented with the Prince of Wales in one of the
designs for medals to be distributed on the occasion of the great
Industrial Exhibition in London; and the Athenæum properly suggests
that such an obtrusion of the "learned Blacksmith" (who has really
scarce any learning at all) is "little better than a burlesque."

       *       *       *       *       *

HORACE MANN, President of the late National Convention of the friends
of education, had issued an address inviting all friendly to the
object, whether connected with and interested in common-schools,
academies, or colleges, to meet in convention at Philadelphia on the
fourth day of August next.

       *       *       *       *       *

LIEUT. MAURY says that the new planet, _Parthenope_, discovered by
M. Gasparis, of Naples, has been observed at Washington, by Mr. J.
Ferguson. It resembles a star of the tenth magnitude. This is the
eleventh in the family of asteroids, and the seventh within the last
five years.

       *       *       *       *       *

GEORGE WILKINS KENDALL is now in New York, having visited New
Orleans since his return from Paris. His History of the Mexican War,
illustrated by some of the cleverest artists of France, will soon be
published here and in London.

       *       *       *       *       *

Mrs. FANNY KEMBLE has left this country for England, on account of the
sudden illness of her father, Charles Kemble, of whose low state of
health we have been apprised by almost every arrival for a year.

       *       *       *       *       *

M. BALZAC's recent marriage, at his rather advanced period of life,
finds him, for the first time, an invalid, and serious fears are now
entertained for him, by friends and physicians.

       *       *       *       *       *

ORESTES A. BROWNSON has received the degree of LL.D. from the R.C.
College, Fordham.

       *       *       *       *       *

RECENT DEATHS.

       *       *       *       *       *

SARGENT S. PRENTISS, one of the most distinguished popular orators of
the age, died at Natchez, Mississippi, on the 3d inst. He was a native
of Maine, and after being admitted to the bar he emigrated to the
Southwest, where his great natural genius, with his energy and
perseverance, soon gained for him a well-deserved reputation as one
of the most successful advocates at the bar, and as one of the most
brilliant and effective speakers in all that part of the country,
where "stumping" is the almost universal practice among political
aspirants.

He was once elected to the House of Representatives from his adopted
State, and was excluded from his seat by the casting vote of James K.
Polk, at that time Speaker of the House. The facts in regard to the
affair, according to the _Tribune_, are substantially as follows:
In 1837, the President, Mr. Van Buren, called an Extra Session
of Congress to assemble in September of that year. The laws of
Mississippi required that the election for Congressmen for that State
for the twenty-fifth Congress should be held in November, and in
order that the State should be represented in the Extra Session, the
Governor ordered an election to be held in July for the choice of
two Congressmen "to fill the vacancy until superseded by the members
to be elected at the next regular election, on the first Monday, and
the day following, in November next." The election was held under
the authority of the Governor's proclamation, and the Democratic
candidates, Claiborne and Gholson, were elected by default. They took
their seats in the House, in which there was a decided Democratic
majority, and immediately applied themselves to the task of inducing
the House to declare that they had been duly elected not only for the
Extra Session, but for the full term of two fears following. Of course
they accomplished their object. The November Election arrived and the
Whigs nominated Prentiss and Word. The Democrats brought out Claiborne
and Gholson again, and the result was that the Whig candidates were
chosen by a triumphant majority. They received their certificates
of election from the proper authority and presented themselves at
the regular session of Congress in December, and found their seats
occupied by the brace of Democrats whom the people of Mississippi
had elected to stay at home, and after a most severe and memorable
contest, the new members presented themselves for admission at the bar
of the House, which decided readily that Claiborne and Gholson were
not entitled to their places, but instead of admitting Prentiss
and Word, by Mr. Polk's casting vote declared the seats vacant, and
referred the whole subject back to the people. During the discussion
of the question Mr. Prentiss made a speech which will be remembered
and admired as long as genius and true manly eloquence are
appreciated. Another election was held in the following month of
March, and Prentiss and Word were again returned, and this time
they were admitted to their seats. The remaining session of the
twenty-fifth Congress, Prentiss served with distinguished ability. We
believe this closed his career as a statesman. He recently removed
to New Orleans, where he continued the practice of the law, standing
always at the head of his profession.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE LATE HON. NATHANIEL SILSBEE, according to the Salem, Mass.
_Gazette_, of the 16th inst., began his career soon after the breaking
out of the French revolution, and the general warfare in which all
Europe became embroiled. At this favorable point of time, Mr. S.
having finished his term of service at one of our best private schools
of instruction, under the Rev. Dr. Cutler, of Hamilton, and having
abandoned the collegiate course for which he had been prepared,
and been initiated into the forms of business and knowledge of
the counting-room, he engaged in the employ of one of our most
enterprising merchants, Hasket Derby, Esq., the leader of the vanguard
of India adventures. At the age of 18, he embarked on the sea of
fortune as clerk of a merchant vessel. On his next voyage he took the
command of a vessel, and before he arrived at the age of 21, he sailed
for the East Indies in a vessel, which, at this day, would scarcely be
deemed suitable for a coasting craft, uncoppered, without the improved
nautical instruments and science which now universally prevail,
trusting only to his dead reckoning, his eyes, and his head, not
one on board having attained to the age of his majority. He served
successively as representative in our State Legislature, as member of
Congress for six years, as State Senator, over which body he presided,
and as Senator in Congress, for nine years, with honor to himself, and
satisfaction to his constituents. In all commercial questions which
presented themselves to the consideration of Congress, while a member
of both houses, no man's opinion was more sought for and more justly
respected.

       *       *       *       *       *

SEVERAL FAMOUS FRENCHMEN have left the world within a few weeks.
Quatremere de Quincy, who was in the first rank of archæology and
æsthetics, died at the age of ninety-five; Count Mollien, the famous
financier--often a minister--at eighty-seven; Baron Meneval, so long
the private, confidential, all-trusted private secretary of Napoleon,
between seventy and eighty; Count Berenger, one of the Emperor's
Councillors and Peers, conspicuous for the independence of his spirit,
as well as administrative qualifications, was four-score and upward.
The obsequies of these personages were grand ceremonials. President
Napoleon sent his carriages and orderly officers to honor the remains
of the old servants of his uncle. This class might be thought to
have found an elixir of life, in their devotion to the Emperor or
his memory. A few of them survive, like Marshal Soult, wonders of
comfortable longevity.

       *       *       *       *       *

REMARKABLE WORK BY A CHINESE.

To the man of science, the philanthropist and the Christian, it will
prove a stirring incident that a work on Geography has just been
issued by a native Chinese, embracing the history and condition of
other nations. Here is a stroke, such as has never yet been dealt
against the ignorance and prejudice which has erected such a wall of
exclusiveness around three hundred millions of people. A Lieutenant
Governor is the author, and, by a commendatory preface, it is pressed
upon the notice of his countrymen by a Governor General--both of these
men high in office in the Chinese Government.

In reference to his map of the world, the writer remarks: "We knew
in respect to a Northern frozen ocean, but in respect to a Southern
frozen ocean we had not heard. So that, when Western men produced maps
having a frozen ocean at the extreme South, we supposed that they
had made a mistake in not understanding the Chinese language, and had
placed that in the South which should have been placed only in the
North. But on inquiring of an American, one Abeel, (the Missionary,)
he said this doctrine was verily true, and should not be doubted."

It is a fact full of interest that the chronology adopted in this work
is that usually received by European writers. The more prominent facts
of sacred history subsequent to the Deluge, are either alluded to, or
stated at length, much as they occur in the Scriptures.

It is interesting to us, too, that this work presents to the Chinese
a more definite and discriminating view of the different religions of
the world, than has yet appeared in the Chinese language.

Speaking of different countries of India under European sway, where
Buddhism or Paganism and Protestantism exist together, the author
does not hesitate to say that the latter is gradually overcoming the
former, "whose light is becoming more and more dim." This is a very
remarkable concession, when we consider that the individual who makes
it is probably a Buddhist himself, and represents the religion of
China as Buddhism.

It is a remarkable fact, that this work contains a more extensive and
correct account of the history and institution of Christian nations
than has ever been published before by any heathen writer in any age
of the world.

This remarkable work will introduce the "Celestials" to such an
acquaintance with "the outside barbarians" as cannot fail to give them
new ideas, remove something at least of the insane prejudice against,
and contempt of, all other nations, which has so long prevailed.
We regard it as a very important agency in preparing the way for
that Christianity which the friends of the perishing are seeking to
introduce into that benighted empire. A book by a native Chinaman,
himself high in office, and recommended by a still higher officer
of the government, the author still himself a Pagan, yet reasoning
upon the great facts of the Bible, and opening the hitherto unknown
civilized and Christian world to his countrymen--such a book cannot
but become an important pioneer in the work of pouring the light of
truth upon that dark land.--_Boston Traveler_.

       *       *       *       *       *

[FROM SARTAIN'S MAGAZINE, FOR AUGUST.]


REQUIEM.

UPON THE DEATH OF FRANCES SARGENT ASGOOD.

BY ANNE C. LYNCH.

  To what bright world afar dost thou belong
    Thou whose pure soul seemed not of mortal birth?
  From what fair realm of flowers, and love, and song,
    Cam'st thou a star-beam to our shadowed earth?
  What hadst thou done, sweet spirit! in that sphere,
    That thou wert banished here?

  Here, where our blossoms early fade and die,
    Where autumn frosts despoil our loveliest bowers;
  Where song goes up to heaven, an anguished cry
    From wounded hearts, like perfume from crushed flowers;
  Where Love despairing waits, and weeps in vain
    His Psyche to regain.

  Thou cam'st not unattended on thy way;
    Spirits of beauty, grace, and joy, and love
  Were with thee, ever bearing each some ray
    Of the far home that thou hadst left above,
  And ever at thy side, upon our sight
    Gleamed forth their wings of light.

  We heard their voices in the gushing song
    That rose like incense from thy burning heart;
  We saw the footsteps of the shining throng
    Glancing upon thy pathway high, apart,
  When in thy radiance thou didst walk the earth,
    Thou child of glorious birth.

  But the way lengthened, and the song grew sad,
    Breathing such tones as find no echo here;
  Aspiring, soaring, but no longer glad,
    Its mournful music fell upon the ear;
  'Twas the home-sickness of a soul that sighs
    For its own native skies.

  Then he that to earth's children comes at last,
    The angel-messenger, white-robed and pale,
  Upon thy soul his sweet oblivion cast,
    And bore thee gently through the shadowy vale,--
  The fleeting years of thy brief exile o'er,--
    Home to the blissful shore.

       *       *       *       *       *

MR. HEALEY is in Paris, engaged busily on his Webster and Hayne
picture, of which at the time of its projection, so much was said.
The canvas is some twenty feet by fourteen, and all the heads will be
portraits. It will be valuable, and must command a ready sale. Will
Massachusetts buy it for her State House, or South Carolina for her
Capitol? It would be a splendid ornament for Fanueil Hall, and not be
misplaced on the walls of the Charleston Court House.

       *       *       *       *       *

MANUEL GODOY, the famous "Prince of Peace," it is mentioned in recent
foreign journals, has left Paris for Spain. The Government at Madrid
has restored a considerable part of his large confiscated estates, and
he probably has returned to enjoy a golden setting sun. He must be at
least eighty years of age.

       *       *       *       *       *

MONS. LIBRI, a well known savant, member of the Institute, and a
professor of the College of France, has been charged, in Paris, with
having committed extensive thefts of valuable MSS. and broken in the
public libraries. He has persisted in proclaiming his innocence, and
is warmly defended by certain papers. An indictment was found, he did
not appear; he was tried, in his absence, for contumacy. He was found
guilty of the most extensive depredations in this way. Abstracting the
most valuable books, effacing identifying marks, sending them out of
the country to be rebound, and then selling them at costly rates. He
was sentenced to imprisonment for ten years at hard labor.

       *       *       *       *       *

SKETCH OF A STREET CHARACTER OF CAIRO.--The Caireen donkey-boy is
quite a character, and mine in particular was a perfect original. He
was small and square of frame, his rich brown face relieved by the
whitewash of teeth and the most brilliant black eyes, and his face
beamed with a merry, yet roguish expression, like that of the Spanish,
or rather Moorish, boy, in Murillo's well known masterpiece, with whom
he was probably of cognate blood. Living in the streets from infancy,
and familiar with the chances of out-door life, and with every
description of character; waiting at the door of a mosque or a cafe,
or crouching in a corner of a bazaar, he had acquired a thorough
acquaintance with Caireen life; and his intellect, and, I fear, his
vices, had become somewhat prematurely developed. But the finishing
touch to his education was undoubtedly given by the European travelers
whom he had served, and of whom he had, with the imitativeness of his
age, picked up a variety of little accomplishments, particularly the
oaths of different languages. His audacity had thus become consummate,
and I have heard him send his fellows to ---- as coolly, and in as
good English, as any prototype of our own metropolis. His mussulman
prejudices sat very loosely upon him, and in the midst of religious
observances he grew up indifferent and prayerless. With this
inevitable laxity of faith and morals, contracted by his early
vagabondage, he at least acquired an emancipation from prejudice,
and displayed a craving after miscellaneous information, to which his
European masters were often tasked to contribute. Thrown almost in
childhood upon their resources, the energy and perseverance of these
boys is remarkable. My little lad had, for instance, been up the
country with some English travelers, in whose service he had saved
four or five hundred piastres, (four or five pounds), with which he
bought the animal which I bestrode, on whose sprightliness and good
qualities he was never tired of expatiating, and with the proceeds
of whose labor he supported his mother and himself. He had but one
habitual subject of discontent, the heavy tax imposed upon his donkey
by Mehemet Ali, upon whom he invoked the curse of God; a curse, it
is to be feared, uttered, not loud but deep, by all classes save the
employés of government. His wind and endurance were surprising. He
would trot after his donkey by the hour together, urging and prodding
along with a pointed stick, as readily in the burning sandy environs,
and under the noonday sun, as in the cool and shady alleys of the
crowded capital; running, dodging, striking, and shouting with all
the strength of his lungs, through the midst of its labyrinthine
obstructions.--_The Nile Boat_.

       *       *       *       *       *

MENDELSSOHN'S SKILL AS A CONDUCTOR.--In the spring of 1835.
Mendelssohn was invited to come to Cologne, in order to direct the
festival. Here we met again, and thanks to his kindness, I had the
pleasure of being present at one of the general rehearsals, where
he conducted Beethoven's Eighth Symphony. It would be a matter
of difficulty to decide in which quality Mendelssohn excelled the
most--whether as composer, pianist, organist, or conductor of the
orchestra. Nobody ever knew better how to communicate, as if by an
electric fluid, his own conceptions of a work, to a large body of
performers. It was highly interesting on this occasion to contemplate
the anxious attention manifested by a body of more than five hundred
singers and performers, watching every glance of Mendelssohn's eye,
and following, like obedient spirits, the magic wand of this musical
_Prospero_. The admirable _allegretto_ in B flat, of Beethoven's
Symphony, not going at first to his liking, he remarked, smilingly,
that he knew every one of the gentlemen engaged was capable of
performing and even composing a scherzo of his own; but that _just
now_ he wanted to hear Beethoven's, which he thought had some merit.
It was cheerfully repeated. "Beautiful! charming!" cried Mendelssohn,
"but still too loud in two or three instances. Let us take it again,
from the middle." "No, no," was the general reply of the band; "the
whole movement over again for our own satisfaction;" and then they
played it with the utmost delicacy and finish, Mendelssohn laying
aside his baton, and listening with evident delight to the more
perfect execution. "What would I have given," exclaimed he, "if
Beethoven could have heard his own composition so well understood and
so magnificently performed!" By thus giving alternately praise and
blame, as required, spurring the slow, checking the too ardent, he
obtained orchestral effects seldom equaled in our days. Need I
add, that he was able to detect at once, even among a phalanx of
performers, the slightest error, either of note or accent.--_Life of
Mendelssohn_.

       *       *       *       *       *

There is a mutual hate between the virtuous and the vicious, the
spiritual and the sensual: but the pure abhor understandingly, knowing
the nature of their antagonists, while the vile nurse an ignorant
malignity, pained with an unacknowledged ache of envy.

       *       *       *       *       *

Superstition In France.--The _Courrier de la Meuse_ says: "Witchcraft
is still an object of belief in our provinces. On Sunday last, in a
village belonging to the arrondissement of Verdun, the keeper of the
parish bull forgot to lay before the poor animal at the usual hour
its accustomed allowance of provender. The bull, impatient at the
delay, made a variety of efforts to regain his liberty, and at last
succeeded. The first use he made of his freedom was to demolish a
rabbit-hutch which was in the stable. The keeper's wife, hearing a
noise, ran to the place, and as soon as she saw the bull treading
mercilessly upon the rabbits with his large hoofs, seized a cudgel and
showered down a volley of blows on the crupper of the devastator. But
not being accustomed to this rough treatment, the bull grew angry,
and fell upon his neighbors the oxen, and what with horns and hoofs,
turned the stable into a scene of terror and confusion. The woman
began to cry for help. Her cries were heard, and with some trouble
the bull was ousted from the stable, and forthwith began to butt at
everything in his path. The mayor and the adjoint of the commune were
attracted to the scene of this riot, and on witnessing the animal's
violence, declared, after a short deliberation, that the bull was a
sorcerer, or at any rate that he was possessed with a devil, and that
he ought to be conducted to the presbytery in order to be exorcised.
The authorities were accordingly obeyed, and the bull was dragged or
driven into the presence of the curate, who was requested to subject
him to the formalities prescribed in the ritual. The good priest found
no little difficulty in escaping the pressing solicitations of his
parishioners. At last, however, he succeeded; but though the bull
escaped exorcism, he could not elude the shambles. Condemned to death
by the mayor as a sorcerer, his sentence was immediately executed."

       *       *       *       *       *

The Libraries At Cambridge.--There are now belonging to the various
libraries connected with the University, about 86,000 volumes beside
pamphlets, maps and prints. The Public Library contains over 57,000
volumes. The Law Library, 13,000; Divinity School, 3000; Medical
School, 1,200; Society Libraries for the Students, 10,000. There have
been added during the past year 1,751 volumes, and 2,219 pamphlets.

       *       *       *       *       *

The _Birmingham Mercury_ thinks some of Lord Brougham's late
proceedings may be accounted for in part by natural vexation at
Cottenham being made an earl. "Cottenham is several years younger than
Brougham, and was his successor in the chancellorship, and yet _he_
gets an earldom, while Brougham, who was known all over the world
before Cottenham was ever heard of out of the Equity Courts, still
remains and is likely to remain a simple baron."

       *       *       *       *       *

Romantic History of two English Lovers.--In the reign of Edward III.,
Robert Machim, an accomplished gentleman, of the second degree of
nobility, loved and was beloved by the beautiful Anna d'Arfet, the
daughter of a noble of the first class. By virtue of a royal warrant
Machim was incarcerated for his presumption; and, on his release,
endured the bitter mortification of learning that Anna had been
forcibly married to a noble, who carried her to his castle, near
Bristol. A friend of Machim's had the address to introduce himself to
the family, and became the groom of broken-hearted Anna, who was thus
persuaded and enabled to escape on board a vessel with her lover, with
the view of ending her days with him in France. In their hurry and
alarm they embarked without the pilot, and the season of the year
being the most unfavorable, were soon at the mercy of a dreadful
storm. The desired port was missed during the night, and the vessel
driven out to sea. After twelve days of suffering they discovered
faint traces of land in the horizon, and succeeded in making the spot
still called Machico. The exhausted Anna was conveyed on shore, and
Machim had spent three days in exploring in the neighborhood with
his friends, when the vessel, which they had left in charge of the
mariners, broke from her moorings in a storm and was wrecked on the
coast of Morocco, where the crew were made slaves. Anna became dumb
with sorrow, and expired three days after. Machim survived her but
five days, enjoining his companions to bury him in the same grave,
under the venerable cedar, where they had a few days before erected
a cross in acknowledgment of their happy deliverance. An inscription,
composed by Machim, was carved on the cross, with the request that the
next Christian who might chance to visit the spot would erect a church
there. Having performed this last sad duty, the survivors fitted out
the boat, which they had drawn ashore on their landing, and putting to
sea in the hope of reaching some part of Europe, were also driven on
the coast of Morocco, and rejoined their companions, but in slavery.
Zargo, during an expedition of discovery to the coast of Africa,
took a Spanish vessel with redeemed captives, amongst whom was an
experienced pilot, named Morales, who entered into the service
of Zargo, and gave him an account of the adventures of Machim, as
communicated to him by the English captives, and of the landmarks and
situations of the newly-discovered island.--_Madeira, by Dr. Mason_.

       *       *       *       *       *

Centenary Performances in commemoration of the death-day of John
Sebastian Bach--the 28th of July--are this week to be held at Leipsic,
(where an assemblage of two thousand executants is to be convened
for the display of some of the masters greatest works,) at Berlin, at
Magdeburg, at Hamburg, and at other towns in North Germany.

       *       *       *       *       *

[FROM THE LEADER.]

POETS IN PARLIAMENT.

The prominence which the "winged words" of Victor Hugo have recently
given him in the Assembly has called forth sarcastic insinuations and
bitter diatribes from all the Conservative journals. There seems to
be an intensity of exasperation, arising from the ancient prejudice
against poets. A poet treating of politics! Let him keep to
rhymes, and leave the serious business of life to us practical men,
sober-minded men--men not led away by our imaginations--men not moved
to absurdities by sentiment--solid, sensible, moderate men! Let him
play with capricious hand on the chords which are resonant to his
will; but let him not mistake his frivolous accomplishment for the
power to play upon the world's great harp, drawing from its grander
chords the large responses of more solemn themes. Let him "strike
the light guitar" as long as women will listen, or fools applaud. But
politics is another sphere; into that he can only pass to make himself
ridiculous.

Thus reason the profound. Thus saith the good practical man, who,
because his mind is a congeries of commonplaces, piques himself on
not being led away by his imagination. The owl prides himself on the
incontestable fact that he is not an eagle.

To us the matter has another aspect. The appearance of Poets and men
of Sentiment in the world of Politics is a good symptom; for at a
time like the present, when positive doctrine can scarcely be said to
exist in embryo, and assuredly not in any maturity, the presence of
Imagination and Sentiment--prophets who endow the present with some
of the riches borrowed from the future--is needed to give grandeur
and generosity to political action, and to prevent men from entirely
sinking into the slough of egotism and routine. Salt is not meat,
but we need the salt to preserve meat from corruption. Lamartine and
Victor Hugo may not be profound statesmen; but they have at least
this one indispensable quality of statesmanship; they look beyond the
hour, and beyond the circle, they care more for the nation than for
"measures;" they have high aspirations and wide sympathies. Lamartine
in power committed many errors, but he also did great things, moved
thereto by his "Imagination." He abolished capital punishment; and he
freed the slaves; had the whole Provisional Government been formed of
such men it would have been well for it and for France.

We are as distinctly aware of the unfitness of a poet for politics, as
any of those can be who rail at Hugo and Lamartine. Images, we know,
are not convictions; aspirations will not do the work; grand speeches
will not solve the problems. The poet is a "phrasemaker"; true; but
show us the man in these days who is more than a phrasemaker! Where is
he who has positive ideas beyond the small circle of his speciality?
In rejecting the guidance of the Poet to whom shall we apply? To
the Priest? He mumbles the litany of an ancient time which falls on
unbelieving ears. To the Lawyer? He is a metaphysician with precedents
for data. To the Litterateur? He is a phrasemaker by profession. To
the Politician? He cannot rise above the conception of a "bill." One
and all are copious in phrases, empty of positive ideas as drums.
The initial laws of social science are still to be discovered and
accepted, yet we sneer at phrasemakers! Carlyle, who never sweeps out
of the circle of sentiment--whose eloquence is always indignation--who
thinks with his heart, has no words too scornful for phrasemakers and
poets; forgetting that he, and we, and they, are _all_ little more
than phrasemakers waiting for a doctrine!

There is something in the air of late which has called forth the poets
and made them politicians. Formerly they were content to leave these
troubled waters undisturbed, but finding that others now are as
ignorant as themselves, they have come forth to give at least the
benefit of their sentiment to the party they espouse. In no department
can phrasemaking prosper where positive ideas have once been attained.
Metaphors are powerless in astronomy; epithets are useless as
alembics; images, be they never so beautiful, will fail to convince
the physiologist. Language may adorn, it cannot create science. But as
soon as we pass from the sciences to social science, (or politics,) we
find that here the absence of positive ideas gives the phrasemaker the
same power of convincing, as in the early days of physical science was
possessed by metaphysicians and poets. Here the phrasemaker is king;
as the one-eyed is king in the empire of the blind. Phrasemaker for
phrasemaker, we prefer the poet to the politician; Victor Hugo to Léon
Faucher; Lamartine to Odilon Barrot; Lamennais to Baroche.

Kossuth, Mazzini, Lamartine, the three heroes of 1848, were all,
though with enormous differences in their relative values and
positions, men belonging to the race of poets--men in whom the
_heart_ thought--men who were moved by great impulses and lofty
aspirations--men who were "carried away by their imagination"--men who
were "dreamers," but whose dreams were of the stuff of which our life
is made.

       *       *       *       *       *

The fine immortal spirit of inspiration that is ever living in human
affairs, is unseen and incredible till its power becomes apparent
through the long past; as the invisible but indelible blue of the
atmosphere is not seen except we look through extended space.

       *       *       *       *       *

The distinction between the sensual, frivolous many, and the few
spiritual and earnest, may be stated thus--the first vaguely guess the
others to be fools, _they_ know that the former are fools.

       *       *       *       *       *

[FROM THE NEW MONTHLY MAGAZINE.]

FRANK HAMILTON; OR, THE CONFESSIONS OF AN ONLY SON.

BY W.H. MAXWELL, ESQ.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER I.

  "_Malvolio._ 'Tis but fortune; all is fortune."

_Twelfth Night_.

  "_Bassanio_. 'Tis not unknown to you, Antonio,
  How much I have disabled my state.
  By something showing a more swelling port
  Than my faint means would grant continuance."

_Merchant of Venice_.

I am by birth an Irishman, and descended from an ancient family. I lay
no claim to any connection with Brian Boru, or Malichi, of the crown
of gold, a gentleman who, notwithstanding the poetical authority
of Tom Moore, we have some reason to believe during his long and
illustrious reign was never master of a crown sterling. My ancestor
was Colonel Hamilton, as stout a Cromwellian as ever led a squadron
of Noll's Ironsides to a charge. If my education was not of the
first order, it was for no lack of instructors. My father, a half-pay
dragoon, had me on the pig-skin before my legs were long enough to
reach the saddle-skirt; the keeper, in proper time, taught me to
shoot: a retired gentleman, _olim_, of the Welsh fusileers, with a
single leg and sixty pounds per annum, paid quarterly by Greenwood
and Cox, indoctrinated me in the mystery of tying a fly, and casting
the same correctly. The curate--the least successful of the lot,
poor man--did his best to communicate Greek and Latin, and my cousin
Constance gave me my first lessons in the art of love. All were able
professors in their way, but cousin Constance was infinitely the most
agreeable.

I am by accident an only son. My mother, in two years after she had
sworn obedience at the altar, presented her liege lord with a couple
of pledges of connubial love, and the gender of both was masculine.
Twelve years elapsed and no addition was made to the Hamiltons; when
lo! upon a fine spring morning a little Benjamin was ushered into
existence, and I was the God-send. My father never could be persuaded
that there was a gentlemanly profession in the world but one, and
that was the trade of arms. My brothers, as they grew up, entirely
coincided with him in opinion, and both would be soldiers. William
died sword in hand, crowning the great breach at Rodrigo; and Henry,
after demolishing three or four cuirassiers of the Imperial Guards,
found his last resting-place on "red Waterloo." When they were named,
my father's eyes would kindle, and my mother's be suffused with tears.
He played a fictitious part, enacted the Roman, and would persuade you
that he exulted in their deaths; but my mother played the true one,
the woman's.

It was an autumnal evening, just when you smell the first indication
of winter in a rarefied atmosphere, and see it in the clear curling
of the smoke, as its woolly flakes rise from the cottage chimney and
gradually are lost in the clear blue sky. Although not a cold evening,
a log fire was extremely welcome. My father, Heaven rest him! had a
slight touch in the toe of what finished him afterward in the stomach,
namely, gout.

"James," said my lady mother, "it is time we came to some decision
regarding what we have been talking of for the last twelve months.
Frank will be eighteen next Wednesday."

"Faith! it is time, my dear Mary; the premises are true, but the
difficulty is to come at the conclusion."

"You know, my love, that only for your pension and half-pay, from the
tremendous depreciation in agricultural property since the peace, we
should be obliged to lay down the old carriage, as you had to part
with the harriers the year after Waterloo."

That to my father was a heavy hit. "It was a devil of a sacrifice,
Mary,"--and he sighed, "to give up the sweetest pack that ever man
rode to; one, that for a mile's run you could have covered with
a blanket--heigh-ho! God's will be done;" and after that pious
adjuration, my father turned down his tumbler No. 3, to the bottom.
The memory of the lost harriers was always a painful recollection, and
brought its silent evidence that the fortunes of the Hamiltons were
not what they were a hundred years ago.

"With all my care," continued my mother, "and, as you know, I
economize to the best of my judgement, and after all is done that can
be done, our income barely will defray the outlay of our household."

"Or, as we used to say when I was dragooning thirty years ago, 'the
tongue will scarcely meet the buckle,'" responded the colonel.

"I have been thinking," said my mother timidly, "that Frank might go
to the bar."

"I would rather that he went direct to the devil," roared the
commander, who hated lawyers, and whose great toe had at the moment
undergone a disagreeable visitation.

"Do not lose temper, dear James," and she laid down her knitting to
replace the hassock he had kicked away under the painful irritation
of a disease that a stoic could not stand with patience, and, as they
would say in Ireland, would fully justify a Quaker if "he kicked his
mother."

"Curse the bar!" but he acknowledged his lady wife's kind offices by
tapping her gently on the cheek. "When I was a boy, Mary, a lawyer and
a gentleman were identified. Like the army--and, thank God! that is
still intact, none but a man of decent pretensions claimed a gown, no
more than a linen-draper's apprentice now would aspire to an epaulet.
Is there a low fellow who has saved a few hundreds by retailing whisky
by the noggin, who will not have his son 'Mister Counsellor O'Whack,'
or 'Mister Barrister O'Finnigan'? No, no, if you must have Frank bred
to a local profession, make him an apothecary; a twenty pound note
will find drawers, drugs, and bottles. Occasionally he may be useful;
pound honestly at his mortar, salve a broken head, carry the country
news about, and lie down at night with a tolerably quiet conscience.
He may have hastened a patient to his account by a trifling over-dose;
but he has not hurried men into villainous litigation, that will
eventuate in their ruin. His worst offense against the community
shall be a mistaking of toothache for tic-douloureux, and lumbago for
gout--oh, d----n the gout!"--for at that portion of his speech the
poor colonel had sustained an awful twinge.

"Well," continued the dame, "would you feel inclined to let him enter
the University, and take orders?"

"Become a churchman?" and away, with a furious kick, again went the
hassock. "You should say, in simple English, make him a curate for the
term of natural life. The church in Ireland, Mary, is like the bar, it
once was tenanted by gentlemen who had birth, worth, piety, learning,
or all united to recommend him to promotion. Now it is an arena where
impure influence tilts against unblushing hypocrisy. The race is
between some shuffling old lawyer, or a canting saint. One has reached
the woolsack by political thimble-rigging, which means starting
patriot, and turning, when the price is offered, a ministerial hack.
He forks a drunken dean, his son, into a Father-in-Godship with all
the trifling temporalities attendant on the same. Well, the other
fellow is a 'regular go-a-head,' denounces popery, calculates the
millennium, alarms thereby elderly women of both sexes, edifies old
maids, who retire to their closets in the evening with the Bible in
one hand, and a brandy-bottle in the other; and what he likes best,
spiritualizes with the younger ones."

"Stop, dear James." The emphasis on the word _spiritualize_ had
alarmed my mother, who, to tell the truth, had a slight touch of the
prevailing malady, and, but for the counteracting influence of the
commander, might have been deluded into saintship by degrees.

The great toe was, however, again awfully invaded, and my father's
spiritual state of mind not all improved by the second twinge, which
was a heavy one.

"Why, d----n it--"

"Don't curse, dear James."

"Curse! I will; for if you had the gout, you would swear like a
trooper."

"Indeed I would not."

"Ah, Mary," replied my father, "between twinges, if you knew the
comfort of a curse or two--it relieves one so."

"That, indeed, James, must be but a sorry consolation, as Mr. Cantwell
said--"

"Oh! d----n Cantwell," roared my father, "a fellow that will tell you
that there is but one path to heaven, and that he has discovered it.
Pish! Mary, the grand route is open as the mail-coach road, and Papist
and Protestant, Quaker and Anabaptist, may jog along at even pace. I'm
not altogether sure about Jews and Methodists. One bearded vagabond
at Portsmouth charged me, when I was going to the Peninsula, ten
shillings a pound for exchanging bank notes for specie, and every
guinea the circumcised scoundrel gave was a light one. He'll fry--or
has fried already--and my poor bewildered old aunt, under the skillful
management of the Methodist preachers, who for a dozen years in their
rambles, had made her house an inn, left the three thousand five
per cents, which I expected, to blow the gospel-trumpet, either in
California or the Cape--for, God knows, I never particularly inquired
in which country the trumpeter was to sound 'boot and saddle,' after I
had ascertained that the doting fool had made a legal testament quite
sufficient for the purposes of the holy knaves who humbugged her.
Cantwell is one of the same crew, a specious hypocrite. I would attend
to the fellow no more than to that red-headed rector--every priest
is a rector now--who often held my horse at his father's forge, when
T happened to throw a shoe hunting,--and would half break his back
bowing, if I handed him now and then a sixpence. Would I believe
the dictum of that low-born dog, when he told me that in
head-quarters"--and my father elevated his hand toward heaven--"they
cared this pinch of snuff, whether upon a Friday I ate a rasher or
red-herring?"

Two episodes interrupted the polemical disquisition. In character none
could be more different--the one eventuated in a clean knock down--the
other decided indirectly my future fortunes--and, in the next chapter,
both shall be detailed.

       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER II.

  "_Antonio_. Thou knowest that all my fortunes are at sea;
  Nor have I money or commodity,
  To raise a present sum."

_Merchant of Venice_.

The _Boheeil Kistanaugh_, called in plain English, the kitchen boy,
had entered, not like Caliban, "bearing a log," but with a basket
full. He deposited the supply, and was directed by the commander
to replenish the fire. I believe that Petereeine's allegiance to my
father originated in fear rather than affection. He dreaded

  "the deep damnation of his 'Bah!'"

but what was a still more formidable consideration, was a black-thorn
stick which the colonel had carried since he gave up the sword; it
was a beauty, upon which every fellow that came for law, in or out of
custody, lavished his admiration--a clean crop, with three inches of
an iron ferule on the extremity. My father was, "good easy man," a
true Milesian philosopher--his arguments were those impressive ones,
called _ad hominem_, and after he had _grassed_ his man, he explained
the reason at his leisure.

_Petereeine_ (little Peter), as he was called, to distinguish him from
another of that apostolic name--who was six feet two--approached the
colonel in his best state of health with much alarm; but, when a fit
of the gout was on--when a foot swathed in flannel, or slippered and
rested on a hassock, announced the anthritic visitation, Petereeine
would hold strong doubts whether, had the choice been allowed, he
should not have preferred entering one of Van Amburgh's dens, to
facing the commander in the dining-room.

Petereeine was nervous--he had overheard his master blowing to the
skies the Reverend George Cantwell, and the red-headed rector, Paul
Macrony. If a parson and a priest were so treated, what chance had he?
and great was his trepidation, accordingly, when he entered the state
chamber, as in duty bound.

"Why the devil did you not answer the bell? You knew well enough, you
incorrible scoundrel! that I wanted you."

Now my father's opening address was not calculated to restore
Petereeine's mental serenity--and to add to his uneasiness, he also
caught sight of that infernal implement, the black-thorn, which, in
treacherous repose, was resting at my father's elbow.

"On with some wood, you vagabond."

The order was obeyed--and Petereeine conveyed a couple of billets
safely from the basket to the grate. The next essay, however, was a
failure--the third log fell--and if the fall were not great, as it
dropped on the fender, it certainly was very noisy. The accident
was harmless--for, according to honest admeasurement, it evaded my
father's foot by a full yard--but, under nervous alarm, he swore,
and, as troopers will swear, that it had descended direct upon his
afflicted member, and, consequently that he was ruined for life. This
was a subsequent explanation--while the unhappy youth was extended
on the hearth-rug, protesting innocence, and also declaring that
his jaw-bone was fractured. The fall of the billet and the boy were
things simultaneous--and while my mother, in great alarm, inculcated
patience under suffering, and hinted at resignation, my father, in
return, swore awfully, that no man with a toe of treble its natural
dimensions, and scarlet as a soldiers jacket, had ever possessed
either of those Christian articles. My mother quoted the case of
Job--and my father begged to inquire if there was any authority to
prove that Job ever had the gout? In the mean time, the kitchen-boy
had gathered himself up and departed--and as he left the presence with
his hand pressed upon his cheek, loud were his lamentations. Constance
and I--nobody enjoyed the ridiculous more than she did--laughed
heartily, while the colonel resented this want of sympathy, by calling
us a brace of fools, and expressing his settled conviction, that were
he, the commander, hanged, we, the delinquents, would giggle at the
foot of the gallows.

Such was the state of affairs, when the entrance of the chief butler
harbingered other occurrences, and much more serious than Petereeine's
damaged jaw. Mick Kalligan had been in the "heavies" with my father,
and at Salamanca, had ridden the opening charge, side by side, with
him, greatly to the detriment of divers Frenchmen, and much to the
satisfaction of his present master. In executing this achievement,
Mick had been a considerable sufferer--his ribs having been invaded by
a red lancer of the guard--while a _chausseur-à-cheval_ had inserted
a lasting token of his affection across his right cheek, extremely
honorable, but by no means ornamental.

Mick laid a couple of newspapers, and as many letters, on the
table--but before we proceed to open either, we will favor the reader
with another peep into our family history.

Manifold are the ruinous phantasies which lead unhappy mortals to
pandemonium. This one has a fancy for the turf, another patronizes the
last imported _choryphée_. The turf is generally a settler--the stage
is also a safe road to a safe settlement, and between a race-horse and
a _danseuse_, we would not give a sixpence for choice. Now, as far as
horse-flesh went, my grandfather was innocent; a _pirouette_ or _pas
seul_, barring an Irish jig, he never witnessed in his life--but he
had discovered as good a method for settling a private gentleman. He
had an inveterate fancy for electioneering. The man who would reform
state abuses, deserves well of his country; there is a great deal of
patriotism in Ireland; in fact, it is, like linen, a staple article
generally, but still the best pay-master is safe to win; and hence, my
poor grandfather generally lost the race.

My father looked very suspiciously at the letters--one had his own
armorial bearings displayed in red wax--and the formal direction was
at a glance detected to be that of his aunt Catharine--Catharine's
missives were never agreeable--she had a rent charge on the property
for a couple of thousands; and, like Moses and Son, her system was
"quick returns," and the interest was consequently expected to the
day. For a few seconds my father hesitated, but he manfully broke the
seal--muttering, audibly, "What can the old rattle-trap write about?
Her interest-money is not due for another fortnight." He threw his
eyes hastily over the contents--his color heightened--and my aunt
Catharine's epistle was flung, and most unceremoniously, upon the
ground--the hope that accompanied the act, being the reverse of a
benediction.

"Is there anything wrong, dear James?" inquired my mother, in her
usual quiet and timid tone.

"Wrong!" thundered my father; "Frank will read this spiritual
production to you. Every line breathes a deep anxiety on old
Kitty's part for my soul's welfare, earthly considerations being
non-important. Read, Frank, and if you will not devoutly wish that the
doting fool was at the dev--"

"Stop, my dear James."

"Well-read, Frank, and say, when you hear the contents, whether you
would be particularly sorry to learn that the old lady had, as sailors
say, her hands well greased, and a fast hold upon the moon? Read,
d----n it, man! there's no trouble in deciphering my aunt Catharine's
penmanship. Hers is not what Tony Lumpkin complained of--a cursed
cramp hand; all clear and unmistakable--the _t_'s accurately stroked
across, and the _i_'s dotted to a nicety. Go on--read, man, read."

I obeyed the order, and thus ran the missive, my honored father adding
a running commentary at every important passage; shall place them in
italics--

"'MY DEAR NEPHEW,'"

"_Oh, ---- her affection!_"

"'If, by a merciful dispensation, I shall be permitted to have a few
spiritual minded friends to-morrow, at four o'clock, at dinner--'"

"_Temps militaire--they won't fail you, my old girl._"

"'I shall then have reached an age to which few arrive--look to the
psalm--namely, to eighty--'"

"_She's eighty-three_--"

"'I have, under the mercy of Providence, and the ministry of a
chosen vessel, the Reverend Carter Kettlewell, and also a worshiping
Christian learned in the law, namely, Mr. Selby Sly, put my earthly
house in order. Would that spiritual preparation could he as easily
accomplished; but yet I feel well convinced that mine is a state of
grace, and Mr. Kettlewell gives me a comfortable assurance that in me
the old man if crucified--'"

"_Did you ever listen to such rascally cant?_"

"'I have given instructions to Mr. Sly to make my will, and Mr.
Kettlewell has kindly consented to be the trustee and executor--"

"_Now comes the villainy, no doubt_"

"'I have devised--may the offering be graciously received!--all that
I shall die possessed of to make an addition to support those devoted
soldiers--not, dear nephew, soldiers in your carnal meaning of the
word--but the ministers of the gospel, who labor in New Zealand. These
inestimable men, whose courage is almost supernatural, and who--'"

"_Pish--what an old twaddler!_"

"'Although annually eaten by converted cannibals, still press forward
at the trumpet-call--"'

"_I wonder what sort of a grill old Kate would make? cursed tough, I
fancy._"

"'I have added my mite to a fund already established to send
assistance there--'"

"_Ay, to Christianize, and, in return, be carbonadoed. I wish I had
charge of the gridiron I would broil one or two of the new recruits._"

"'I have called in, under Mr. Sly's advice the mortgage granted to
the late Sir George O'Gorman, by my ever-to-be-lamented husband, and
the other portions of my property being in state securities, are
reclaimable at once. My object in writing this letter is to convey to
my dear nephew my heartfelt prayers for his spiritual amendment, and
also to intimate that the 2000l.--a rent-charge on he Kilnavaggart
property--with the running quarter's interest, shall be paid at La
Touche's to the order of Messrs. Kettlewell and Sly. As the blindness
of the New Zealanders is deplorable, and as Mr. Kettlewell has already
enlisted some gallant champions who will blow the gospel-trumpet,
although they were to be served up to supper the same evening, I wish
the object to be carried out at once--'"

"_Beautiful!_" said my poor father with a groan; "_where the devil
could the money be raised? You won't realize now for a bullock what,
in war-time, you would get for a calf. Go on with the old harridan's
epistle._"

"'Having now got rid of fleshly considerations--I mean money ones--let
me, my dear James, offer a word in season. Remember that it comes from
an attached relation, who holds your worldly affairs as nothing--'"

"_I can't dispute that_," said my father with a smothered groan.

"'But would turn your attention to the more important considerations
of our being. I would not lean too heavily upon the bruised reed, but
your early life was anything but evangelical--'"

Constance laughed; she could not, wild girl, avoid it.

"'We must all give an account of our stewardship,' _vide_ St. Luke,
chap. xvi.--'"

"_Stop--Shakspeare's right; when the devil quotes Scripture--but, go
on--let's have the whole dose._"

"'When can you pay the money in? And, oh! in you, my dear nephew, may
grace yet fructify, and may you be brought, even at the eleventh hour,
to a slow conviction that all on this earth is vanity and vexation
of spirit--drums, colors, scarlet and fine linen, hounds running
after hares, women whirling round, as they tell me they do, in that
invention of the evil one called a waltz, all these are but delusions
of the enemy, and designed to lead sinners to destruction. I
transcribe a verse from a most affecting hymn, composed by that gifted
man--'"

"_Oh, d----n the hymn!_" roared my father; "_on with you, Frank, and
my benison light on the composer of it! Don't stop to favor us with
his name, and pass over the filthy doggerel!_"

I proceeded under orders accordingly.

"'Remember, James, you are now sixty-one; repent, and, even in the
eleventh hour, you may be plucked like a brand from the fire. Avoid
swearing, mortify the flesh--that is, don't take a third tumbler after
dinner--'"

My father could not stand it longer. "_Oh, may Cromwell's curse light
upon her! I wonder how many glasses of brandy-and-water she swallows
at evening exercise, as she calls it, over a chapter of Timothy?_"

"'I would not recall the past, but for the purpose of wholesome
admonition. The year before you married, and gave up the godless life
of soldiering, can you forget that I found you, at one in the morning
in Bridget Donovan's room? Your reason was, that you had got the
colic; if you had, why not come to my chamber, where you knew there
was laudanum and lavender?

Poor Constance could not stand the fresh allegation; and, while my
mother looked very grave, we laughed, as Scrub says, "consumedly." My
father muttered something about "cursed nonsense!" but I am inclined
to think that aunt Catharine's colic charge was not without some
foundation.

"'I have now, James, discharged my duty: may my humble attempts to
arouse you to a sense of the danger of standing on the brink of the
pit of perdition be blessed! Pay the principal and interest over to La
Touche. Mr. Selby Sly hinted that a foreclosure of the mortgage might
expedite matters; and, by saving a term or two in getting in the
money, two or three hundred New Zealanders would--and oh, James! how
gratifying would be the reflection!--be saved from the wrath to come.

"'This morning, on looking over your marriage settlement, Mr. Sly is
of opinion that, if Mrs. Hamilton will renounce certain rights he can
raise the money at once, and that too only at legal interest, say six
per cent.--'"

Often had I witnessed a paternal explosion; but, when it was hinted
that the marital rights of my poor mother were to be sacrificed, his
fury amounted almost to madness.

"Damnation!" he exclaimed; "confusion light upon the letter and the
letter-writer! You!--do you an act to invalidate your settlement!
I would see first every canting vagabond in----" and he named a
disagreeable locality. "Never, Mary! pitch that paper away: I dread
that at the end of it the old lunatic will inflict her benediction.
Frank, pack your traps--you must catch the mail to-night; you'll be
in town by eight o'clock to-morrow morning. Be at Sly's office at
nine. D----n the gout!--I should have done the job myself. Beat the
scoundrel as nearly to death as you think you can conscientiously
go without committing absolute murder: next, pay a morning visit to
Kettlewell, and, if you leave him in a condition to mount the pulpit
for a month, I'll never acknowledge you. Break that other seal;
Probably, the contents may prove as agreeable as old Kitty's."

There were times and moods when, in Byron's language, it was judicious
to reply "Psha! to hear is to obey," and this was such a period.
I broke the black wax, and the epistle proved to be from the very
gentleman whom I was to be dispatched per mail to qualify next morning
for surgical assistance.

"Out with it!" roared my father, as I unclosed the foldings of the
paper; "What is the signature? I remember that my uncle Hector always
looked at the name attached to a letter when he unclosed the post-bag;
and if the handwriting looked like an attorney's he flung it, without
reading a line, into the fire."

"This letter, sir, is subscribed 'Selby Sly.'"

"Don't burn it, Frank, read. Well, there is one comfort that Selby
Sly shall have to-morrow evening a collection of aching ribs, if the
Hamiltons are not degenerated: read, man," and, as usual, there was a
running comment on the text.

"'Dublin,--March, 1818.

"'Colonel Hamilton,--Sir,

"'It is my melancholy duty to inform you--'"

"_That you have foreclosed the mortgage. Frank, if you don't break a
bone or two, I'll never acknowledge you again._"

"'That my honored and valued client and patroness, Mrs. Catharine
O'Gorman, suddenly departed this life at half-past six o'clock, P.M.,
yesterday evening, when drinking a glass of sherry, and holding sweet
and spiritual converse with the Reverend Carter Kettlewell.'"

"_It's all up, no doubt: the canting scoundrels have secured her--or,
as blackguard gamblers say, have 'made all' safe?_"

"'She has died intestate, although a deed, that would have
immortalized her memory, was engrossed, and ready for signature.
Within an hour after she went to receive her reward--'"

My father gave a loud hurrah! "_Blessed be Heaven that the rout came
before the old fool completed the New Zealand business!_"

"'As heir-at-law, you are in direct remainder, and the will, not being
executed, is merely wastepaper: but, from the draft, the intentions
of your inestimable aunt can clearly be discovered. Although not
binding in law, let me say there is such a thing as Christian
equity that should guide you. The New Zealand bequest, involving a
direct application of 10,000l. to meet the annual expenditure of
gospel-soldiers--there being a constant drain upon these sacred
harbingers of peace, from the native fancy of preferring a deviled
missionary to a stewed kangaroo--that portion of the intended
testament I would not press upon you. But the intentional behests of
500l. to the Rev. Carter Kettlewell, the same sum to myself, and an
annuity to Miss Grace Lightbody of 50l. a year, though not recoverable
in law, under these circumstances should be faithfully confirmed.

"'It may be gratifying to acquaint you with some particulars of the
last moments of your dear relative, and one of the most devout, nay,
I may use the term safely, evangelical elderly gentlewomen for whom I
have had the honor to transact business.'"

"_Stop, Frank. Pass over the detail. It might be too affecting._"

"'I await your directions for the funeral. My lamented friend and
client had erected a catacomb in the Siloam Chapel, and in the
minister's vault, and she frequently expressed a decided wish that
her dust might repose with faithful servants, who, in season and out
of season, fearlessly grappled with the man of sin, who is arrayed
in black, and the woman who sitteth on the seven hills, dressed in
scarlet.'"

"_Hang the canting vagabond--why not call people by their proper
titles; name Old Nick at once, and the lady whose soubriquet
is unmentionable, but who, report says, has a town residence in
Babylon._"

Constance and I laughed; my mother, as usual, looking demure and
dignified. Another twinge of the gout altogether demolished the
commander's temper.

"_Stop that scoundrel's jargon. Run your eye over the remainder, and
tell me what the fellow's driving at._"

I obeyed the order.

"Simply, sir, Mr. Sly desires to know whether you have any objection
to old Kitty taking peaceable possession of her catacomb in the Dublin
gospel-shop which she patronized, or would you prefer that she were
'pickled and sent home,' as Sir Lucius says."

"Heaven forbid that I should interfere with her expressed wishes,"
said my father. "I suppose there's 'snug lying' in Siloam; and there's
one thing certain, that the company who occupy the premises are quite
unobjectionable. Kitty will be safer there. Lord! if the gentleman in
black, or the red lady of the seven hills attempted a felonious entry
on her bivouac, what a row the saintly inmates would kick up! It would
be a regular 'guard, turn out!' And what chance would scarlatina and
old clooty have? No, no, she'll be snug there in her sentry-box. What
a blessed escape from ruin! Mary, dear, make me another tumbler, and
d----n the gout!"--he had a sharp twinge. "I'll drink 'here's luck!'
Frank, go pack your kit, and instead of demolishing Selby Sly, see
Kitty decently sodded. Your mother, Constance, and myself will rumble
after you to town by easy stages. I wonder how aunt Catherine will
cut up. If she has left as much cash behind as she has lavished good
advice in her parting epistle, by--" and my father did ejaculate
a regular rasper--"I'll re-purchase the harriers, as I have got
a whisper that poor Dick was cleaned out the last meeting at the
Curragh, and the pack is in the market."


       *       *       *       *       *

CHAPTER III.

  "I have _tremor cordis_ on me."--_Winter's Tale_.

It is a queer world after all; manifold are its ups and downs,
and life is but a medley of fair promise, excited hope, and bitter
disappointment.

Never did a family party start for the metropolis with gayer hearts,
or on a more agreeable mission. Our honored relative (_authoritate_
the Methodist Magazine) had "shuffled off" in the best marching order
imaginable. Before the rout had arrived, her house had been perfectly
arranged, but her will, "wo [**Unreadable] day," was afterward found
to be too informal. It was hinted that the mission to Timbuctoo,
although not legally binding on the next of kin, should be considered
a sacred injunction and first lien on the estates. In a religious
light, according to the Reverend Mr. Sharpington, formalities were
unnecessary; but my father observed, _sotto voce_, in reply, and in
the plain vernacular of the day, what in modern times would have been
more figuratively expressed, namely, "Did not the gospel-trumpeters
wish they might get it!" The kennel, whose door for two years had not
been opened, was again unlocked; whitewashing and reparations were
extensively ordered; a prudent envoy was dispatched to re-purchase the
pack, which, _rebut egenis_, had been laid down, and the colonel, in
his "mind's eye," and oblivious of cloth shoes, once more was up to
his knees in leather,[2] and taking everything in the shape of fence
and brook, just as the Lord pleased to dispose them.

A cellar census was next decided on, and by a stout exertion, and at
the same time with a heavy heart, my father hobbled down the stone
steps and entered an underground repertorium, which once he took
much pride in visiting. Alas! its glory had departed; the empty bins
were richly fringed with cobwebbed tapestries, and silently admitted
a non-occupancy by bottles for past years. The colonel sighed. He
remembered his grandfather's parting benediction. Almost in infancy,
malignant fever within one brief week had deprived him of both
parents, and a chasm in direct succession was thus created. A summons
from school was unexpectedly received, and although the young heir and
the courier borrowed liberally from the night, it was past cock-crow
when they reached their destination.

The old gentleman was "in articulo," or as sailors would say, he was
already "hove short," and ready to trip his anchor.

"Up stairs, master Frank," exclaimed the old butler to my father, "the
general will be in heaven in half an hour, glory to the Virgin!"

I shall never forget my fathers description of the parting scene.
Propped by half a dozen pillows, the old man gasped hard for breath,
but the appearance of his grandson appeared to rouse the dormant
functions of both mind and body; and although there were considerable
breaks between each sentence, he thus delivered his valedictory
advice. Often has the departure of Commodore Trunnion been recalled to
memory by the demise of my honored relative.

"Frank," said the old fox-hunter to my father, "the summons is come,
as we used to say when I was a dragoon, to 'boot and saddle.' I told
the doctor a month ago that my wind was touched, but he would have it
that I was only a whistler."

He paused for breath.

"The best horse that ever bore pig-skin on his back, won't stand too
many calls--ugh! ugh! ugh!"

Another pause.

"I bless God that my conscience is tolerably clean. Widow or orphan I
never wronged intentionally, and the heaviest item booked against me
overhead is Dick Sommer's death. Well, he threw a decanter, as was
proved upon the trial to the satisfaction of judge and jury; and you
know, after that, nothing but the daisy[3] would do. I leave you four
honest weight carriers, and as sweet a pack as ever ran into a red
rascal without a check. Don't be extravagant in my wake."

Another interruption in the parting address.

"A fat heifer, half a dozen sheep, and the puncheon of Rasserea that's
in the cellar untouched, should do the thing genteelly. It's only
a couple of nights you know, as you'll sod me the third morning.
Considering that I stood two contests for the county, an action for
false imprisonment by a gauger, never had a lock on the hall door,
kept ten horses at rack and manger, and lived like a gentleman. To the
£5,000 for which my poor father dipped the estate I have only after
all added £10,000 more, which, as Attorney Rowland said, showed that I
was a capital manager. Well, you can pay both off easily."

Another fit of coughing distressed my grandfather sorely.

"Go to the waters--any place in England will answer. If you will stand
tallow or tobacco, you can in a month or two wipe old scores off the
slate. Sir Roderick O'Boyl, when he was so hard pushed as to be driven
over the bridge of Athlone in a coffin to avoid the coroner,[4] didn't
he, and in less than a twelvemonth too, bring over a sugar-baker's
daughter, pay off encumbrances, and live and die like a gentleman as
he was every inch? I have not much to leave you but some advice, Frank
dear, and after I slip my girths remember what I say. When you're
likely to get into trouble, always take the bull by the horns, and
when you're in for a stoup, never mix liquors or sit with your back
to the fire. If you're obliged to go out, be sure to fight across the
ridges, and if you can manage it, with the sun at your back. Ugh! ugh!
ugh!"

"In crossing a country, choose the--"

Another coughing fit, and a long hiatus in valedictory instructions
succeeded, but the old man, as they say in hunting, got second wind,
and thus proceeded--

"Never fence a ditch when a gate is open--avoid late hours and
attorneys--and the less you have to say to doctors, all the
better--ugh! ugh! ugh! When it's your misfortune to be in company
with an old maid--I mean a reputed one--ugh! ugh! always be on the
muzzle--for in her next issue of scandal she'll be sure to quote
you as her authority. If a saint comes in your way, button your
breeches-pocket, and look now and then at your watch-chain. I'm
brought nearly to a fix, for bad bellows won't stand long speeches."

Here the ripple in his speech, which disturbed Commodore Trunnion so
much, sorely afflicted my worthy grandfather. He muttered something
that a snaffle was the safest bit a sinner could place faith
in--assumed the mantle of prophecy--foretold, as it would appear,
troublous times to be in rapid advent--and inculcated that faith
should be placed in heaven, and powder kept very dry.

He strove to rally and reiterate his counsels for my father's
guidance, but strength was wanting. The story of a life was told--he
swayed on one side from the supporting pillows--and in a minute more
the struggle was over. Well, peace to his ashes! We'll leave him in
the family vault, and start with a party for the metropolis, who, in
the demise of our honored kinswoman, had sustained a heavy loss, but
notwithstanding, endured the visitation with Christian fortitude and
marvelous resignation.

_Place au dames_. My lady-mother had been a beauty in her day, and
for a dozen years after her marriage, had seen her name proudly and
periodically recorded by George Faukiner, in the thing he called
a journal, which, in size, paper, and typography, might emulate a
necrologic affair cried loudly through the streets of London, "i' the
afternoon" of a hanging Monday, containing much important information,
whether the defunct felon had made his last breakfast simply from tea
and toast, or whether Mr. Sheriff ---- had kindly added mutton-chops
to the _déjeûner_, while his amiable lady furnished new-laid eggs from
the family corn-chandler. But to return to my mother.

Ten years had passed, and her name had not been hallooed from groom
to groom on a birth-day night, while the pearl neck-lace, a bridal
present, and emeralds, an heir-loom from her mother, remained in
strict abeyance. Now and again their cases were unclosed, and a
sigh accompanied the inspection--for sad were their reminiscences.
_Olim_--her name was chronicled on Patrick's night, by every Castle
reporter. They made, it is to be lamented, as Irish reporters will
make, sad mistakes at times. The once poor injured lady had been
attired in canary-colored lute-string, and an ostrich plume remarkable
for its enormity while she, the libeled one, had been becomingly
arrayed in blue bombazine, and of any plumage imported from Araby the
blest, was altogether innocent.

A general family movement was decided on. My aunt's demise required,
my father's presence in the metropolis. My mother's wardrobe demanded
an extensive addition,--for, sooth to say, her costume had become, as
far as fashion went, rather antediluvian. Constance announced that a
back-tooth called for professional interference. May heaven forgive
her if she fibbed!--for a dental display of purer ivory never slily
solicited a lover's kiss, than what her joyous laugh exhibited. My
poor mother entered a protest against the "_spes ultima gregis_,"
meaning myself, being left at home in times so perilous, and when
all who could effect it were hurrying into garrisoned towns, and
abandoning, for crowded lodgings, homes whose superior comforts were
abated by their insecurity. The order for a general movement was
consequently issued, and on the 22d of June we commenced our journey
to the capital.

With all the precision of a commissary-general, my father had
regulated the itinerary. Here, we were to breakfast, there, dine,
and this hostelrie was to be honored with our sojourn during the
night-season. Man wills, fate decrees, and in our case the old saw was
realized.

It will be necessary to remark that a conspiracy that had been
hatching for several years, from unforeseen circumstances had now
been prematurely exploded. My father, with more _hardiesse_ than
discretion, declined following the general example of abandoning
his home for the comparative safety afforded by town and city.
Coming events threw their shadow before, and too unequivocally to
be mistaken, but still he sported _deaf adder_. In confidential
communication with Dublin Castle, all known there touching the
intended movements of the disaffected was not concealed from him.
He was, unfortunately, the reverse of an alarmist--proud of his
popularity--read his letters--drew his inferences--and came to
prompt conclusions. Through his lawyer, a house ready-furnished in
Leeson-street was secured. His plate and portable valuables were
forwarded to Dublin, and reached their destination safely. Had our
hearts been where the treasure was, we should, as in prudence bound,
have personally accompanied the silver spoons--but the owner, like
many an abler commander, played the waiting game too long. A day
sooner would have saved some trouble--but my father had carried habits
of absolute action into all the occurrences of daily life. Indecision
is, in character, a sad failure, but his weak point ran directly in
an opposite direction. He thought, weighed matters hastily, decided in
five minutes, and that decision once made, _coute qui coute_, must be
carried out to the very letter. He felt all the annoyance of leaving
the old roof-tree and its household gods--conflicting statements from
the executive--false information from local traitors--an assurance
from the priest that no immediate danger might be expected--these,
united to a yearning after home, rendered his operations rather
Fabian. The storm burst, however, while he still hesitated, or rather,
the burning of the mail-coaches and the insurrection were things
simultaneous--and my father afterward discovered that he, like many a
wiser man, had waited a day too long.

Whether the colonel might have dallied still longer is mere
conjecture, when a letter marked "haste" was delivered by an orderly
dragoon, and in half an hour the "leathern conveniency" was rumbling
down the avenue.

The journey of the Wronghead family to London--if I recollect the
pleasant comedy that details it correctly--was effected without the
occurrence of any casualty beyond some dyspeptic consequences to the
cook from over-eating. Would that our migration to the metropolis had
been as fortunately accomplished!

We started early; and on reaching the town where we were to breakfast
and exchange our own for post-horses, found the place in feverish
excitement. A hundred anxious inquirers were collected in the
market-place. Three hours beyond the usual time of the mail-delivery
had elapsed,--wild rumors were spread abroad,--a general rising
in Leinster was announced,--and the non-arrival of the post had an
ominous appearance, and increased the alarm.

We hurried over the morning meal,--the horses were being put to,--the
ladies already in the carriage,--when a dragoon rode in at speed, and
the worst apprehensions we had entertained were more than realized
by this fresh arrival. The mail-coach had been plundered and burned,
while everywhere, north, east, and west, as it was stated, the rebels
were in open insurrection,--all communication with Dublin was cut
off,--and any attempt to reach the metropolis would have been only an
act of madness.

Another express from the south came in. Matters there were even worse.
The rebels had risen _en masse_ and committed fearful devastation.
The extent of danger in attempting to reach the capital, or return to
his mansion, were thus painfully balanced; and my father considering
that, as sailors say, the choice rested between the devil and the deep
sea, decided on remaining where he was, as the best policy under all
circumstances.

The incompetency of the Irish engineering staff, and a defective
commissariat, at that time was most deplorable; and although the town
of ---- was notoriously disaffected, the barrack chosen, temporarily,
to accommodate the garrison--a company of militia--was a thatched
building, two stories high, and perfectly commanded by houses in front
and rear. The captain in charge of the detachment knew nothing of his
trade, and had been hoisted to a commission in return for the use of
a few freeholders. The Irish read character quickly. They saw at a
glance the marked imbecility of the devoted man; and by an imposition,
from which any but an idiot would have recoiled, trapped the silly
victim and, worse still, sacrificed those who had been unhappily
intrusted to his direction.

That the express had ridden hard was evident from the distressed
condition of his horse; and the intelligence he brought deranged my
father's plans entirely. Any attempt either to proceed or to return,
as it appeared, would be hazardous alike; and nothing remained but to
halt where he was, until more certain information touching the rebel
operations should enable him to decide which would be the safest
course of action to pursue. He did not communicate the extent of his
apprehensions to the family,--affected an air of indifference he did
not feel,--introduced himself to the commanding officer on parade, and
returned to the inn in full assurance that, in conferring a commission
on a man so utterly ignorant of the trade he had been thrust into as
Captain --- appeared to be, "the King's press had been abused most
damnably."

The Colonel had a singular quality,--that of personal remembrance; and
even at the distance of years he would recall a man to memory, even
had the former acquaintance been but casual. Passing through the inn
yard, his quick eye detected in the ostler a _quondam_ stable-boy. To
avoid the consequences attendant on a fair riot which had ended, "_ut
mos est_," in homicide, the ex-groom had fled the country, and, as it
was reported and believed, sought an asylum in the "land of the free"
beyond the Atlantic, which, privileged like the Cave of Abdullum,
conveniently flings her stripes and stars over all that are in debt
and all that are in danger. Little did the fugitive groom desire now
to recall "lang syne," and renew a former acquaintance. But my father
was otherwise determined; and stepping carelessly up, he tapped his
old domestic on the shoulder, and at once addressed him by name.

The ostler turned deadly pale, but in a moment the Colonel dispelled
his alarm.

"You have nothing to apprehend from me, Pat. He who struck the blow,
which was generally laid to your charge, confessed when dying that
he was the guilty man, and that you were innocent of all blame beyond
mixing in the affray."

Down popped the suspected culprit on his knees, and in a low but
earnest voice he returned thanks to heaven.

"I understood you had gone to America, or I would have endeavored in
some way to have apprised you, that a murderer by report, you were but
a rioter in reality."

"I did go there. Colonel, but I could not rest. I knew that I was
innocent: but who would believe my oath? I might have done well enough
there; but I don't know why, the ould country was always at my heart,
and I used to cry when I thought of the mornings that I whipped in the
hounds, and the nights that I danced merrily in the servants' hall,
when piper or fiddler came,--and none left the house without meat,
drink, and money, and a blessing on the hand that gave it."

"What brought you here, so close to your former home, and so likely to
be recognized?"

"To see if I couldn't clear myself, and get ye'r honor to take me
back. Mark that dark man! He's owner of this horse. Go to the bottom
of the garden, and I'll be with you when he returns to the house
again."

My father walked carelessly away, unclosed the garden gate, and left
the dark stranger with his former whipper-in. Throwing himself on a
bench in a rude summer-house, he began to think over the threatening
aspect of affairs, and devise, if he could, some plan to deliver his
family from the danger, which on every side it became too evident was
alarmingly impending.

He was speedily rejoined by his old domestic.

"Marked ye that dark man well?"

"Yes; and a devilish suspicious-looking gentleman he is."

"His looks do not belie him. No matter whatever may occur through it,
you must quit the town directly. Call for post-horses, and as mine is
the first turn, I'll be postillion. Don't show fear or suspicion--and
leave the rest to me. Beware of the landlord--he's a colonel of
the rebels, and a bloodier-minded villain is not unhanged. Hasten
in--every moment is worth gold--and when the call comes, the horses
will be to the carriage in the cracking of a whip, Don't notice me,
good or bad."

He spoke, hopped over the garden hedge to reach the back of the
stables unperceived, while I proceeded along the gate; it was opened
by the host in person. He started; but, with assumed indifference,
observed, "What sad news the dragoon has brought!"

"I don't believe the half of it. These things are always exaggerated.
Landlord, I'll push on a stage or two, and the worst that can happen
is to return, should the route prove dangerous. I know that here I
have a safe shelter to fall back upon."

"Safe!" exclaimed the innkeeper. "All the rabble in the country would
not venture within miles of where ye are; and, notwithstanding bad
reports, there's not a loyaler barony in the county. Faith! Colonel,
although it may look very like seeking custom, I would advise you
to keep your present quarters. You know the old saying, 'Men may
go farther and fare worse.' I had a lamb killed when I heard of the
rising, and specially for your honor's dinner. Just look into the barn
as ye pass. Upon my conscience! it's a curiosity!"

He turned back with me; but before we reached the place, the dark
stranger I had seen before beckoned from a back window.

"Ha! an old and worthy customer wants me."

Placing his crooked finger in his mouth. he gave a loud and piercing
whistle. The _quondam_ whipper appeared at a stable-door with a
horse-brush in his hand.

"Pat, show his honor that born beauty I killed for him this morning."

"Coming, Mr. Scully--I beg ye'r honor's pardon--but ye know that
business must be minded," he said, and hurried off.

No man assumes the semblance of indifference, and masks his feelings
more readily than an Irishman, and Pat Loftus was no exception to his
countrymen. When summoned by the host's whistle, he came to the door
lilting a planxty merrily,--but when he re-entered the stable, the
melody ceased, and his countenance became serious.

"I hid behind the straw, yonder, Colonel, and overheard every syllable
that passed, and under the canopy bigger villains are not than the two
who are together now. There's no time for talking--all's ready," and
he pointed to the harnessed post-horses, "Go in, keep an eye open, and
close mouth--order the carriage round--all is packed--and when we're
clear of the town I'll tell you more."

When my father's determination was made known, feelingly did the host
indicate the danger of the attempt, and to his friendly remonstrances
against wayfaring, Mr. Scully raised a warning voice. But my father
was decisive--Pat Loftus trotted to the door--some light luggage was
placed in the carriage, and three brace of pistols deposited in its
pockets. A meaning look was interchanged between the innkeeper and his
fellow-guest.

"Colonel," said the former, "I hope you will not need the tools. If
you do, the fault will be all your own."

"If required," returned my father, "I'll use them to the best
advantage."

The villains interchanged a smile.

"Pat," said the host to the postillion, "you know the safest road--do
what I bid ye--and keep his honor out of trouble if ye can."

"Go on," shouted my father--the whip cracked smartly, and off rolled
the carriage.

For half a mile we proceeded at a smart pace, until at the junction of
the three roads, Loftus took the one which the finger-post indicated
was not the Dublin one. My father called out to stop, but the
postillion hurried on, until high hedges, and a row of ash-trees at
both sides, shut in the view. He pulled up suddenly.

"Am I not an undutiful servant to disobey the orders of so good
a master as Mr. Dogherty? First, I have not taken the road he
recommended--and, secondly, instead of driving this flint into a
horse's frog, I have carried it in my pocket," and he jerked the stone
away.

"Look to your pistols, Colonel. In good old times your arms, I
suspect, would have been found in better order."

The weapons were examined, and every pan had been saturated with
water. "Never mind, I'll clean them well at night: it's not the first
time. But, see the dust yonder! I dare not turn back, and I am half
afraid to go on. Ha--glory to the Virgin! dragoons, ay, and, as I see
now, they are escorting Lord Arlington's coach. Have we not the luck
of thousands?"

He cracked his whip, and at the junction of a cross-road fell in with
and joined the travelers. My father was well known to his lordship,
who expressed much pleasure that the journey to the capital should be
made in company.

Protected by relays of cavalry, we reached the city in safety, not,
however, without one or two hair-breadth escapes from molestation.
Everything around told that the insurrection had broken out:
church-bells rang, dropping shots now and then were heard, and houses,
not very distant, were wrapped in flames. Safely, however, we passed
through manifold alarms, and at dusk entered the fortified barrier
erected on one of the canal bridges, which was jealously guarded by a
company of Highlanders and two six-pounders. Brief shall be a summary
of what followed. While the tempest of rebellion raged, we remained
safely in the capital. Constance and I were over head and ears in
love; but another passion struggled with me for mastery. Youth is
always pugnacious; like Norval,

  "I had heard of battles, and had longed
  To follow to the field some warlike"

colonel of militia, and importuned my father to obtain a commission,
and, like Laertes, "wrung a slow consent." The application was made;
and, soon after breakfast, the butler announced that my presence was
wanted in the drawing-room. I repaired thither, and there found my
father, his fair dame, and my cousin Constance.

"Well, Frank, I have kept my promise, and, in a day or two, I shall
have a captain's commission for you. Before, however, I place myself
under an obligation to Lord Carhampton, let me propose an alternative
for your selection."

I shook my head. "And what may that be, sir?"

"A wife."

"A wife!" I exclaimed.

"Yes, that is the plain offer. You shall have, however, a free liberty
of election: read that letter."

I threw my eye over it hastily. It was from the Lord Lieutenant's
secretary, to say that his excellency felt pleasure in placing a
company in the ---- militia, at Colonel Hamilton's disposal. "There is
the road to fame open as a turnpike trust. Come hither, Constance, and
here is the alternative." She looked at me archly, I caught her to my
heart, and kissed her red lips.

"Father!"

"Well, Frank."

"You may write a polite letter to the Castle, and decline the
commission."

Half a century has passed, but ninety-eight is still, by oral
communications, well known to the Irish peasant; and would that its
horrors carried with them salutary reminiscences! But to my own story.

Instead of fattening beeves, planting trees, clapping vagabonds "i'
th' stocks," and doing all and everything that appertaineth to a
country gentleman, and also, the queen's poor esquire, I might have,
until the downfall of Napoleon, and the reduction of the militia,
events cotemporaneous, smelt powder on the Phoenix Park on field days,
and like Hudibras, of pleasant memory, at the head of a charge of
foot, "rode forth a coloneling." In place, however, of meddling with
cold iron, I yielded to "metal more attractive," and in three months
became a Benedict, and in some dozen more a papa.

In the mean time, rebellion was bloodily put down, and on my lady's
recovery, my father, whose yearning for a return to the old roof-tree
was irresistible, prepared for our departure from the metropolis.

Curiously enough, we passed through Prosperous, exactly on the
anniversary of the day when we had so providentially effected an
invasion from certain destruction. Were aught required to elicit
gratitude for a fortunate escape, two objects, and both visible
from the inn windows, would have been sufficient. One was a mass
of blackened ruins--the scathed walls of the barrack, in which the
wretched garrison had been so barbarously done to death: the other
a human head impaled upon a spike on the gable of the building. That
blanched skull had rested on the shoulders of our traitor host, and
we, doomed to "midnight murder," were mercifully destined to witness a
repulsive, but just evidence, that Providence interposes often between
the villain and the victim.

I am certain that in my physical construction, were an analysis
practicable, small would be the amount of heroic proportions which
the most astute operator would detect. I may confess the truth, and
say, that in "lang syne," any transient ebullition of military ardor
vanished at a glance from Constance's black eye. The stream of time
swept on, and those that were, united their dust with those that had
been. In a short time my letter of readiness may be expected; and I
shall, in nature's course, after the last march, as Byron says, ere
long

  "Take my rest."

And will the succession end with me? Tell it not to Malthes, nor
whisper it to Harriet Martineau. There is no prospect of advertising
for the next of kin, i.e. if five strapping boys and a couple of the
fair sex may be considered a sufficient security.

[Footnote 2: An Irish term for wearing jockey-boots.]

[Footnote 3: An Irish gentleman shot in a duel in lang syne, was
poetically described as having been left "quivering on a daisy."]

[Footnote 4: In Ireland this functionary's operations are not confined
to the dead, but extend very disagreeably to the living.]

       *       *       *       *       *

No money is better spent than what is laid out for domestic
satisfaction. A man is pleased that his wife is dressed as well
as other people, and the wife is pleased that she is so well
dressed.--_Dr. Johnson._

       *       *       *       *       *


THE IVORY MINE:

A TALE OF THE FROZEN SEA.


IV.--THE FROZEN SEA.

Ivan soon found himself received into the best society of the place.
All were glad to welcome the adventurous trader from Yakoutsk; and
when he intimated that his boxes of treasure, his brandy and tea, and
rum and tobacco, were to be laid out in the hire of dogs and sledges,
he found ample applicants, though, from the very first, all refused
to accompany his party as guardians of the dogs. Sakalar, however,
who had expected this, was nothing daunted, but, bidding Ivan amuse
himself as best he could, undertook all the preparations. But Ivan
found as much pleasure in teaching what little he knew to Kolina as
in frequenting the fashionable circles of Kolimsk. Still, he could not
reject the numerous polite invitations to evening parties and dances
which poured upon him. I have said evening parties, for though there
was no day, yet still the division of the hours was regularly kept,
and parties began at five P.M., to end at ten. There was singing and
dancing, and gossip and tea, of which each individual would consume
ten or twelve large cups; in fact, despite the primitive state of the
inhabitants, and the vicinity to the Polar Sea, these assemblies very
much resembled in style those of Paris and London. The costumes, the
saloons, and the hours, were different, while the manners were less
refined, but the facts were the same.

When the carnival came round, Ivan, who was a little vexed at the
exclusion of Kolina from the fashionable Russian society, took care
to let her have the usual amusement of sliding down a mountain of ice,
which she did to her great satisfaction. But he took care also at all
times to devote to her his days, while Sakalar wandered about from
yourte to yourte in search of hints and information for the next
winter's journey. He also hired the requisite _nartas_, or sledges,
and the thirty-nine dogs which were to draw them, thirteen to each.
The he bargained for a large stock of frozen and dry fish for the
dogs, and other provisions for themselves. But what mostly puzzled
the people were his assiduous efforts to get a man to go with them
who would harness twenty dogs to an extra sledge. To the astonishment
of everybody, three young men at last volunteered, and three extra
sledges were then procured.

The summer soon came round, and then Ivan and his friends started out
at once with the hunters, and did their utmost to be useful. As the
natives of Kolimsk went during the chase a long distance toward Cape
Sviatoi, the spot where the adventurers were to quit the land and
venture on the Frozen Sea, they took care, at the furthest extremity
of their hunting trip, to leave a deposit of provisions. They erected
a small platform, which they covered with drift wood, and on this
they placed the dried fish. Above were laid heavy stones, and every
precaution used to ward off the isatis and the glutton. Ivan during
the summer added much to his stock of hunting knowledge.

At length the winter came round once more, and the hour arrived so
long desired. The sledges were ready--six in number, and loaded as
heavily as they could bear. But for so many dogs, and for so many
days, it was quite certain they must economize most strictly; while
it was equally certain, if no bears fell in their way on the journey,
that they must starve, if they did not perish otherwise on the
terrible Frozen Sea. Each narta, loaded with eight hundredweight of
provisions and its driver, was drawn by six pair of dogs and a leader.
They took no wood, trusting implicitly to Providence for this most
essential article. They purposed following the shores of the Frozen
Sea to Cape Sviatoi, because on the edge of the sea they hoped to
find, as usual, plenty of wood, floated to the shore during the brief
period when the ice was broken and the vast ocean in part free. One of
the sledges was less loaded than the rest with provisions, because it
bore a tent, an iron plate for fire on the ice, a lamp, and the few
cooking utensils of the party.

Early one morning in the month of November--the long night still
lasting--the six sledges took their departure. The adventurers had
every day exercised themselves with the dogs for some hours, and were
pretty proficient. Sakalar drove the first team, Kolina the second,
and Ivan the third. The Kolimak men came afterward. They took their
way along the snow toward the mouth of the Tchouktcha river. The first
day's journey brought them to the extreme limits of vegetation, after
which they entered on a vast and interminable plain of snow, along
which the nartas moved rapidly. But the second day. in the afternoon,
a storm came on. The snow fell in clouds, the wind blew with a
bitterness of cold as searching to the form of man as the hot blast of
the desert, and the dogs appeared inclined to halt. But Sakalar kept
on his way toward a hillock in the distance, where the guides spoke of
a hut of refuge. But before a dozen yards could be crossed, the sledge
of Kolina was overturned, and a halt became necessary.

Ivan was the first to raise his fair companion from the ground; and
then with much difficulty--their hands, despite all the clothes,
being half-frozen--they again put the nartas in condition to proceed.
Sakalar had not stopped, but was seen in the distance unharnessing his
sledge, and then poking about in a huge heap of snow. He was searching
for the hut, which had been completely buried in the drift. In a few
minutes the whole six were at work, despite the blast, while the dogs
were scratching holes for themselves in the soft snow, within which
they soon lay snug, their noses only out of the hole, while over this
the sagacious brutes put the tip of their long bushy tails.

At the end of an hour well employed, the hut was freed inside from
snow, and a fire of stunted bushes with a few logs lit in the middle.
Here the whole party cowered, almost choked with the thick smoke,
which, however, was less painful than the blast from the icy sea. The
smoke escaped with difficulty, because the roof was still covered with
firm snow, and the door was merely a hole to crawl through. At last,
however, they got the fire to the state of red embers, and succeeded
in obtaining a plentiful supply of tea and food: after which their
limbs being less stiff, they fed the dogs.

While they were attending to the dogs, the storm abated, and was
followed by a magnificent aurora borealis. It rose in the north, a
sort of semi-arch of light; and then across the heavens, in almost
every direction, darted columns of a luminous character. The light was
as bright as that of the moon in its full. There were jets of lurid
red light in some places, which disappeared and came again; while
there being a dead calm after the storm, the adventurers heard a kind
of rustling sound in the distance, faint and almost imperceptible,
and yet believed to be the rush of the air in the sphere of the
phenomenon. A few minutes more and all had disappeared.

After a hearty meal, the wanderers launched into the usual topics
of conversation in those regions. Sakalar was not a boaster,
but the young men from Nijnei-Kolimsk were possessed of the
usual characteristics of hunters and fishermen. They told with
considerable vigor and effect long stories of their adventures, most
exaggerated--and when not impossible, most improbable--of bears killed
in hand to hand combat, of hundreds of deer slain in the crossing of
a river, and of multitudinous heaps of fish drawn in one cast of a
seine: and then, wrapped in their thick clothes and every one's feet
to the fire, the whole party soon slept. Ivan and Kolina, however,
held whispered converse together for a little while, but fatigue soon
overcame even them.

The next day they advanced still farther toward the pole, and on the
evening of the third camped within a few yards of the great Frozen
Sea. There it lay before them, scarcely distinguishable from the land.
As they looked upon it from a lofty eminence, it was hard to believe
that that was a sea before them. There was snow on the sea and snow on
the land: there were mountains on both, and huge drifts, and here and
there vast _polinas_--a space of soft, watery ice, which resembled the
lakes of Siberia. All was bitter, cold, sterile, bleak, and chilling
to the eye, which vainly sought a relief. The prospect of a journey
over this desolate plain, intersected in every direction by ridges
of mountain icebergs, full of crevices, with soft salt ice here and
there, was dolorous indeed; and yet the heart of Ivan quaked not. He
had now what he sought in view; he knew there was land beyond, and
riches, and fame.

A rude tent, with snow piled round the edge to keep it firm, was
erected. It needed to be strongly pitched, for in these regions the
blast is more quick and sudden than in any place perhaps in the known
world, pouring down along the fields of ice with terrible force direct
from the unknown caverns of the northern pole. Within the tent, which
was of double reindeer-skin, a fire was lit; while behind a huge rock,
and under cover of the sledges, lay the dogs. As usual, after a hearty
meal, and hot tea--drunk perfectly scalding--the party retired to
rest. About midnight all were awoke by a sense of oppression and
stifling heat. Sakalar rose, and by the light of the remaining
embers scrambled to the door. It was choked up by snow. The hunter
immediately began to shovel it from the narrow hole through which they
entered or left the hut, and then groped his way out. The snow was
falling so thick and fast that the traveling yourte was completely
buried, and the wind being--directly opposite to the door, the snow
had drifted round and concealed the aperture.

The dogs now began to howl fearfully. This was too serious a warning
to be disdained. They smelt the savage bear of the icy seas, which in
turn had been attracted to them by its sense of smelling. Scarcely
had the sagacious animals given tongue, when Sakalar, through the
thick-falling snow and amid the gloom, saw a dull heavy mass rolling
directly toward the tent. He leveled his gun, and fired, after which
he seized a heavy steel wood-axe, and stood ready. The animal had at
first halted, but next minute he came on growling furiously. Ivan and
Kolina now both fired, when the animal turned and ran. But the dogs
were now round him, and Sakalar behind them. One tremendous blow of
his axe finished the huge beast, and there he lay in the snow. The
dogs then abandoned him, refusing to eat fresh bear's meat, though,
when frozen, they gladly enough accept it.

The party again sought rest, after lighting an oil-lamp with a thick
wick, which, in default of the fire, diffused a tolerable amount
of warmth in a small place occupied by six people. But they did not
sleep; for though one of the bears was killed, the second of the
almost invariable couple was probably near, and the idea of such
vicinity was anything but agreeable. These huge quadrupeds have been
often known to enter a hut and stifle all its inhabitants. The night
was therefore far from refreshing, and at an earlier hour than usual
all were on foot. Every morning the same routine was followed: hot
tea, without sugar or milk, was swallowed to warm the body; then a
meal, which took the place of dinner, was cooked and devoured; then
the dogs were fed, and then the sledges, which had been inclined on
one side, were placed horizontally. This was always done to water
their keel, to use a nautical phrase; for this water freezing they
glided along all the faster. A portion of the now hard-frozen bear was
given to the dogs, and the rest placed on the sledges, after the skin
had been secured toward making a new covering at night.

This day's journey was half on the land, half on the sea, according as
the path served. It was generally very rough, and the sledges made but
slow way. The dogs, too, had coverings put on their feet, and on every
other delicate place, which made them less agile. In ordinary cases,
on a smooth surface, it is not very difficult to guide a team of
dogs, when the leader is a first-rate animal. But this is an essential
point, otherwise it is impossible to get along. Every time the dogs
hit on the track of a bear, or fox, or other animal, their hunting
instincts are developed: away they dart like mad, leaving the line of
march, and in spite of all the efforts of the driver, begin the chase.
But if the front dog be well trained, he dashes on on one side, in a
totally opposite direction, smelling and barking as if he had a new
track. If his artifice succeeds, the whole team dart away after him,
and speedily losing the scent, proceed on their journey.

Sakalar, who still kept ahead of the party, when making a wide circuit
out at sea about midday, at the foot of a steep hill of rather rough
ice, found his dogs suddenly increasing their speed, but in the right
direction. To this he had no objection, though it was very doubtful
what was beyond. However, the dogs darted ahead with terrific
rapidity, until they reached the summit of the hill. The ice was here
very rough and salt, which impeded the advance of the sledge: but
off are the dogs, down a very steep descent, furiously tugging at
the sledge-halter, till away they fly like lightning. The harness had
broken off, and Sakalar remained alone on the crest of the hill. He
leaped off the nartas, and stood looking at it with the air of a man
stunned. The journey seemed checked violently. Next instant, his gun
in hand, he followed the dogs right down the hill, dashing away too
like a madman, in his long hunting-skates. But the dogs were out
of sight, and Sakalar soon found himself opposed by a huge wall of
ice. He looked back; he was wholly out of view of his companions. To
reconnoiter, he ascended the wall as best he could, and then looked
down into a sort of circular hollow of some extent, where the ice was
smooth and even watery.

He was about to turn away, when his sharp eye detected something
moving, and all his love of the chase was at once aroused. He
recognized the snow-cave of a huge bear. It was a kind of cavern,
caused by the falling together of two pieces of ice, with double
issue. Both apertures the bear had succeeded in stopping up, after
breaking a hole in the thin ice of the sheltered _polina_, or sheet
of soft ice. Here the cunning animal lay in wait. How long he had been
lying it was impossible to say, but almost as Sakalar crouched down
to watch, a seal came to the surface, and lay against the den of its
enemy to breathe. A heavy paw was passed through the hole, and the
sea-cow was killed in an instant. A naturalist would have admired
the wit of the ponderous bear, and passed on; but the Siberian hunter
knows no such thought, and as the animal issued forth to seize his
prey, a heavy ball, launched with unerring aim, laid him low.

Sakalar now turned away in search of his companions, whose aid was
required to secure a most useful addition to their store of food; and
as he did so, he heard a distant and plaintive howl. He hastened in
the direction, and in a quarter of an hour came to the mouth of a
narrow gut between two icebergs. The stick of the harness had caught
in the fissure, and checked the dogs, who were barking with rage.
Sakalar caught the bridle, which had been jerked out of his hand,
and turned the dogs round. The animals followed his guidance, and he
succeeded, after some difficulty, in bringing them to where lay his
game. He then fastened the bear and seal, both dead and frozen even in
this short time, and joined his companions.

For several days the same kind of difficulties had to be overcome, and
then they reached the _sayba_, where the provisions had been placed in
the summer. It was a large rude box, erected on piles, and the whole
stock was found safe. As there was plenty of wood in this place they
halted to rest the dogs and re-pack the sledges. The tent was pitched,
and they all thought of repose. They were now about wholly to quit the
land, and to venture in a north-westerly direction on the Frozen Sea.

       *       *       *       *       *

V.--ON THE ICE.

Despite the fire made on the iron plate in the middle of the tent,
our adventurers found the cold at this point of their journey most
poignant. It was about Christmas; but the exact time of year had
little to do with the matter. The wind was northerly, and keen: and
they often at night had to rise and promote circulation by a good run
on the snow. But early on the third day all was ready for a start.
The sun was seen that morning on the edge of the horizon for a short
while, and promised soon to give them days. Before them were a line
of icebergs, seemingly an impenetrable wall; but it was necessary
to brave them. The dogs, refreshed by two days of rest, started
vigorously, and a plain hill of ice being selected, they succeeded
in reaching its summit. Then before them lay a vast and seemingly
interminable plain. Along this the sledges ran with great speed; and
that day they advanced nearly thirty miles from the land, and camped
on the sea in a valley of ice.

It was a singular spot. Vast sugar-loaf hills of ice, as old perhaps
as the world, threw their lofty cones to the skies, on all sides,
while they rested doubtless on the bottom of the ocean. Every
fantastic form was there; there seemed in the distance cities and
palaces as white as chalk; pillars and reversed cones, pyramids and
mounds of every shape, valleys and lakes; and under the influence of
the optical delusions of the locality, green fields and meadows, and
tossing seas. Here the whole party rested soundly, and pushed on hard
the next day in search of land.

Several tracks of foxes and bears were now seen, but no animals
were discovered. The route, however, was changed. Every now and then
newly-formed fields of ice were met, which a little while back had
been floating. Lumps stuck up in every direction, and made the path
difficult. Then they reached a vast polinas, where the humid state of
the surface told that it was thin, and of recent formation. A stick
thrust into it went through. But the adventurers took the only course
left them. The dogs were placed abreast, and then, at a signal, were
launched upon the dangerous surface. They flew rather than ran. It was
necessary, for as they went, the ice cracked in every direction, but
always under the weight of the nartas, which were off before they
could be caught by the bubbling waters. As soon as the solid ice was
again reached, the party halted, deep gratitude to Heaven in their
hearts, and camped for the night.

But the weather had changed. What is called here the warm wind had
blown all day, and at night a hurricane came on. As the adventurers
sat smoking after supper, the ice beneath their feet trembled, shook,
and then fearful reports bursting on their ears, told them that the
sea was cracking in every direction. They had camped on an elevated
iceberg of vast dimensions, and were for the moment safe. But around
them they heard the rush of waters. The vast Frozen Sea was in one of
its moments of fury. In the deeper seas to the north it never freezes
firmly--in fact there is always an open sea, with floating bergs. When
a hurricane blows, these clear spaces become terribly agitated. Their
tossing waves and mountains of ice act on the solid plains, and break
them up at times. This was evidently the case now. About midnight our
travelers, whose anguish of mind was terrible, felt the great iceberg
afloat. Its oscillations were fearful. Sakalar alone preserved his
coolness. The men of Nijnei Kolimsk raved and tore their hair, crying
that they had been brought willfully to destruction; Kolina kneeled,
crossed herself, and prayed; while Ivan deeply reproached himself as
the cause of so many human beings encountering such awful peril. The
rockings of their icy raft were terrible. It was impelled hither and
thither by even huger masses. Now it remained on its first level, then
its surface presented an angle of nearly forty-five degrees, and it
seemed about to turn bottom up. All recommended themselves to God,
and awaited their fate. Suddenly they were rocked more violently than
ever, and were all thrown down by the shock. Then all was still.

The hurricane lulled, the wind shifted. snow began to fall, and the
prodigious plain of loose ice again lay quiescent. The bitter frost
soon cemented its parts once more, and the danger was over. The men
of Nijnei Kolimsk now insisted on an instant return; but Sakalar was
firm, and, though their halt had given them little rest, started as
the sun was seen above the horizon. The road was fearfully bad. All
was rough, disjointed, and almost impassable. But the sledges had
good whalebone keels, and were made with great care to resist such
difficulties. The dogs were kept moving all day, but when night came
they had made but little progress. But they rested in peace. Nature
was calm, and morning found them still asleep. But Sakalar was
indefatigable, and as soon as he had boiled a potful of snow, made
tea, and awoke his people.

They were now about to enter a labyrinth of _toroses_ or icebergs.
There was no plain ground within sight; but no impediment could be
attended to. Bears made these their habitual resorts, while the wolf
skulked every night round the camp, waiting their scanty leavings.
Every eye was stretched in search of game. But the road itself
required intense care, to prevent the sledges overturning. Toward the
afternoon they entered a narrow valley of ice full of drifted snow,
into which the dogs sank, and could scarcely move. At this instant two
enormous white bears presented themselves. The dogs sprang forward;
but the ground was too heavy for them. The hunters, however, were
ready. The bears marched boldly on as if savage from long fasting.
No time was to be lost. Sakalar and Ivan singled out each his animal.
Their heavy ounce balls struck both. The opponent of Sakalar turned
and fled, but that of Ivan advanced furiously toward him. Ivan stood
his ground, axe in hand, and struck the animal a terrible blow on
the muzzle. But as he did so, he stumbled, and the bear was upon him.
Kolina shrieked; Sakalar was away after his prize; but the Kolimsk men
rushed in. Two fired: the third struck the animal with a spear. The
bear abandoned Ivan, and faced his new antagonists. The contest was
now unequal, and before half an hour was over, the stock of provisions
was again augmented, as well as the means of warmth. They had very
little wood, and what they had was used sparingly. Once or twice
a tree, fixed in the ice, gave them additional fuel; but they were
obliged chiefly to count on oil. A small fire was made at night to
cook by; but it was allowed to go out, the tent was carefully closed,
and the caloric of six people, with a huge lamp with three wicks,
served for the rest of the night.

About the sixth day they struck land. It was a small island, in a bay
of which they found plenty of drift wood. Sakalar was delighted. He
was on the right track. A joyous halt took place, a splendid fire was
made, and the whole party indulged themselves in a glass of rum--a
liquor very rarely touched, from its known tendency to increase rather
than diminish cold. A hole was next broken in the ice, and an attempt
made to catch some seals. Only one, however, rewarded their efforts;
but this, with a supply of wood, filled the empty space made in the
sledges by the daily consumption of the dogs. But the island was
soon found to be infested with bears: no fewer than five, with eleven
foxes, were killed, and then huge fires had to be kept up at night to
drive their survivors away.

Their provender thus notably increased, the party started in high
spirits; but though they were advancing toward the pole, they were
also advancing toward the Deep Sea, and the ice presented innumerable
dangers. Deep fissures, lakes, chasms, mountains, all lay in their
way; and no game presented itself to their anxious search. Day after
day they pushed on--here making long circuits, there driven back, and
losing sometimes in one day all they had made in the previous twelve
hours. Some fissures were crossed on bridges of ice, which took hours
to make, while every hour the cold seemed more intense. The sun was
now visible for hours, and, as usual in these parts, the cold was more
severe since his arrival.

At last, after more than twenty days of terrible fatigue, there was
seen looming in the distance what was no doubt the promised land. The
sledges were hurried forward--for they were drawing toward the end of
their provisions--and the whole party was at length collected on the
summit of a lofty mountain of ice. Before them were the hills of New
Siberia; to their right a prodigious open sea: and at their feet, as
far as the eye could reach, a narrow channel of rapid water, through
which huge lumps of ice rushed so furiously, as to have no time to
cement into a solid mass.

The adventurers stood aghast. But Sakalar led the way to the very
brink of the channel, and moved quietly along its course until he
found what he was in search of. This a sheet or floe of ice, large
enough to bear the whole party, and yet almost detached from the
general field. The sledges were put upon it, and then, by breaking
with their axes the narrow tongue which held it, it swayed away into
the tempestuous sea. It almost turned round as it started. The sledges
and dogs were placed in the middle, while the five men stood at the
very edge to guide it as far as possible with their hunting spears.

In a few minutes it was impelled along by the rapid current, but
received every now and then a check when it came in contact with
heavier and deeper masses. The Kolimsk men stood transfixed with
terror as they saw themselves borne out toward that vast deep sea
which eternally tosses and rages round the Arctic Pole: but Sakalar,
in a peremptory tone, bade them use their spears. They pushed away
heartily; and their strange raft, though not always keeping its
equilibrium, was edged away both across and down the stream. At last
it began to move more slowly, and Sakalar found himself under the
shelter of a huge iceberg, and then impelled up stream by a backwater
current. In a few minutes the much wished-for shore was reached.

The route was rude and rugged as they approached the land; but all
saw before them the end of their labors for the winter, and every one
proceeded vigorously. The dogs seemed to smell the land, or at all
events some tracks of game, for they hurried on with spirit. About
an hour before the usual time of camping they were under a vast
precipice, turning which, they found themselves in a deep and
sheltered valley, with a river at the bottom, frozen between its
lofty banks, and covered by deep snow.

"The ivory mine!" said Sakalar in a low tone to Ivan, who thanked him
by an expressive look.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE RUSSIAN SERF.

"In the Russian peasant lies the embryo of the Russian chivalric
spirit, the origin of our nation's grandeur."

"Cunning fellows they are, the vagabonds," remarked Vassily
Ivanovitsch.

"Yes, cunning, and thereby clever; quick in imitation, quick in
appropriating what is new or useful--ready prepared for civilization.
Try to teach a laborer in foreign countries anything out of the way
of his daily occupation, and he will still cling to his plow: with
us, only give the word, and the peasant becomes musician, painter,
mechanic, steward, anything you like."

"Well, that's true," remarked Vassily Ivanovitsch.

"And besides," continued Ivan Vassilievitsch, "in what country can you
find such a strongly-marked and instinctive notion of his duties,
such readiness to assist his fellow-creatures, such cheerfulness, such
benignity, so much gentleness and strength combined."

"A splendid fellow the Russian peasant--a splendid fellow indeed;"
interrupted Vassily Ivanovitsch.

"And, nevertheless, we disdain him, we look at him with contempt; nay,
more, instead of making any effort to cultivate his mind, we try to
spoil it by every possible means."

"How so?"

"By the loathsome establishment we have--our household serfs. Our
house serf is the first step toward the tchinovnik. He goes without a
beard and wears a coat of a western cut; he is an idler, a debauchee,
a drunkard, a thief, and yet he assumes airs of consequence before
the peasant, whom he disdains, and from whose labor he draws his own
subsistence and his poll-tax. After some time more or less, according
to circumstances, the household serf becomes a clerk; he gets his
liberty and a place as writer in some district court; as a writer in
the government's service he disdains, in addition to the peasant, his
late comrades in the household; he learns to cavil in business, and
begins to take email bribes in poultry, eggs, corn, &c.; he studies
roguery systematically, and goes one step lower; he becomes a
secretary and a genuine tchinovnik. Then his sphere is enlarged; he
gets a new existence: he disdains the peasant, the house serf, the
clerk, and the writer, because, he says, they are all uncivilized
people. His wants are now greater, and you cannot bribe him except
with bank notes. Does he not take wine now at his meals? Does he not
patronize a little pharo? Is he not obliged to present his lady with
a costly cap or a silk gown? He fills up his place, and without the
least remorse--like a tradesman behind his counter--he sells his
influence as if it were merchandise. It happens now and then that he
is caught. 'Served him right,' say his comrades then; 'take bribes,
but take them prudently, so as not to be caught.'"

"But they are not all as you describe them," remarked Vassily
Ivanovitsch.

"Certainly not. Exceptions, however, do not alter the rule."

"And yet the officers in the government service with us are for the
most part elected by the nobility and gentry."

"That is just where the great evil lies," continued Ivan
Vassilievitsch. "What in other countries is an object of public
competition, is with us left to ourselves. What right have we to
complain against our government, who has left it in our discretion
to elect officers to regulate our internal affairs? Is it not our own
fault that, instead of paying due attention to a subject of so much
importance, we make game of it? We have in every province many a
civilized man, who backed by the laws, could give a salutary direction
to public affairs; but they all fly the elections like a plague,
leaving them in the hands of intriguing schemers. The most wealthy
land-owners lounge on the Nevsky-perspective, or travel abroad, and
but seldom visit their estates. For them elections are--a caricature:
they amuse themselves over the bald head of the sheriff or the thick
belly of the president of the court of assizes, and they forget that
to them is intrusted not only their own actual welfare and that of
their peasantry, but their entire future destiny. Yes, thus it is! Had
we not taken such a mischievous course, were we not so unpardonably
thoughtless, how grand would have been the vocation of the Russian
noble, to lead the whole nation forward on the path of genuine
civilization! I repeat again, it is our own fault. Instead of being
useful to their country, what has become of the Russian nobility?"

"They have ruined themselves," emphatically interrupted Vassily
Ivanovitsch.--_The Tarantas: or Impressions of Young Russia._







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of International Weekly Miscellany, Vol.
1, No. 5, July 29, 1850, by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK INTERNATIONAL WEEKLY ***

***** This file should be named 13241-8.txt or 13241-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/3/2/4/13241/

Produced by Cornell University, Joshua Hutchinson, William Flis, and
the Online Distributed Proofreading Team.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
