The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Book for Christmas, by Cyrus Townsend Brady

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: A Little Book for Christmas

Author: Cyrus Townsend Brady

Release Date: March 12, 2005 [EBook #15343]
[Most recently updated: July 31, 2020]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK FOR CHRISTMAS ***




Produced by Gene Smethers and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team




A Little Book for Christmas

[Illustration: The author making his book, as pictured by his friend,
Will Crawford.]

      Containing a Greeting, a Word of Advice, Some
      Personal Adventures, a Carol, a Meditation, and Three Christmas
      Stories for All Ages

      By

      Cyrus Townsend Brady

      Author of “And Thus He Came, A Christmas
      Fantasy,” “Christmas When the West Was Young,” etc., etc.

      With Illustrations and Decorations by

      Will Crawford

      G.P. Putnam’s Sons
      
      New York and London

      The Knickerbocker Press

      1917


      DEDICATED

      TO

      MRS. LEONARD L. HILL

      AND HER CHARMING COMPANIONS

      OF

      THE AMERICAN CRITERION SOCIETY

      OF NEW YORK

      BY

      THEIR CHAPLAIN

[Illustration]




PREFACE


      Christmas is one of the great days of obligation and observance
      in the Church of which I am a Priest; but it is much more than
      that, it is one of the great days of obligation and observance in
      the world. Furthermore it is one of the evidences of the power of
      Him Whose birth we commemorate that its observation is not
      limited by conditions of race and creed. Those who fail to see in
      Him what we see nevertheless see something and even by imperfect
      visions are moved to joy. The world transmutes that joy into
      blessing, not merely by giving of its substance but of its soul
      because men perceive that it is for the soul’s good and because
      they hope to receive its benefits although they well know that
      giving is far better than receiving, in the very words of Him Who
      gave us the greatest of all gifts—Himself.

      As a Priest of the Church, as a Missionary in the Far West, as
      the Rector of large and important parishes I have been brought in
      touch with varied life. Christmas in all its phases is familiar
      to me. The author of many books and stories as well as the
      preacher of many sermons, it is natural that Christmas should
      have engaged a large part of my attention. Out of the abundance
      of material which I have accumulated in the course of a long
      ministry and a longer life I have gathered here a sheaf of things
      I have written about Christmas; personal adventures, stories
      suggested by the old yet ever-new theme; meditations, words of
      advice which I am old enough to be entitled to give; and last but
      not least good wishes and good will. I might even call this
      little volume _A Book of Good Will toward Men_. And so fit it not
      only for Christmas but for all other seasons as well.

      If it shall add to your joy in Christmas, dear reader, and better
      still, if it shall move you to add to the joy of some one else at
      Christmas-tide or in any other season, I shall be well repaid for
      my efforts and incidentally you will also be repaid for your
      purchase.

  Cyrus Townsend Brady. 

 The Hemlocks, Park Hill,
 Yonkers, N.Y.
 1917  




      NOTE OF ACKNOWLEDGEMENT


      The author is in debt to his long-time and greatly beloved friend
      the Rev. Alsop Leffingwell for the beautiful musical setting of
      the little carol which this book contains.

[Illustration]




TABLE OF CONTENTS


 I.—A CHRISTMAS GREETING
“_Peace on Earth, Good Will toward Men_”

 II.—FROM A FAR COUNTRY
A story for grown-ups
_Being a new variation of an ancient theme_

 III.—ON CHRISTMAS GIVING
_Being a word of much needed advice_

 IV.—IT WAS THE SAME CHRISTMAS MORNING
A story for girls
_In which it is shown how different the same thing may be_

 V.—A CHRISTMAS CAROL
_To be sung to the music accompanying it_

 VI.—THE LONE SCOUT’S CHRISTMAS
A story for boys
_Wherein is set forth the courage of youth_

 VII.—LOOKING INTO THE MANGER
_A Christmas meditation_

 VIII.—CHRISTMAS IN THE SNOWS
_Being some personal adventures in the Far West_

 IX.— CHRISTMAS WISH
_For everybody everywhere_

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




ILLUSTRATIONS


 The Author Making his Book
 “I sought dat Santy Claus tame down de chimney,” said the younger of
 the twain.
 “I am sure, Miss, that they do wish you a Merry Christmas.”
 “The Stars look down”
 “Thrusting his toes into the straps he struck out boldly.”
 “The world bows down to a Mother and her Child—and the Mother herself
 is at the feet of the Child.”

[Illustration]




A CHRISTMAS GREETING

      “_Good Will Toward Men”—St. Luke 11-14._


      There was a time when the spirit of Christmas was of the present.
      There is a period when most of it is of the past. There shall
      come a day perhaps when all of it will be of the future. The
      child time, the present; the middle years, the past; old age, the
      future.

      Come to my mind Christmas Days of long ago. As a boy again I
      enter into the spirit of the Christmas stockings hanging before
      my fire. I know what the children think to-day. I recall what
      they feel.

      Passes childhood, and I look down the nearer years. There rise
      before me remembrances of Christmas Days on storm-tossed seas,
      where waves beat upon the ice-bound ship. I recall again the
      bitter touch of water-warping winter, of drifts of snow, of
      wind-swept plains. In the gamut of my remembrance I am once more
      in the poor, mean, lonely little sanctuary out on the prairie,
      with a handful of Christians, mostly women, gathered together in
      the freezing, draughty building. In later years I worship in the
      great cathedral church, ablaze with lights, verdant and fragrant
      with the evergreen pines, echoing with joyful carols and
      celestial harmonies. My recollections are of contrasts like those
      of life—joy and sadness, poverty and ease.

      And the pictures are full of faces, many of which may be seen no
      more by earthly vision. I miss the clasp of vanished hands, I
      crave the sound of voices stilled. As we old and older grow,
      there is a note of sadness in our glee. Whether we will or not we
      must twine the cypress with the holly. The recollection of each
      passing year brings deeper regret. How many have gone from those
      circles that we recall when we were children? How many little
      feet that pattered upon the stair on Christmas morning now tread
      softer paths and walk in broader ways; sisters and brothers who
      used to come back from the far countries to the old home—alas,
      they cannot come from the farther country in which they now are,
      and perhaps, saddest thought of all, we would not wish them to
      come again. How many, with whom we joined hands around the
      Christmas tree, have gone?

      Circles are broken, families are separated, loved ones are lost,
      but the old world sweeps on. Others come to take our places. As
      we stood at the knee of some unforgotten mother, so other
      children stand. As we listened to the story of the Christ Child
      from the lips of some grey old father, so other children listen
      and we ourselves perchance are fathers or mothers too. Other
      groups come to us for the deathless story. Little heads which
      recall vanished halcyon days of youth bend around another younger
      mother. Smaller hands than ours write letters to Santa Claus and
      hear the story, the sweetest story ever told, of the Baby who
      came to Mary and through her to all the daughters and sons of
      women on that winter night on the Bethlehem hills.

      And we thank God for the children who take us out of the past,
      out of ourselves, away from recollections that weigh us down; the
      children that weave in the woof and warp of life when our own
      youth has passed, some of the buoyancy, the joy, the happiness of
      the present; the children in whose opening lives we turn
      hopefully to the future. We thank God at this Christmas season
      that it pleased Him to send His beloved Son to come to us as a
      little child, like any other child. We thank God that in the
      lesser sense we may see in every child who comes to-day another
      incarnation of divinity. We thank God for the portion of His
      Spirit with which He dowers every child of man, just as we thank
      Him for pouring it all upon the Infant in the Manger.

      There is no age that has not had its prophet. No country, no
      people, but that has produced its leader. But did any of them
      ever before come as a little child? Did any of them begin to lead
      while yet in arms? Lodges there upon any other baby brow “the
      round and top of sovereignty?” What distinguished Christ and His
      Christian followers from all the world? Behold! no mighty
      monarch, but “a little child shall lead them!”

      You may see through the glass darkly, you may not know or
      understand the blessedness of faith in Him as He would have you
      know it, but there is nothing that can dim the light that
      radiates from that birth in the rude cave back of the inn. Ah, it
      pierces through the darkness of that shrouding night. It shines
      to-day. Still sparkles the Star in the East. He is that Star.

      There is nothing that can take from mankind—even doubting
      mankind—the spirit of Christ and the Christmas season. Our
      celebrations do not rest upon the conclusions of logic, or the
      demonstrations of philosophy; I would not even argue that they
      depend inevitably or absolutely upon the possession of a certain
      faith in Jesus, but we accept Christmas, nevertheless; we
      endeavour to apply the Christmas spirit, for just once in the
      year; it may be because we cannot, try as we may, crush out
      utterly and entirely the divinity that is in us that makes for
      God. The stories and tales for Christmas which have for their
      theme the hard heart softened are not mere fictions of the
      imagination. They rest upon an instinctive consciousness of a
      profound philosophic truth.

      What is the unpardonable sin, I wonder? Is it to be persistently
      and forever unkind? Does it mean perhaps the absolute refusal to
      accept the principle of love which is indeed creation’s final
      law? The lessons of the Christmastide are so many; the appeals
      that now may be made to humanity crowd to the lips from full
      minds and fuller hearts. Might we not reduce them all to the
      explication of the underlying principle of God’s purpose to us,
      as expressed in those themic words of love with which angels and
      men greeted the advent of the Child on the first Christmas
      morning, “Good will toward men?”

      Let us then show our good will toward men by doing good and
      bringing happiness to someone—if not to everyone—at this
      Christmas season. Put aside the memories of disappointments, of
      sorrows that have not vanished, of cares that still burden, and
      do good in spite of them because you would not dim the brightness
      of the present for any human heart with the shadows of old
      regrets. Do good because of a future which opens possibilities
      before you, for others, if not for yourselves.

      Brethren, friends, all, let us make up our minds that we will be
      kindly affectioned one to another in our homes and out of them,
      on this approaching Christmas day. That the old debate, the
      ancient strife, the rankling recollection, the sharp contention,
      shall be put aside, that “envy, hatred, and malice, and all
      uncharitableness” shall be done away with. Let us forgive and
      forget; but if we cannot forget let us at least forgive. And so
      let there be peace between man and man at Christmas—a truce of
      God.

      Let us pray that Love shall come as a little child to our
      households. That He shall be in our hearts and shall find His
      expression in all that we do or say on this birthday of goodness
      and cheer for the world. Then let us resolve that the spirit of
      the day shall be carried out through our lives, that as Christ
      did not come for an hour, but for a lifetime, we would fain
      become as little children on this day of days that we may begin a
      new life of good will to men.

      Let us make this a new birthday of kindness and love that shall
      endure. That is a Christmas hope, a Christmas wish. Let us give
      to it the gracious expression of life among men.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

FROM A FAR COUNTRY

      _Being a New Variation of an Ancient Theme_

      A STORY FOR GROWN-UPS


      I

      “_A certain man had two sons_”—so begins the best and most famous
      story in the world’s literature. Use of the absolute superlative
      is always dangerous, but none will gainsay that statement, I am
      sure. This story, which follows that familiar tale afar off,
      indeed, begins in the same way. And the parallelism between the
      two is exact up to a certain point. What difference a little
      point doth make; like the little fire, behold, how great a matter
      it kindleth! Indeed, lacking that one detail the older story
      would have had no value; it would not have been told; without its
      addition this would have been a repetition of the other.

      When the modern young prodigal came to himself, when he found
      himself no longer able to endure the husks of the swine like his
      ancient exemplar, when he rose and returned to his father because
      of that distaste, he found no father watching and waiting for him
      at the end of the road! Upon that change the action of this story
      hangs. It was a pity, too, because the elder brother was there
      and in a mood not unlike that of his famous prototype.

      Indeed, there was added to that elder brother’s natural
      resentment at the younger’s course the blinding power of a great
      sorrow, for the father of the two sons was dead. He had died of a
      broken heart. Possessed of no omniscience of mind or vision, he
      had been unable to foresee the long delayed turning point in the
      career of his younger son and death came too swiftly to enable
      them to meet again. So long as he had strength, that father had
      stood, as it were, at the top of the hill looking down the road
      watching and hoping.

      And but the day before the tardy prodigal’s return he had been
      laid away with his own fathers in the God’s acre around the
      village church in the Pennsylvania hills. Therefore there was no
      fatted calf ready for the disillusioned youth whose waywardness
      had killed his father. It will be remembered that the original
      elder brother objected seriously to fatted calves on such
      occasions. Indeed, the funeral baked meats would coldly furnish
      forth a welcoming meal if any such were called for.

      For all his waywardness, for all his self-will, the younger son
      had loved his father well, and it was a terrible shock to him
      (having come to his senses) to find that he had returned too
      late. And for all his hardness and narrowness the eldest son also
      had loved his father well—strong tribute to the quality of the
      dead parent—and when he found himself bereft he naturally visited
      wrath upon the head of him who he believed rightly was the cause
      of the untimely death of the old man.

      As he sat in the study, if such it might be called, of the
      departed, before the old-fashioned desk with its household and
      farm and business accounts, which in their order and method and
      long use were eloquent of his provident and farseeing father, his
      heart was hot within his breast. Grief and resentment alike
      gnawed at his vitals. They had received vivid reports, even in
      the little town in which they dwelt, of the wild doings of the
      wanderer, but they had enjoyed no direct communication with him.
      After a while even rumour ceased to busy itself with the doings
      of the youth. He had dropped out of their lives utterly after he
      passed over the hills and far away.

      The father had failed slowly for a time, only to break suddenly
      and swiftly in the end. And the hurried frantic search for the
      missing had brought no results. Ironically the god of chance had
      led the young man’s repentant footsteps to the door too late.

      “Where’s father?” cried John Carstairs to the startled woman who
      stared at him as if she had seen a ghost as, at his knock, she
      opened the door which he had found locked, not against him, but
      the hour was late and it was the usual nightly precaution:

      “Your brother is in your father’s study, sir,” faltered the
      servant at last.

      “Umph! Will,” said the man, his face changing. “I’d rather see
      father first.”

      “I think you had better see Mr. William, sir.”

      “What’s the matter, Janet?” asked young Carstairs anxiously. “Is
      father ill?”

      “Yes, sir! indeed I think you had bettor see Mr. William at once,
      Mr. John.”

      Strangely moved by the obvious agitation of the ancient servitor
      of the house who had known him from childhood, John Carstairs
      hurried down the long hall to the door of his father’s study.
      Always a scapegrace, generally in difficulties, full of mischief,
      he had approached that door many times in fear of well merited
      punishment which was sure to be meted out to him. And he came to
      it with the old familiar apprehension that night, if from a
      different cause. He never dreamed that his father was anything
      but ill. He must see his brother. He stood in no little awe of
      that brother, who was his exact antithesis in almost everything.
      They had not got along particularly well. If his father had been
      inside the door he would have hesitated with his hand on the
      knob. If his father had not been ill he would not have attempted
      to face his brother. But his anxiety, which was increased by a
      sudden foreboding, for Janet, the maid, had looked at him so
      strangely, moved him to quick action. He threw the door open
      instantly. What he saw did not reassure him. William was clad in
      funeral black. He wore a long frock coat instead of the usual
      knockabout suit he affected on the farm. His face was white and
      haggard. There was an instant interchange of names.

      “John!”

      “William!”

      And then—

      “Is father ill?” burst out the younger.

      “Janet said—”

      “Dead!” interposed William harshly, all his indignation flaming
      into speech and action as he confronted the cause of the
      disaster.

      “Dead! Good God!”

      “God had nothing to do with it.”

      “You mean?”

      “You did it.”

      “I?”

      “Yes. Your drunken revelry, your reckless extravagance, your
      dissipation with women, your unfeeling silence, your—”

      “Stop!” cried the younger. “I have come to my senses, I can’t
      bear it.”

      “I’ll say it if it kills you. You did it, I repeat. He longed and
      prayed and waited and you didn’t come. You didn’t write. We could
      hear nothing. The best father on earth.”

      The younger man sank down in a chair and covered his face with
      his hands.

      “When?” he gasped out finally.

      “Three days ago.”

      “And have you—”

      “He is buried beside mother in the churchyard yonder. Now that
      you are here I thank God that he didn’t live to see what you have
      become.”

      The respectable elder brother’s glance took in the disreputable
      younger, his once handsome face marred—one doesn’t foregather
      with swine in the sty without acquiring marks of the
      association—his clothing in rags. Thus errant youth, that was
      youth no longer, came back from that far country. Under such
      circumstances one generally has to walk most of the way. He had
      often heard the chimes at midnight, sleeping coldly in the straw
      stack of the fields, and the dust of the road clung to his
      person. Through his broken shoes his bare feet showed, and he
      trembled visibly as the other confronted him, partly from hunger
      and weakness and shattered nerves, and partly from shame and
      horror and for what reason God only knew.

      The tall, handsome man in the long black coat, who towered over
      him so grimly stern, was two years older than he, yet to the
      casual observer the balance of time was against the prodigal by
      at least a dozen years. However, he was but faintly conscious of
      his older brother. One word and one sentence rang in his ear.
      Indeed, they beat upon his consciousness until he blanched and
      quivered beneath their onslaught.

      “Dead—you did it!”

      Yes, it was just. No mercy seasoned that justice in the heart of
      either man. The weaker, self-accusing, sat silent with bowed
      head, his conscience seconding the words of the stronger. The
      voice of the elder ran on with growing, terrifying intensity.

      “Please stop,” interposed the younger. He rose to his feet. “You
      are right, Will. You were always right and I was always wrong. I
      did kill him. But you need not have told me with such bitterness.
      I realized it the minute you said he was dead. It’s true. And yet
      I was honestly sorry. I came back to tell him so, to ask his
      forgiveness.”

      “When your money was gone.”

      “You can say that, too,” answered the other, wincing under the
      savage thrust. “It’s as true as the rest probably, but sometimes
      a man has to get down very low before he looks up. It was that
      way with me. Well, I’ve had my share and I’ve had my fling. I’ve
      no business here. Good-bye.” He turned abruptly away.

      “Don’t add more folly to what you have already done,” returned
      William Carstairs, and with the beginnings of a belated pity, he
      added, “stay here with me, there will be enough for us both and—”

      “I can’t.”

      “Well, then,” he drew out of his pocket a roll of bills, “take
      these and when you want more—”

      “Damn your money,” burst out John Carstairs, passionately. He
      struck the other’s outstretched hand, and in his surprise,
      William Carstairs let the bills scatter upon the floor. “I don’t
      want it—blood money. Father is dead. I’ve had mine. I’ll trouble
      you no more.”

      He turned and staggered out of the room. Now William Carstairs
      was a proud man and John Carstairs had offended him deeply. He
      believed all that he had said to his brother, yet there had been
      developing a feeling of pity for him in his heart, and in his
      cold way he had sought to express it. His magnanimity had been
      rejected with scorn. He looked down at the scattered bills on the
      floor. Characteristically—for he inherited his father’s business
      ability without his heart—he stooped over and picked them slowly
      up, thinking hard the while. He finally decided that he would
      give his brother yet another chance for his father’s sake. After
      all, they were brethren. But the decision came too late. John
      Carstairs had stood not on the order of his going, but had gone
      at once, none staying him.

      William Carstairs stood in the outer door, the light from the
      hall behind him streaming out into the night. He could see
      nothing. He called aloud, but there was no answer. He had no idea
      where his younger brother had gone. If he had been a man of finer
      feeling or quicker perception, perhaps if the positions of the
      two had been reversed and he had been his younger brother, he
      might have guessed that John might have been found beside the
      newest mound in the churchyard, had one sought him there. But
      that idea did not come to William, and after staring into the
      blackness for a long time, he reluctantly closed the door.
      Perhaps the vagrant could be found in the morning.

      No, there had been no father waiting for the prodigal at the end
      of the road, and what a difference it had made to that wanderer
      and vagabond!


      II

      We leave a blank line on the page and denote thereby that ten
      years have passed. It was Christmas Eve, that is, it had been
      Christmas Eve when the little children had gone to bed. Now
      midnight had passed and it was already Christmas morning. In one
      of the greatest and most splendid houses on the avenue two little
      children were nestled all snug in their beds in a nursery. In an
      adjoining room sound sleep had quieted the nerves of the usually
      vigilant and watchful nurse. But the little children were
      wakeful. As always, visions of Santa Claus danced in their heads.

      They were fearless children by nature and had been trained
      without the use of bugaboos to keep them in the paths wherein
      they should go. On this night of nights they had left the doors
      of their nursery open. The older, a little girl of six, was
      startled, but not alarmed, as she lay watchfully waiting, by a
      creaking sound as of an opened door in the library below. She
      listened with a beating heart under the coverlet; cause of
      agitation not fear, but hope. It might be, it must be Santa
      Claus, she decided. Brother, aged four, was close at hand in his
      own small crib. She got out of her bed softly so as not to
      disturb Santa Claus, or—more important at the time—the nurse. She
      had an idea that Saint Nicholas might not welcome a nurse, but
      she had no fear at all that he would not be glad to see her.

      Need for a decision confronted her. Should she reserve the
      pleasure she expected to derive from the interview for herself or
      should she share it with little brother? There was a certain risk
      in arousing brother. He was apt to awaken clamant, vociferous.
      Still, she resolved to try it. For one thing, it seemed so
      selfish to see Santa Claus alone, and for another the adventure
      would be a little less timorous taken together.

      Slipping her feet into her bedroom slippers and covering her
      nightgown with a little blanket wrap, she tip-toed over to
      brother’s bed. Fortunately, he too was sleeping lightly, and for
      a like reason. For a wonder she succeeded in arousing him without
      any outcry on his part. He was instantly keenly, if quietly,
      alive to the situation and its fascinating possibilities.

      “You must be very quiet, John,” she whispered. “But I think Santa
      Claus is down in the library. We’ll go down and catch him.”

      Brother, as became the hardier male, disdained further protection
      of his small but valiant person. Clad only in his pajamas and his
      slippers, he followed sister out the door and down the stair.
      They went hand in hand, greatly excited by the desperate
      adventure.

      What proportion of the millions who dwelt in the great city were
      children of tender years only statisticians can say, but
      doubtless there were thousands of little hearts beating with
      anticipation as the hearts of those children beat, and perhaps
      there may have been others who were softly creeping downstairs to
      catch Santa Claus unawares at that very moment.

      One man at least was keenly conscious of one little soul who,
      with absolutely nothing to warrant the expectation, nothing
      reasonable on which to base joyous anticipation, had gone to bed
      thinking of Santa Claus and hoping that, amidst equally deserving
      hundreds of thousands of obscure children, this little mite in
      her cold, cheerless garret might not be overlooked by the
      generous dispenser of joy. With the sublime trust of childhood
      she had insisted upon hanging up her ragged stocking. Santa Claus
      would have to be very careful indeed lest things should drop
      through and clatter upon the floor. Her heart had beaten, too,
      although she descended no stair in the great house. She, too, lay
      wakeful, uneasy, watching, sleeping, drowsing, hoping. We may
      have some doubts about the eternal springing of hope in the human
      breast save in the case of childhood—thank God it is always
      verdant there!


      III

      Now few people get so low that they do not love somebody, and I
      dare say that no people get so low that somebody does not love
      them.

      “Crackerjack,” so called because of his super-excellence in his
      chosen profession, was, or had been, a burglar and thief; a very
      ancient and highly placed calling indeed. You doubtless remember
      that two thieves comprised the sole companions and attendants of
      the Greatest King upon the most famous throne in history. His
      sole court at the culmination of His career. “Crackerjack” was no
      exception to the general rule about loving and being beloved set
      forth above.

      He loved the little lady whose tattered stocking swung in the
      breeze from the cracked window. Also he loved the wretched woman
      who with himself shared the honours of parentage to the poor but
      hopeful mite who was also dreaming of Christmas and the morning.
      And his love inspired him to action. Singular into what devious
      courses, utterly unjustifiable, even so exalted and holy an
      emotion may lead fallible man. Love—burglary! They do not belong
      naturally in association, yet slip cold, need, and hunger in
      between and we may have explanation even if there be no
      justification. Oh, Love, how many crimes are committed in thy
      name!

      “Crackerjack” would hardly have chosen Christmas eve for a
      thieving expedition if there had been any other recourse.
      Unfortunately there was none. The burglar’s profession, so far as
      he had practised it, was undergoing a timely eclipse. Time was
      when it had been lucrative, its rewards great. Then the law,
      which is no respecter of professions of that kind, had got him.
      “Crackerjack” had but recently returned from a protracted sojourn
      at an institution arranged by the State in its paternalism for
      the reception and harbouring of such as he. The pitiful dole with
      which the discharged prisoner had been unloaded upon a world
      which had no welcome for him had been soon spent; even the
      hideous prison-made clothes had been pawned, and some rags, which
      were yet the rags of a free man, which had been preserved through
      the long period of separation by his wife, gave him a poor
      shelter from the winter’s cold.

      That wife had been faithful to him. She had done the best she
      could for herself and baby during the five years of the absence
      of the bread winner, or in his case the bread taker would be the
      better phrase. She had eagerly waited the hour of his release;
      her joy had been soon turned to bitterness. The fact that he had
      been in prison had shut every door against him and even closed
      the few that had been open to her. The three pieces of human
      flotsam had been driven by the wind of adversity and tossed. They
      knew not where to turn when jettisoned by society.

      Came Christmas Eve. They had no money and no food and no fire.
      Stop! The fire of love burned in the woman’s heart, the fire of
      hate in the man’s. Prison life usually completes the education in
      shame of the unfortunate men who are thrust there. This was
      before the days in which humane men interested themselves in
      prisons and prisoners and strove to awaken the world to its
      responsibilities to, as well as the possibilities of, the
      convict.

      But “Crackerjack” was a man of unusual character. Poverty,
      remorse, drink, all the things that go to wreck men by forcing
      them into evil courses had laid him low, and because he was a man
      originally of education and ability, he had shone as a criminal.
      The same force of character which made him super-burglar could
      change him from criminal to man if by chance they could be
      enlisted in the endeavour.

      He had involved the wife he had married in his misfortunes. She
      had been a good woman, weaker than he, yet she stuck to him. God
      chose the weak thing to rejuvenate the strong. In the prison he
      had enjoyed abundant leisure for reflection. After he learned of
      the birth of his daughter he determined to do differently when he
      was freed. Many men determine, especially in the case of an
      ex-convict, but society usually determines better—no, not better,
      but more strongly. Society had different ideas. It was
      Brahministic in its religion. Caste? Yes, once a criminal always
      a criminal.

      “Old girl,” said the broken man, “it’s no use. I’ve tried to be
      decent for your sake and the kid’s, but it can’t be done. I can’t
      get honest work. They’ve put the mark of Cain on me. They can
      take the consequences. The kid’s got to have some Christmas;
      you’ve got to have food and drink and clothes and fire. God, how
      cold it is! I’ll go out and get some.”

      “Isn’t there something else we can pawn?”

      “Nothing.”

      “Isn’t there any work?”

      “Work?” laughed the man bitterly. “I’ve tramped the city over
      seeking it, and you, too. Now, I’m going to get money—elsewhere.”

      “Where?”

      “Where it’s to be had.”

      “Oh, Jack, think.”

      “If I thought, I’d kill you and the kid and myself.”

      “Perhaps that would be better,” said the woman simply. “There
      doesn’t seem to be any place left for us.”

      “We haven’t come to that yet,” said the man. “Society owes me a
      living and, by God, it’s got to pay it to me.”

      It was an oft-repeated, widely held assertion, whether fallacious
      or not each may determine for himself.

      “I’m afraid,” said the woman.

      “You needn’t be; nothing can be worse than this hell.”

      He kissed her fiercely. Albeit she was thin and haggard she was
      beautiful to him. Then he bent over his little girl. He had not
      yet had sufficient time since his release to get very well
      acquainted with her. She had been born while he was in prison,
      but it had not taken any time at all for him to learn to love
      her. He stared at her a moment. He bent to kiss her and then
      stopped. He might awaken her. It is always best for the children
      of the very poor to sleep. He who sleeps dines, runs the Spanish
      proverb. He turned and kissed the little ragged stockings
      instead, and then he went out. He was going to play—was it Santa
      Claus, indeed?


      IV

      The strange, illogical, ironical god of chance, or was it
      Providence acting through some careless maid, had left an area
      window unlocked in the biggest and newest house on the avenue.
      Any house would have been easy for “Crackerjack” if he had
      possessed the open sesame of his kit of burglar’s tools, but he
      had not had a jimmy in his hand since he was caught with one and
      sent to Sing Sing. He had examined house after house, trusting to
      luck as he wandered on, and, lo! fortune favoured him.

      The clock in a nearby church struck the hour of two. The areaway
      was dark. No one was abroad. He plunged down the steps, opened
      the window and disappeared. No man could move more noiselessly
      than he. In the still night he knew how the slightest sounds are
      magnified. He had made none as he groped his way through the back
      of the house, arriving at last in a room which he judged to be
      the library. Then, after listening and hearing nothing, he
      ventured to turn the button of a side light in a far corner of
      the room.

      He was in a large apartment, beautifully furnished. Books and
      pictures abounded, but these did not interest him, although if he
      had made further examination he might have found things worthy of
      his attention even there. It so happened that the light bracket
      to which he had blundered, or had been led, was immediately over
      a large wall safe. Evidently it had been placed there for the
      purpose of illuminating the safe door. His eyes told him that
      instantly. This was greater fortune than he expected. A wall safe
      in a house like that must contain things of value.

      Marking the position of the combination knob, he turned out the
      light and waited again. The quiet of the night continued
      unbroken. A swift inspection convinced him that the lock was only
      an ordinary combination. With proper—or improper—tools he could
      have opened it easily. Even without tools, such were his
      delicately trained ear and his wonderfully trained fingers that
      he thought he could feel and hear the combination. He knelt down
      by the knob and began to turn it slowly, listening and feeling
      for the fall of the tumblers. Several times he almost got it,
      only to fail at the end, but by repeated trials and unexampled
      patience, his heart beating like a trip-hammer the while, he
      finally mastered the combination and opened the safe door.

      In his excitement when he felt the door move he swung it outward
      sharply. It had not been used for some time evidently and the
      hinges creaked. He checked the door and listened again. Was he to
      be balked after so much success? He was greatly relieved at the
      absence of sound. It was quite dark in the room. He could see
      nothing but the safe. He reached his hand in and discovered it
      was filled with bulky articles covered with some kind of cloth,
      silver evidently.

      He decided that he must have a look and again he switched on the
      light. Yes, his surmise had been correct. The safe was filled
      with silver. There was a small steel drawer in the middle of it.
      He had a broad bladed jack-knife in his pocket and at the risk of
      snapping the blade he forced the lock and drew out the drawer. It
      was filled with papers. He lifted the first one and stood staring
      at it in astonishment, for it was an envelope which bore his
      name, written by a hand which had long since mouldered away in
      the dust of a grave.


      V

      Before he could open the envelope, there broke on his ear a still
      small voice, not that of conscience, not that of God; the voice
      of a child—but does not God speak perhaps as often through the
      lips of childhood as in any other way—and conscience, too?

      “Are you Santa Claus?” the voice whispered in his ear.

      “Crackerjack” dropped the paper and turned like a flash, knife
      upraised in his clenched hand, to confront a very little girl and
      a still smaller boy staring at him in open-eyed astonishment, an
      astonishment which was without any vestige of alarm. He looked
      down at the two and they looked up at him, equal bewilderment on
      both sides.

      “I sought dat Santy Claus tame down de chimney,” said the younger
      of the twain, whose pajamas bespoke the nascent man.

      “In all the books he has a long white beard. Where’s yours?”
      asked the coming woman.

      This innocent question no less than the unaffected simplicity and
      sincerity of the questioner overpowered “Crackerjack.” He sank
      back into a convenient chair and stared at the imperturbable
      pair. There was a strange and wonderful likeness in the
      sweet-faced golden-haired little girl before him to the worn,
      haggard, and ill-clad little girl who lay shivering in the mean
      bed in the upper room where God was not—or so he fancied.

      “You’re a little girl, aren’t you?” he whispered.

      No voice had been or was raised above a whisper. It was a
      witching hour and its spell was upon them all.

      “Yes.”

      “What is your name?”

      “Helen.”

      Now Helen had been “Crackerjack’s” mother’s name and it was the
      name of his own little girl, and although everybody else called
      her Nell, to him she was always Helen.

      “And my name’s John,” volunteered the other child.

      “John!” That was extraordinary!

      “What’s your other name?”

      “John William.”

      The man stared again. Could this be coincidence merely? John was
      his own name and William that of his brother.

      “I mean what is your last name?”

      “Carstairs,” answered the little girl. “Now you tell us who you
      are. You aren’t Santa Claus, are you? I don’t hear any reindeers
      outside, or bells, and you haven’t any pack, and you’re not by
      the fireplace where our stockings are.”

[Illustration: I sought dat Santy Claus tame down de chimney,” said the
younger of the twain.] “I sought dat Santy Claus tame down de chimney,”
said the younger of the twain.

      “No,” said the man, “I’m not exactly Santa Claus, I’m his
      friend—I—”

      What should he say to these children? In his bewilderment for the
      moment he actually forgot the letter which he still held tightly
      in his hand.

      “Dat’s muvver’s safe,” continued the little boy. “She keeps lots
      o’ things in it. It’s all hers but dat drawer. Dat’s papa’s and—”

      “I think I hear some one on the stairs,” broke in the little girl
      suddenly in great excitement. “Maybe that’s Santa Claus.”

      “Perhaps it is,” said the man, who had also heard. “You wait and
      watch for him. I’ll go outside and attend to his reindeer.”

      He made a movement to withdraw, but the girl caught him tightly
      by the hand.

      “If you are his friend,” she said, “you can introduce us. You
      know our names and—”

      The golden opportunity was gone.

      “Don’t say a word,” whispered the man quickly. “We’ll surprise
      him. Be very still.”

      He reached his hand up and turned out the light. He half hoped he
      might be mistaken, or that in the darkness they would not be
      seen, but no. They all heard the footsteps on the stair. They
      came down slowly, and it was evident that whoever was approaching
      was using every precaution not to be heard. “Crackerjack” was in
      a frightful situation. He did not know whether to jerk himself
      away from the two children, for the boy had clasped him around
      the leg and the girl still held his hand, or whether to wait.

      The power of decision suddenly left him, for the steps stopped
      before the door. There was a little click as a hand pressed a
      button on the wall and the whole room was flooded with light from
      the great electrolier in the centre. Well, the game was up.
      “Crackerjack” had been crouching low with the children. He rose
      to his feet and looked straightly enough into the barrel of a
      pistol held by a tall, severe looking man in a rich silk dressing
      robe, who confronted him in the doorway. Two words broke from the
      lips of the two men, the same words that had fallen from their
      lips when they met ten years before.

      “John!” cried the elder man, laying the weapon on a nearby table.

      “Will!” answered “Crackerjack” in the same breath.

      As if to mark the eternal difference as before, the one was
      clothed in habiliments of wealth and luxury, the other in the
      rags and tatters of poverty and shame.

      “Why, that isn’t Santa Claus,” instantly burst out the little
      girl, “that’s papa.”

      “Dis is Santy Claus’s friend, papa,” said the little boy. “We
      were doin’ to su’prise him. He said be very still and we minded.”

      “So this is what you have come to, John,” said the elder man, but
      there was an unwonted gentleness in his voice.

      “I swear to God I didn’t know it was your house. I just came in
      here because the window was open.”

      The other pointed to the safe.

      “But you were—”

      “Of course I was. You don’t suppose I wandered in for fun, do
      you? I’ve got a little girl of my own, and her name’s Helen, too;
      our mother’s name.”

      The other brother nodded.

      “She’s hungry and cold and there’s no Christmas for her or her
      mother.”

      “Oh, Santy has been here already,” cried Master John Williams,
      running toward the great fireplace, having just that moment
      discovered the bulging stockings and piles of gifts. His sister
      made a move in the same direction, for at the other corner hung
      her stocking and beneath it her pile, but the man’s hand
      unconsciously tightened upon her hand and she stopped.

      “I’ll stay with you,” she said, after a moment of hesitation.
      “Tell me more about your Helen.”

      “There’s nothing to tell.” He released her hand roughly. “You
      musn’t touch me,” he added harshly. “Go.”

      “You needn’t go, my dear,” said her father quickly. “Indeed, I
      think, perhaps—”

      “Is your Helen very poor?” quietly asked the little girl,
      possessing herself of his hand again, “because if she is she can
      have”—she looked over at the pile of toys—“Well, I’ll see. I’ll
      give her lots of things, and—”

      “What’s this?” broke out the younger man harshly, extending his
      hand with the letter in it toward the other.

      “It is a letter to you from our father.”

      “And you kept it from me?” cried the other.

      “Read it,” said William Carstairs.

      With trembling hands “Crackerjack” tore it open. It was a message
      of love and forgiveness penned by a dying hand.

      “If I had had this then I might have been a different man,” said
      the poor wretch.

      “There is another paper under it, or there should be, in the same
      drawer,” went on William Carstairs, imperturbably. “Perhaps you
      would better read that.”

      John Carstairs needed no second invitation. He turned to the open
      drawer and took out the next paper. It was a copy of a will. The
      farm and business had been left to William, but one half of it
      was to be held in trust for his brother. The man read it and then
      he crushed the paper in his hand.

      “And that, too, might have saved me. My God!” he cried, “I’ve
      been a drunken blackguard. I’ve gone down to the very depths. I
      have been in State’s prison. I was, I am, a thief, but I never
      would have withheld a dying man’s forgiveness from his son. I
      never would have kept a poor wretch who was crazy with shame and
      who drank himself into crime out of his share of the property.”

      Animated by a certain fell purpose, he leaped across the room and
      seized the pistol.

      “Yes, and I have you now!” he cried. “I’ll make you pay.”

      He levelled the weapon at his brother with a steady hand.

      “What are you doin’ to do wif that pistol?” said young John
      William, curiously looking up from his stocking, while Helen
      cried out. The little woman acted the better part. With rare
      intuition she came quickly and took the left hand of the man and
      patted it gently. For one thing, her father was not afraid, and
      that reassured her. John Carstairs threw the pistol down again.
      William Carstairs had never moved.

      “Now,” he said, “let me explain.”

      “Can you explain away this?”

      “I can. Father’s will was not opened until the day after you
      left. As God is my judge I did not know he had written to you. I
      did not know he had left anything to you. I left no stone
      unturned in an endeavour to find you. I employed the best
      detectives in the land, but we found no trace of you whatever.
      Why, John, I have only been sorry once that I let you go that
      night, that I spoke those words to you, and that has been all the
      time.”

      “And where does this come from?” said the man, flinging his arm
      up and confronting the magnificent room.

      “It came from the old farm. There was oil on it and I sold it for
      a great price. I was happily married. I came here and have been
      successful in business. Half of it all is yours.”

      “I won’t take it.”

      “John,” said William Carstairs, “I offered you money once and you
      struck it out of my hand. You remember?”

      “Yes.”

      “What I am offering you now is your own. You can’t strike it out
      of my hand. It is not mine, but yours.”

      “I won’t have it,” protested the man. “It’s too late. You don’t
      know what I’ve been, a common thief. ‘Crackerjack’ is my name.
      Every policeman and detective in New York knows me.”

      “But you’ve got a little Helen, too, haven’t you?” interposed the
      little girl with wisdom and tact beyond her years.

      “Yes.”

      “And you said she was very poor and had no Christmas.”

      “Yes.”

      “For her sake, John,” said William Carstairs. “Indeed you must
      not think you have been punished alone. I have been punished,
      too. I’ll help you begin again. Here”—he stepped closer to his
      brother—“is my hand.”

      The other stared at it uncomprehendingly.

      “There is nothing in it now but affection. Won’t you take it?”

      Slowly John Carstairs lifted his hand. His palm met that of his
      elder brother. He was so hungry and so weak and so overcome that
      he swayed a little. His head bowed, his body shook and the elder
      brother put his arm around him and drew him close.

      Into the room came William Carstairs’ wife. She, too, had at last
      been aroused by the conversation, and, missing her husband, she
      had thrown a wrapper about her and had come down to seek him.

      “We tame down to find Santy Claus,” burst out young John William,
      at the sight of her, “and he’s been here, look muvver.”

      Yes, Santa Claus had indeed been there. The boy spoke better than
      he knew.

      “And this,” said little Helen eagerly, pointing proudly to her
      new acquaintance, “is a friend of his, and he knows papa and he’s
      got a little Helen and we’re going to give her a Merry
      Christmas.”

      William Carstairs had no secrets from his wife. With a flash of
      womanly intuition, although she could not understand how he came
      to be there, she divined who this strange guest was who looked a
      pale, weak picture of her strong and splendid husband, and yet
      she must have final assurance.

      “Who is this gentleman, William?” she asked quietly, and John
      Carstairs was forever grateful to her for her word that night.

      “This,” said William Carstairs, “is my father’s son, my brother,
      who was dead and is alive again, and was lost and is found.”

      And so, as it began with the beginning, this story ends with the
      ending of the best and most famous of all the stories that were
      ever told.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

ON CHRISTMAS GIVING

      _Being a Word of Much Needed Advice_


      Christmas is the birthday of our Lord, upon which we celebrate
      God’s ineffable gift of Himself to His children. No human soul
      has ever been able to realize the full significance of that gift,
      no heart has ever been glad enough to contain the joy of it, and
      no mind has ever been wise enough to express it. Nevertheless we
      powerfully appreciate the blessing and would fain convey it
      fitly. Therefore to commemorate that great gift the custom of
      exchanging tokens of love and remembrance has grown until it has
      become well nigh universal. This is a day in which we ourselves
      crave, as never at any other time, happiness and peace for those
      we love and that ought to include everybody, for with the angelic
      message in our ears it should be impossible to hate any one on
      Christmas day however we may feel before or after.

      But despite the best of wills almost inevitably Christmas in many
      instances has created a burdensome demand. Perhaps by the method
      of exclusion we shall find out what Christmas should be. It is
      not a time for extravagance, for ostentation, for vulgar display,
      it is possible to purchase pleasure for someone else at too high
      a price to ourselves. To paraphrase Polonius, “Costly thy gift as
      thy purse can buy, rich but not expressed in fancy, for the gift
      oft proclaims the man.” In making presents observe three
      principal facts; the length of your purse, the character of your
      friend, and the universal rule of good taste. Do not plunge into
      extravagance from which you will scarcely recover except in
      months of nervous strain and desperate financial struggle. On the
      other hand do not be mean and niggardly in your gifts. Oh, not
      that; avoid selfishness at Christmas, if at no other time. Rather
      no gift at all than a grudging one. Let your offerings represent
      yourselves and your affections. Indeed if they do not represent
      you, they are not gifts at all. “The gift without the giver is
      bare.”

      And above all banish from your mind the principle of reciprocity.
      The _lex talionis_ has no place in Christmas giving. Do not think
      or feel that you must give to someone because someone gave to
      you. There is no barter about it. You give because you love and
      without a thought of return. Credit others with the same feeling
      and be governed thereby. I know one upon whose Christmas list
      there are over one hundred and fifty people, rich and poor, high
      and low, able and not able. That man would be dismayed beyond
      measure if everyone of those people felt obliged to make a return
      for the Christmas remembrances he so gladly sends them.

      In giving remember after all the cardinal principle of the day.
      Let your gift be an expression of your kindly remembrance, your
      gentle consideration, your joyful spirit, your spontaneous
      gratitude, your abiding desire for peace and goodwill toward men.
      Hunt up somebody who needs and who without you may lack and
      suffer heart hunger, loneliness, and disappointment.

      Nor is Christmas a time for gluttonous eating and drinking. To
      gorge one’s self with quantities of rich and indigestible food is
      not the noblest method of commemorating the day. The rules and
      laws of digestion are not abrogated upon the Holy day. These are
      material cautions, the day has a spiritual significance of which
      material manifestations are, or ought to be, outward and visible
      expressions only.

      Christmas is one of the great days of obligation in the Church
      year, then as at Easter if at no other time, Christians should
      gather around the table of the Lord, kneeling before God’s altar
      in the ministering of that Holy Communion which unites them with
      the past, the present, and the future—the communion of the saints
      of God’s Holy Church with His Beloved Son. Then and thus in body,
      soul, and spirit we do truly participate in the privilege and
      blessing of the Incarnation, then and there we receive that
      strength which enables everyone of us to become factors in the
      great extension of that marvellous occurrence throughout the ages
      and throughout the world.

      Let us therefore on this Holy Natal Day, from which the whole
      world dates its time, begin on our knees before that altar which
      is at once manger, cross, throne. Let us join thereafter in holy
      cheer of praise and prayer and exhortation and Christmas carol,
      and then let us go forth with a Christmas spirit in our hearts
      resolved to communicate it to the children of men, and not merely
      for the day but for the future. To make the right use of these
      our privileges, this it is to save the world.

      In this spirit, therefore, so far as poor, fallible human nature
      permits him to realize it and exhibit it, the author wishes all
      his readers which at present comprise his only flock—

      A MERRY CHRISTMAS AND A HAPPY NEW YEAR.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

IT WAS THE SAME CHRISTMAS MORNING

      _In Which it is Shown how Different the Same Things may Be_

      _A Story for Girls_


      In Philadelphia the rich and the poor live cheek by jowl—or
      rather, back to back. Between the streets of the rich and
      parallel to them, run the alleys of the poor. The rich man’s
      garage jostles elbows with the poor man’s dwelling.

      In a big house fronting on one of the most fashionable streets
      lived a little girl named Ethel. Other people lived in the big
      house also, a father, a mother, a butler, a French maid, and a
      host of other servants. Back of the big house was the garage.
      Facing the garage on the other side of the alley was a little,
      old one-story-and-a-half brick house. In this house dwelt a
      little girl named Maggie. With her lived her father who was a
      labourer; her mother, who took in washing; and half a dozen
      brothers, four of whom worked at something or other, while the
      two littlest went to school.

      Ethel and Maggie never played together. Their acquaintance was
      simply a bowing one—better perhaps, a smiling one. From one
      window in the big playroom which was so far to one side of the
      house that Ethel could see past the garage and get a glimpse of
      the window of the living-room in Maggie’s house, the two little
      girls at first stared at each other. One day Maggie nodded and
      smiled, then Ethel, feeling very much frightened, for she had
      been cautioned against playing with or noticing the children in
      the alley, nodded and smiled back. Now neither of the children
      felt happy unless they had held a pantomimic conversation from
      window to window at some time during the day.

      It was Christmas morning. Ethel awoke very early, as all properly
      organized children do on that day at least. She had a beautiful
      room in which she slept alone. Adjacent to it, in another room
      almost as beautiful, slept Celeste, her mamma’s French maid.
      Ethel had been exquisitely trained. She lay awake a long time
      before making a sound or movement, wishing it were time to arise.
      But Christmas was strong upon her, the infection of the season
      was in her blood. Presently she slipped softly out of bed,
      pattered across the room, paused at the door which gave entrance
      to the hall which led to her mother’s apartments, then turned and
      plumped down upon Celeste.

      “Merry Christmas,” she cried shaking the maid.

      To awaken Celeste was a task of some difficulty. Ordinarily the
      French woman would have been indignant at being thus summarily
      routed out before the appointed hour but something of the spirit
      of Christmas had touched her as well. She answered the salutation
      of the little girl kindly enough, but as she sat up in bed she
      lifted a reproving finger.

      “But,” she said, “you mus’ keep ze silence, Mademoiselle Ethel.
      Madame, vôtre maman, she say she mus’ not be disturb’ in ze
      morning. She haf been out ver’ late in ze night and she haf go to
      ze bed ver’ early. She say you mus’ be ver’ quiet on ze Matin de
      Noël!”

      “I will be quiet, Celeste,” answered the little girl, her lip
      quivering at the injunction.

      It was so hard to be repressed all the time but especially on
      Christmas Day of all others.

      “Zen I will help you to dress immediatement, and zen Villiam, he
      vill call us to see ze tree.”

      Never had the captious little girl been more docile, more
      obedient. Dressing Ethel that morning was a pleasure to Celeste.
      Scarcely had she completed the task and put on her own clothing
      when there was a tap on the door.

      “Vat is it?”

      “Mornin’, Miss Celeste,” spoke a heavy voice outside, a voice
      subdued to a decorous softness of tone, “if you an’ Miss Ethel
      are ready, the tree is lit, an’—”

      “Ve air ready, Monsieur Villiam,” answered Celeste, throwing open
      the door dramatically.

      Ethel opened her mouth to welcome the butler—for if that solemn
      and portentous individual ever unbent it was to Miss Ethel, whom
      in his heart of hearts he adored—but he placed a warning finger
      to his lip and whispered in an awestruck voice:

      “The master, your father, came in late last night, Miss, an’ he
      said there must be no noise or racket this morning.”

      Ethel nodded sadly, her eyes filling at her disappointment;
      William then marched down the hall with a stately magnificence
      peculiar to butlers, and opened the door into the playroom. He
      flung it wide and stood to one side like a grenadier, as Celeste
      and Ethel entered. There was a gorgeous tree, beautifully
      trimmed. William had bought the tree and Celeste’s French taste
      had adorned it. It was a sight to delight any child’s eyes and
      the things strewn around it on the floor were even more
      attractive. Everything that money could buy, that Celeste and
      William could think of was there. Ethel’s mother had given her
      maid carte blanche to buy the child whatever she liked, and
      Ethel’s father had done the same with William. The two had pooled
      their issue and the result was a toyshop dream. Ethel looked at
      the things in silence.

      “How do you like it, Miss?” asked William at last rather
      anxiously.

      “Mademoiselle is not pleased?” questioned the French woman.

      “It—it—is lovely,” faltered the little girl.

      “We haf selected zem ourselves.”

      “Yes, Miss.”

      “Didn’t mamma—buy anything—or papa—or Santa?”

      “Zey tell us to get vatever you vould like and nevair mind ze
      money.”

      “It was so good of you, I am sure,” said Ethel struggling
      valiantly against disappointment almost too great to bear.
      “Everything is beautiful but—I—wish mamma or papa had—I wish they
      were here—I’d like them to wish me a Merry Christmas.”

      The little lip trembled but the upper teeth came down on it
      firmly. The child had courage. William looked at Celeste and
      Celeste shrugged her shoulders, both knowing what was lacking.

      “I am sure, Miss, that they do wish you a Merry Christmas,
      an’”—the butler began bravely, but the situation was too much for
      him. “There goes the master’s bell,” he said quickly and turned
      and stalked out of the room gravely, although no bell had
      summoned him.

[Illustration: “I am sure, Miss, that they do wish you a Merry
Christmas.”]

      “You may go, Celeste,” said Ethel with a dignity not unlike her
      mother’s manner.

      The maid shrugged her shoulders again, left the room and closed
      the door. Everything was lovely, everything was there except that
      personal touch which means so much even to the littlest girl.
      Ethel was used to being cared for by others than her parents but
      it came especially hard on her this morning. She turned, leaving
      the beautiful things as they were placed about the tree, and
      walked to the end window whence she could get a view of the
      little house beyond the garage over the back wall.

      There was a Christmas tree in Maggie’s house too. It wouldn’t
      have made a respectable branch for Ethel’s tree, and the
      trimmings were so cheap and poor that Celeste would have thrown
      them into the waste basket immediately. There were a few common,
      cheap, perishable little toys around the tree on the floor but to
      Maggie it was a glimpse of heaven. She stood in her little white
      night-gown—no such thing as dressing for her on Christmas
      morning—staring around her. The whole family was grouped about
      her, even the littlest brothers, who went to school because they
      were not big enough to work, forgot their own joy in watching
      their little sister. Her father, her mother, the big boys all in
      a state of more or less dishevelled undress stood around her,
      pointing out first one thing and then another which they had been
      able to get for her by denying themselves some of the necessities
      of life. Maggie was so happy that her eyes brimmed, yet she did
      not cry. She laughed, she clapped her hands, and kissed them all
      round and finally found herself, a big orange in one hand, a tin
      trumpet in the other, perched upon her father’s broad shoulders
      leading a frantic march around the narrow confines of the
      living-room. As she passed by the one window she caught a glimpse
      of the alley. It had been snowing throughout the night and the
      ground was white.

      “Oh,” she screamed with delight, “let me see the snow on
      Christmas morning.”

      Her father walked over to the window, parted the cheap lace
      curtains, while Maggie clapped her hands gleefully at the
      prospect. Presently she lifted her eyes and looked toward the
      other window high up in the air, where Ethel stood, a mournful
      little figure. Maggie’s papa looked too. He knew how cheap and
      poor were the little gifts he had bought for his daughter.

      “I wish,” he thought, “that she could have some of the things
      that child up there has.”

      Maggie however was quite content. She smiled, flourished her
      trumpet, waved her orange, but there was no answering smile on
      Ethel’s face now. Finally the wistful little girl in the big
      house languidly waved her hand, and then Maggie was taken away to
      be dressed lest she should catch cold after the mischief was
      done.

      “I hope that she’s having a nice Christmas,” said Maggie,
      referring to Ethel.

      “I hope so too,” answered her mother, wishing that her little
      girl might have some of the beautiful gifts she knew must be in
      the great house.

      “Whatever she has,” said Maggie, gleefully, “she can’t have any
      nicer Christmas than I have, that you and papa and the boys gave
      me. I’m just as happy as I can be.”

      Over in the big house, Ethel was also wishing. She was so unhappy
      since she had seen Maggie in the arms of her big, bearded father,
      standing by the window, that she could control herself no longer.
      She turned away and threw herself down on the floor in front of
      the tree and buried her face in her hands bursting into tears.

      It was Christmas morning and she was all alone.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

A CHRISTMAS CAROL

“_Christmas Then and Now_”


The Stars look down On David’s town, While angels sing in Winter night;
The Shepherds pray, And far away The Wise Men follow guiding light.
Little Christ Child By Mary Mild In Manger lies without the Inn;
Of Man the Son, Yet God in One, To save the lost in World of Sin.
Still stars look down
On David’s town And still the Christ Child dwells with men,
What thought give we To such as He, Or souls who live in Sin as then?
Show we our love To Him above By offering others’ grief to share;
And Christmas cheer For all the year Bestow to lighten pain and care.

[Illustration: The Stars Look Down (music page one)]

[Illustration: The Stars Look Down (music page two)]





[Illustration]

THE LONE SCOUT’S CHRISTMAS

      _Wherein is Set Forth the Courage and Resourcefulness of Youth_

      _A Story for Boys_


      Every boy likes snow on Christmas Day, but there is such a thing
      as too much of it. Henry Ives, alone in the long railroad coach,
      stared out of the clouded windows at the whirling mass of snow
      with feelings of dismay. It was the day before Christmas, almost
      Christmas Eve. Henry did not feel any too happy, indeed he had
      hard work to keep down a sob. His mother had died but a few weeks
      before and his father, the captain of a freighter on the Great
      Lakes, had decided, very reluctantly, to send him to his brother
      who had a big ranch in western Nebraska.

      Henry had never seen his uncle or his aunt. He did not know what
      kind of people they were. The loss of his mother had been a
      terrible blow to him and to be separated from his father had
      filled his cup of sorrow to the brim. His father’s work did not
      end with the close of navigation on the lakes, and he could not
      get away then although he promised to come and see Henry before
      the ice broke and traffic was resumed in the spring.

      The long journey from the little Ohio town on Lake Erie to
      western Nebraska had been without mishap. His uncle’s ranch lay
      far away from the main line of the railroad on the end of the
      branch. There was but one train a day upon it, and that was a
      mixed train. The coach in which Henry sat was attached to the end
      of a long string of freight cars. Travel was infrequent in that
      section of the country. On this day Henry was the only passenger.

      The train had been going up-grade for many miles and had just
      about reached the crest of the divide. Bucking the snow had
      become more and more difficult; several times the train had
      stopped. Sometimes the engine backed the train some distance to
      get headway to burst through the drift. So Henry thought nothing
      of it when the car came to a gentle stop.

      The all-day storm blew from the west and the front windows of the
      car were covered with snow so he could not see ahead. Some time
      before the conductor and rear brakeman had gone forward to help
      dig the engine out of the drift and they had not come back.

      Henry sat in silence for some time watching the whirling snow. He
      was sad; even the thought of the gifts of his father and friends
      in his trunk which stood in the baggage compartment of the car
      did not cheer him. More than all the Christmas gifts in the
      world, he wanted at that time his mother and father and friends.

      “It doesn’t look as though it was going to be a very merry
      Christmas for me,” he said aloud at last, and then feeling a
      little stiff from having sat still so long he got up and walked
      to the front of the car.

      It was warm and pleasant in the coach. The Baker heater was going
      at full blast and Henry noticed that there was plenty of coal. He
      tried to see out from the front door; but as he was too prudent
      to open it and let in the snow and cold he could make out
      nothing. The silence rather alarmed him. The train had never
      waited so long before.

      Then, suddenly, came the thought that something very unusual was
      wrong. He must get a look at the train ahead. He ran back to the
      rear door, opened it and standing on the leeward side, peered
      forward. The engine and freight cars were not there! All he saw
      was the deep cut filled nearly to the height of the car with
      snow.

      Henry was of a mechanical turn of mind and he realized that
      doubtless the coupling had broken. That was what had happened.
      The trainmen had not noticed it and the train had gone on and
      left the coach. The break had occurred at the crest of the divide
      and the train had gone rapidly down hill on the other side. The
      amount of snow told the boy that it would not be possible for the
      train to back up and pick up the car. He was alone in the
      wilderness of rolling hills in far western Nebraska. And this was
      Christmas Eve!

      It was enough to bring despair to any boy’s heart. But Henry Ives
      was made of good stuff, he was a first-class Boy Scout and on his
      scout coat in the trunk were four Merit Badges. He had the spirit
      of his father, who had often bucked the November storms on Lake
      Superior in his great six-hundred-foot freighter, and danger
      inspired him.

      He went back into the car, closed the door, and sat down to think
      it over. He had very vague ideas as to how long such a storm
      would last and how long he might be kept prisoner. He did not
      even know just where he was or how far it was to the end of the
      road and the town where his uncle’s ranch lay.

      It was growing dark so he lighted one of the lamps close to the
      heater and had plenty of light. In doing so he noticed in the
      baggage rack a dinner pail. He remembered that the conductor had
      told him that his wife had packed that dinner pail and although
      it did not belong to the boy he felt justified in appropriating
      it in such circumstances. It was full of food—eggs, sandwiches,
      and a bottle of coffee. He was not very hungry but he ate a
      sandwich. He was even getting cheerful about the situation
      because he had something to do. It was an adventure.

      While he had been eating, the storm had died away. Now he
      discovered that it had stopped snowing. All around him the
      country was a hilly, rolling prairie. The cut ran through a hill
      which seemed to be higher than others in the neighbourhood. If he
      could get on top of it he might see where he was. Although day
      was ending it was not yet dark and Henry decided upon an
      exploration.

      Now he could not walk on foot in that deep and drifted snow
      without sinking over his head under ordinary conditions, but his
      troop had done a great deal of winter work, and strapped
      alongside of his big, telescope grip were a pair of snow-shoes
      which he himself had made, and with the use of which he was
      thoroughly familiar.

      “I mustn’t spoil this new suit,” he told himself, so he ran to
      the baggage-room of the car, opened his trunk, got out his Scout
      uniform and slipped into it in a jiffy. “Glad I ran in that
      ‘antelope dressing race,’” he muttered, “but I’ll beat my former
      record now.” Over his khaki coat he put on his heavy sweater,
      then donned his wool cap and gloves, and with his snow-shoes
      under his arm hurried back to the rear platform. The snow was on
      a level with the platform. It rose higher as the coach reached
      into the cut. He saw that he would have to go down some distance
      before he could turn and attempt the hill.

      He had used his snow-shoes many times in play but this was the
      first time they had ever been of real service to him. Thrusting
      his toes into the straps he struck out boldly.

[Illustration: “Thrusting his toes into the straps he struck out
boldly.”]

      To his delight he got along without the slightest difficulty
      although he strode with great care. He gained the level and in
      ten minutes found himself on the top of the hill, where he could
      see miles and miles of rolling prairie. He turned himself slowly
      about, to get a view of the country.

      As his glance swept the horizon, at first it did not fall upon a
      single, solitary thing except a vast expanse of snow. There was
      not a tree even. The awful loneliness filled him with dismay. He
      had about given up when, in the last quarter of the horizon he
      saw, perhaps a quarter of a mile away, what looked like a fine
      trickle of blackish smoke that appeared to rise from a shapeless
      mound that bulged above the monotonous level.

      “Smoke means fire, and fire means man,” he said, excitedly.

      The sky was rapidly clearing. A few stars had already appeared.
      Remembering what he had learned on camp and trail, he took his
      bearing by the stars; he did not mean to get lost if he left that
      hill. Looking back, he could see the car, the lamp of which sent
      broad beams of light through the windows across the snow.

      Then he plunged down the hill, thanking God in his boyish heart
      for the snow-shoes and his knowledge of them.

      It did not take him long to reach the mound whence the smoke
      rose. It was a sod house, he found, built against a sharp knoll,
      which no doubt formed its rear wall. The wind had drifted the
      snow, leaving a half-open way to the door. Noiselessly the boy
      slipped down to it, drew his feet from the snow-shoes and
      knocked. There was a burst of sound inside. It made his heart
      jump, but he was reassured by the fact that the voices were those
      of children. What they said he could not make out; but, without
      further ado, he opened the door and entered.

      It was a fairly large room. There were two beds in it, a stove, a
      table, a chest of drawers and a few chairs. From one of the beds
      three heads stared at him. As each head was covered with a wool
      cap, drawn down over the ears, like his own, he could not make
      out who they were. There were dishes on the table, but they were
      empty. The room was cold, although it was evident that there was
      still a little fire in the stove.

      “Oh!” came from one of the heads in the bed. “I thought you were
      my father. What is your name?”

      “My name,” answered the boy, “is Henry Ives. I was left behind
      alone in the railroad car about a mile back, and saw the smoke
      from your house and here I am.”

      “Have you brought us anything to burn?” asked the second head.

      “Or anything to eat?” questioned the third.

      “My name is Mary Wright,” said the first speaker, “and these are
      my brothers George and Philip. Father went away yesterday morning
      with the team, to get some coal and some food. He went to Kiowa.”

      “That’s where I am going,” interrupted Henry.

      “Yes,” continued Mary, “I suppose he can’t get back because of
      the snow. It’s an awful storm.”

      “We haven’t anything to eat, and I don’t know when father will be
      back,” said George.

      “And it’s Christmas Eve,” wailed Philip, who appeared to be about
      seven.

      He set up a howl about this which his brother George, who was
      about nine, had great difficulty in quieting.

      “We put the last shovelful of coal in the stove,” said Mary
      Wright, “and got into bed to keep warm.”

      “I’ll go outside while you get up and dress,” said Henry
      considerately, “and then we will try and get to the car. It is
      warm there, and there is something to eat.”

      “You needn’t go,” said the girl; “we are all dressed.” She threw
      back the covers and sprang out of bed. She was very pretty and
      about Henry’s own age, he discovered, although she was pale and
      haggard with cold and hunger.

      “Goody, goody!” exclaimed little Philip, as his feet landed on
      the floor. “Maybe we’ll have some Christmas, too.”

      “Maybe we will,” said Henry, smiling at him. “At least we will
      have something to eat.”

      “Well, let’s start right away then,” urged George.

      This brought Henry face to face with a dilemma. “I have only one
      pair of snow-shoes,” he said at last, “and you probably don’t
      know how to use them anyway, and you can’t walk on the snow.”

      “I have a sled,” suggested George.

      “That won’t do,” said Henry. “I’ve got to have something that
      won’t sink in the snow—that will lie flat, so I can draw you
      along.”

      “How about that table?” said the girl.

      “Good suggestion,” cried Henry.

      It was nothing but a common kitchen table. He turned it upside
      down, took his Scout axe from its sheath, knocked the legs off,
      fastened a piece of clothesline to the butts of two of them.

      “Now if I could have something to turn up along the front, so as
      not to dig into the snow,” he said, “it would be fine.” He
      thought a moment. “Where is that sled of yours, George?”

      “Here,” said George, dragging it forth. The runners curved
      upwards. Henry cut them off, in spite of Philip’s protests. He
      nailed these runners to the front of the table and stretched rope
      tightly across them so that he had four up-curves in front of the
      table.

      “Now I want something to stretch on these things, so as to let
      the sled ride over the snow, instead of digging into it,” he said
      to the girl.

      She brought him her father’s old “slicker.” Henry cut it into
      suitable shape and nailed and lashed it securely to the runners
      and to the table top. Now he had a flat-bottomed sled with a
      rising front to it that would serve. He smiled as he looked at
      the queer contrivance and said aloud: “I wish Mr. Lesher could
      see that!”

      “Who is Mr. Lesher?” asked George.

      “Oh, he’s my Scoutmaster back in Ohio. Now come on!”

      He opened the door, drew the sled outside, pushed it up on the
      snow and stepped on it. It bore his weight perfectly.

      “It’s all right,” he cried. “But it won’t take all three of you
      at once.”

      “I’ll wait,” said Mary, “you take the two boys.”

      “Very well,” said Henry.

      “You’ll surely come back for me?”

      “Surely, and I think it’s mighty brave of you to stay behind. Now
      come on, boys,” he said.

      Leaving Mary filled with pleasure at such praise, he put the two
      boys carefully into the sled, stepped into his snow-shoes and
      dragged them rapidly across the prairie. It was quite dark now,
      but the sky was clear and the stars were bright. The storm had
      completely stopped. He remembered the bearings he had taken by
      the stars, and reached the high hill without difficulty. Below
      him lay the car.

      Presently he drew up before the platform. He put the boys in the
      car, told them to go up to the fire and warm themselves and not
      to touch anything. Then he went back for the girl.

      “Did you think I was not coming?” he asked as he re-entered the
      cabin.

      “I knew you would come back,” said the girl and it was Henry’s
      turn to tingle with pride.

      He wrapped her up carefully, and fairly ran back to the car. They
      found the boys warm and comfortable and greatly excited.

      “If we just had a Christmas tree and Santa Claus and something to
      eat and a drink of water and a place to sleep,” said the youngest
      boy, “it would be great fun.”

      “I am afraid we can’t manage the Christmas tree,” said Henry,
      “but we can have everything else.”

      “Do you mean Santy?”

      “Santy too,” answered the boy. “First of all, we will get
      something to eat.”

      “We haven’t had anything since morning,” said the girl. Henry
      divided the sandwiches into three portions. As it happened, there
      were three hard-boiled eggs. He gave one portion to each of his
      guests.

      “You haven’t left any for yourself,” said Mary.

      “I ate before I looked for you,” answered Henry, although the one
      sandwich had by no means satisfied his hunger.

      “My, but this is good!” said George.

      “Our mother is dead,” said Mary Wright after a pause, “and our
      father is awful poor. He has taken out a homestead and we are
      trying to live on it until he gets it proved up. We have had a
      very hard time since mother died.”

      “Yes, I know,” said Henry, gravely; “my mother died, too.”

      “I wonder what time it is?” asked the girl at last.

      Henry pulled out his watch. “It is after six o’clock,” he said.

      “Say,” broke in George, “that’s a funny kind of a uniform you’ve
      got on.”

      “It is a Boy Scout uniform.”

      “Oh, is it?” exclaimed George. “I never saw one before. I wish I
      could be a Scout!”

      “Maybe you can,” answered Henry. “I am going to organize a troop
      when I get to Kiowa. But now I’m going to fix beds for you. Of
      course we are all sleepy after such a hard day.”

      He had seen the trainmen lift up the bottoms of the seats and lay
      them lengthwise of the car. He did this, and soon made four
      fairly comfortable beds. The two nearest the stove he gave to the
      boys. He indicated the next one was for Mary, and the one further
      down toward the middle of the car was for himself.

      “You can all go to bed right away,” he said when he had made his
      preparations. The two boys decided to accept this advice. Mary
      said she would stay up a little longer and talk with Henry.

      “You can’t undress,” she said to the two boys. “You’ll have to
      sleep as you are.” She sat down in one of the car seats; Philip
      knelt down at one knee and George at the other. The girl, who was
      barely fifteen had already taken her mother’s place. She laid her
      hand on each bent head and listened while one after the other the
      boys said their prayers. She kissed them good-night, saw them
      comfortably laid out on the big cushions with their overcoats for
      pillows and turned away.

      “Say,” began Philip, “you forgot something, Mary.”

      “What have I forgotten, dear?”

      “Why, it’s Christmas Eve and we must hang up our stockings.”

      Mary threw up her hands. “I am afraid this is too far away for
      Santa Claus. He won’t know that we are out here,” she said.

      “Oh, I don’t know,” said Henry, thinking rapidly, “let them hang
      them up.”

      Mary looked at him in surprise. “They haven’t any to hang up,”
      she said. “We can’t take those they’re wearing.”

      “You should have thought of that,” wailed Philip, “before you
      brought us here.”

      “I have some extra ones in my bag,” said Henry. “We will hang
      them up.”

      He opened the bag and brought out three stockings, one for each
      of his guests. He fastened them to the baggage racks above the
      seats and watched the two boys contentedly close their eyes and
      go to sleep.

      “They will be awfully disappointed when they wake up in the
      morning and do not find anything in them,” said Mary.

      “They’re going to find something in them,” said Henry
      confidently.

      He went to the end of the car, opened his trunk and lifted out
      various packages which had been designed for him. Of course he
      was going on sixteen, but there were some things that would do
      for Philip and plenty of things for George and some good books
      that he had selected himself that would do for Mary. Then there
      were candy and nuts and cakes and oranges galore. Mary was even
      more excited than he was as they filled the boys’ stockings and
      arranged things that were too big to go in them.

      “These are your own Christmas gifts, I know,” said the girl, “and
      you haven’t hung up your stocking.”

      “I don’t need to. I have had my Christmas present.”

      “And what is that?”

      “A chance to make a merry Christmas for you and your little
      brothers,” answered Henry, and his heart was light.

      “How long do you suppose we will have to stay here?” asked the
      girl.

      “I don’t know. I suppose they will try to dig us out to-morrow.
      Meanwhile we have nuts, oranges, crackers, and little cakes, to
      say nothing of the candy, to live on. Now you go to bed and have
      a good sleep.”

      “And what will you do?”

      “I’ll stay up for a while and read one of these books and keep
      the fire going.”

      “You are awfully good to us,” said Mary, turning away. “You are
      just like a real Santa Claus.”

      “We have to help other people—especially people in trouble,”
      answered the boy. “It is one of the first Scout rules. I am
      really glad I got left behind and found you. Good-night.”

      The girl, whose experience that day had been hard, soon fell
      asleep with her brothers. Henry did not feel sleepy at all; he
      was bright and happy and rejoiced. This certainly _was_ an
      adventure. He wondered what Dick and Joe and Spike and the other
      fellows of his troop would think when he wrote them about it. He
      did not realize that he had saved the lives of the children, who
      would assuredly have frozen to death in the cabin.

      When he was satisfied that Mary was sound asleep, he put some
      things in her stocking and then piled in the rack over her head
      two books he thought the girl would like. It was late when he
      went to sleep himself, happier than he had dreamed he could be.

      He awoke once in the night to replenish the fire, but he was
      sleeping soundly at seven o’clock in the morning when the door of
      the car opened and half a dozen men filed in. They had not made
      any noise. Even the big snow-plough tearing open the way from
      Kiowa had not disturbed the four sleepers.

      The first man in was the conductor. After the trainmen had
      discovered that the coach had been left behind they had managed
      to get into Kiowa and had started back at once with the rotary
      plough to open the road and to rescue the boy. Henry’s uncle had
      been in town to meet Henry, and of course the trainmen let him go
      back with them on the plough. The third man was Mr. Wright. He
      had been caught by the storm and, as he said, the abandoned coach
      must be near his claim, he asked to be taken along because he was
      afraid his children would be freezing to death.

      The men stopped and surveyed the sleeping boys and girl. Their
      glances ranged from the children to the bulging stockings and the
      pile of Christmas presents in the racks.

      “Well, can you beat that?” said the conductor.

      “By George!” exclaimed Rancher Ives, “a regular Christmas
      layout!”

      “These are my children safe and well, thank God!” cried Mr.
      Wright.

      “Boy,” said the conductor, laying his hand on Henry’s shoulder,
      “we came to wish you a Merry Christmas.”

      “Father!” cried Mary Wright, awakened by the voice, and the next
      minute she was in his arms, while she told him rapidly what Henry
      had done for them all.

      The boys were awake, too, but humanity had no attraction for
      them.

      “Santa has come!” shouted Philip making a dive for his stocking.

      “This is your uncle, Jim Ives,” said the conductor to Henry.

      “And this is my father,” said Mary in turn.

      “I am awfully sorry,” said Henry to the conductor, “but we had to
      eat your dinner. And I had to chop up your kitchen table,” he
      added, turning to Mr. Wright.

      “I am glad there was something to eat in the pail,” said one.

      “You could have chopped the cabin down,” said the other.

      “By George!” said the ranchman proudly. “I wrote to your father
      to send you out here and we’d make a man of you, but it seems to
      me you are a man already,” he continued as Mary Wright poured
      forth the story of their rescue.

      “No, I am not a man,” said Henry to his uncle, as he flushed with
      pride at the hearty praise of these men. “I am just a—”

      “Just a what?” asked the conductor as the boy hesitated.

      “Why, just a Boy Scout,” answered Henry.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

LOOKING INTO THE MANGER

      _A Christmas Meditation_


      Christmas morning, the day we celebrate as the anniversary of the
      birth of our Lord and Saviour, Jesus Christ, in the obscure,
      little hill town of Bethlehem in the far-off Judæan land, over
      nineteen hundred years ago!

      It is said:

“When beggars die, there are no comets seen:
The heavens themselves blaze forth the death of princes.”

      What is true of the passing of kings is perhaps more true of
      their coming; yet in this birth are singular contradictions. The
      Child was born a beggar. There lacks no touch which even
      imagination could supply to indicate the meanness of His earthly
      condition. Homeless, His mother, save for the stable of the
      public inn—and words can hardly describe any place more
      unsuited—was shelterless, unprotected, in that hour of travail
      pain.

      I love to let my imagination dwell upon that scene. Sometimes I
      think wayfarers may have gathered in the tavern hard by and with
      music and play sought to while away the hours as travellers have
      from time immemorial. Perhaps in some pause in their merriment, a
      strange cry of anguish, borne by the night wind from the rude
      shelter without, may have stopped their revelry for a moment and
      one may have asked of another:

      “What is that?”

      The servant of the house who stood obsequious to promote their
      pleasure may have answered apologetically:

      “It is the cry of a woman of the people in travail in the inn
      yard.”

      I can fancy their indifference to the answer, or I can hear
      perhaps the rude jest, or the vulgar quip, with which such an
      announcement may have been received, as the play or the music
      went on again.

      Oh, yes, the world in solemn stillness lay, doubtless, that
      winter night, but not the people in it. They pursued their
      several vocations as usual. They loved or they hated, they worked
      or they played, they hoped or they despaired, they dreamed or
      they achieved, just as they had done throughout the centuries,
      just as they have done since that day, just as they will do far
      into the future; although their little God came to them, as never
      He came before, in the stable in the Bethlehem hills that night.

      And yet, had they but cast their eyes upward like the wise men—it
      is always your wise man who casts his eyes upward—they, too,
      might have seen the star that blazed overhead. It was placed so
      high above the earth that all men everywhere could see to which
      spot on the surface it pointed. Or, had they been devout men,
      they would have listened for heavenly voices—it is always your
      devout man who tries to hear other things than the babble of the
      Babel in which he lives—they, too, could have heard the angelic
      chorus like the shepherds in the fields and on the hillsides that
      frosty night.

      For the heavens did blaze forth the birth of the Child. Not with
      the thunder of guns, not with the blare of trumpets, not with the
      beating of drums, not with the lighting of castle, village, and
      town, the kindling of beacons upon the far-flung hills, the cry
      of fast-riding messengers through the night, and the loud acclaim
      of thousands which greet the coming of an earthly king, was He
      welcomed; but by the still shining of a silent star and by the
      ineffable and transcendent voices of an Angel Choir.

      How long did the Shepherds listen to that chorus? How long did it
      ring over the hills and far away? Whither went the Wise Men? Into
      what dim distance vanished the star?

“Where are the roses of yesterday?
What has become of last year’s snow?”

      And the residuum of it all was a little Baby held to a woman’s
      breast in a miserable hovel in the most forlorn and detested
      corner of the world. And yet to-day and at this hour, and at
      every hour during the twenty-four, men are looking into that
      chamber; men are bowing to that Child and His mother, and even
      that mother is at the feet of the Child.

      From the snow peaks of the North land, “from Greenland’s icy
      mountains to India’s coral strand,” and on and on through all the
      burning tropics to the companion ice of the other pole, the
      antarctic, and girdling the world from east to west as well, the
      adoration continues. It comes alike from the world’s noblest,
      from the world’s highest, from the world’s truest, from the
      world’s kindest, from the world’s poorest, from the world’s
      humblest, from the world’s best.

      Do not even the soldiers in the trenches upon the far-flung
      battle lines pause to listen, look to see as for a moment dies
      away the cannonade? Do not even the sailors of war and trade peer
      across the tossing waters of the great deep, longing for a truce
      of God if only for an hour upon this winter morning?

[Illustration: “The world bows down to a Mother and her Child—and the
Mother herself is at the feet of the Child.”]

      Yes, they all look into the manger as they look upon the cross
      and if only for an instant this war reddened planet comes to
      “_see and believe_.” What keen vision saw in the Baby the Son of
      God and the Son of Man? What simple faith can see these things in
      Him now? “_Let us now go even unto Bethlehem and see this thing
      which is come to pass_.”

      That birth is known as the Incarnation. Ye know not “_how the
      bones do grow in the womb of her that is with child_.” Life
      itself is insusceptible of any definition which satisfies, but we
      know that we live, nevertheless. Science points out a common
      origin in protoplasmic cells and is quite unable to explain so
      common a fact as sex differentiation. I care not what methods of
      accounting for life you propose, you yet have to refer it to the
      Author of all life “_in whom we live and move and have our
      being_.” Why, therefore, should the Incarnation be thought
      incredible or impossible because it does not come within the
      limitations of our present understanding and it is not taught by
      our limited human experience. The sweet reasonableness of the
      Incarnation, this conception by Divine power, this birth from the
      Virgin mother, should appeal to all who think deeply on these
      subjects.

      And yet perhaps the manner, place, and circumstance of this birth
      may awaken wonder. Possibly you would have the King come as other
      kings come, in pomp and circumstance, glory and majesty, with
      heralds preceding, music playing, blossoms strewn, and people
      cheering. Oh, no, that way did not seem the best way to the
      wisdom of God—a young girl, an old man, in the stable, no other
      tendance, no luxury, no comfort—poverty, humility, absolute.

      Let us forget the Angel Chorus and the blazing star and go now
      even unto Bethlehem and look into the manger at that Child, while
      the uncomprehending cattle stare resentful perhaps at their
      displacement. The King comes as a Child, as weak, as helpless, as
      vocal of its pains as any other child. Not a Child of luxury, not
      a Child of consequence, not a Child of comfort, but a Child of
      poverty; and in the eyes of the blind world, if they had been
      privy to it, without the glorious vision of the good man, Joseph,
      a Child of shame! If the world had known that the Babe was not
      the Child of Joseph and Mary how it would have mocked. What
      laughter, what jeers, what contempt, what obloquy, what scorn
      would have been heaped upon the woman’s head! Why the world would
      heap them there now were it not that that portion of it which
      disbelieves in the Incarnation, says that Joseph was after all
      the father of the Child.

      Nor shall we go down to Bethlehem alone. The poor, ignorant
      shepherds came to the cradle that night. They could understand.
      It did not seem strange to them that their God was poor, for they
      themselves were poor. I wonder how much the shepherds reflected.
      Theirs is a profession which gives rise to thought; they are much
      alone in the waste places with the gentlest of God’s creatures.
      Their paths lead by green pastures and still waters; they enjoy
      long, lonely hours for meditation. Did they say:

      “Ah! God has come to us as a poor man, not because there is
      anything particularly noble or desirable in poverty, but because
      so many of us are so very poor, and because the most of us have
      been poor all the time, and because it is probable that most of
      us will be poor in the future!”

      Many a poor man has looked up into the silent heavens and
      wondered sometimes whether God understood or cared about his
      wretched lot. Of course God always knew and cared, we cannot
      gainsay that, but in order to make men know that He knew and to
      make them believe that He cared, He let them see that He did not
      disdain to be a poor man and humble; that He sought His followers
      and supporters in the great majority. _My God was a Carpenter_!
      That is why He came to the stable; that is why He came to the
      manger. And that is why the poor come to Him.

      And there came to that same cradle, a little while after, the
      Wise Men. They were professional wise men; they belonged to the
      learned, the cultured, the thoughtful class; but they were wise
      men as well in the sense in which we use wisdom to-day. That is,
      they looked beyond earthly conditions and saw Divinity where the
      casual glance does not see it. How many a seamed, rugged face,
      how many a burden-bent back, how many a faltering footstep, how
      many a knotted, calloused hand is perhaps more nearly in the
      image of God than the fairer face, the straighter figure, the
      softer palm!

      The shepherds were not only poor, but they laboured in their
      poverty; they were working men and they worshipped Him, the
      Working Man. The wise men were not only wise, but they were rich.
      They brought the treasures of the earth from the ends thereof and
      laid them before the Babe and the mother. How fragrant the
      perfume of the frankincense and the myrrh, and how rich the
      lustre of the gold and silver in the mean surroundings of the
      hovel. They took no thought of their costly apparel, they had no
      fear of contamination from their surroundings, no question of
      relative degree entered their heads. As simply and as truly as
      the shepherds they worshipped the Christ. The rich and the poor
      met together there, and the Lord was the maker of them all.

      Was that baby-hand the shaper of destiny? Was that working-hand
      the director of events? Even so. The Lord’s power is not less the
      Lord’s power though it be not exhibited in the stretched out arm
      of majesty.

      Some of you who read this and many more who can not are poor,
      perhaps very poor, but you can stand beside that manger and look
      at that Baby’s face, you can reflect upon the Child, how He grew,
      what He said, what He did, until a cross casts its black shadow
      across your vision—the war is raising many crosses and many there
      be that walk the _via dolorosa_ to them to-day. You shall be
      counted blessed if you can gaze at that cross until it is
      transformed by the glory of the resurrection. And in it all you
      can see your God—the poor man’s God!—the rich man’s
      God!—everybody’s God!

      You can know that your God was poor, that He was humble, that He
      struggled under adverse conditions, that He laboured, that He was
      hungry, thirsty, tired, cold, that He was homeless, that He was
      denied many of the joys of human society and the solace of
      affection, that His best friends went back on Him, that everybody
      deserted Him, and that the whole world finally rose up and
      crushed Him down. That he suffered all things. Only a very great
      God could so endure. Only one who was truly God could so manifest
      Himself in pain.

      You can understand how He can comprehend what your trouble is.
      Oh, yes, the poor and the bereaved have as great a right to look
      into that manger and see their God there as have the rich and the
      care free.

      Now there is a kind of pernicious socialism which condemns riches
      as things unholy and exalts poverty as a thing acceptable to God.
      That Baby came as well to the rich as to the poor. Do not forget
      that. It is not generally understood, but it is true. He accepted
      gladly the hospitality, the alms, the gifts, priceless in value,
      of those who had great possessions and He loved them even as He
      loved those who had nothing. The rich and wise also have a right
      to look into that cradle to see their God, too. When we say He is
      the God of all classes we do not mean that He is only the God of
      the poor any more than we mean He is only the God of the rich.

      He came to all the children of men and they can all stand by that
      cradle this morning and claim Him as their own; ask, receive, and
      share in His blessing. The light that shone in the darkness
      lighted impartially the world. Some of you are blessed with
      competences and some of the competences are greater than others.
      What of it? The poor man may serve God acceptably in his poverty
      and the rich man may serve God acceptably in his wealth. There is
      one God and though He is King of Kings and Lord of Lords, even
      though He may lie lowly in a manger, yet the kingdom of Heaven is
      like a republic—it is a democracy in which all are equal, or if
      there be distinctions they are based on righteousness
      alone—saving only the distinctions Divine.

      Now there is one other condition into which all men inevitably
      fall. Whether they be rich or whether they be poor, they are all
      bound to be sorrowful. Sooner or later, we are certain to be
      troubled. And that is more true today, doubtless, than in any
      other period in the long history of this old world.

      These sorrowful ones can go unto Bethlehem and look into the
      cradle and claim the Child as their God. For every sorrow that
      has been yours, He experienced; every grief that you have bowed
      before, He was forced to struggle with. Very tender and
      compassionate is our Lord. I am quite sure that He notices your
      bowed head, that He puts His arms across your shoulders, that He
      whispers words of comfort into your ear, or that He gives you the
      silent sympathy of His presence, that He takes you by the hand;
      that whatever action most appeals to you and is best for you He
      takes if you wish Him to.

      There are many people belonging to you or your family who are far
      away, whom you would fain have with you this Christmas morning.
      Many of them are fighting manfully in His cause, too. Do not
      forget that our Lord came to the family! that He made a family by
      coming. These far-off loved ones are doing what we are doing this
      morning. And there are some you love who are still farther away.
      The sound of their earthly voices is stilled, we may not clasp
      their hands, we cannot see them any more. They are gone from the
      world, but not from our hearts. If they are not here I think they
      are with Him. And we may be sure that it is very pleasant to them
      where He is. They are not unmindful of our human regrets and
      longings, but I think we ought not to be unmindful of their
      peaceful joy in His presence.

      And so everybody has a right to come to that cradle, the poor,
      the humble, the hard workers, the toilers, the wise, the learned,
      the easy, the rich, the joyous, the sad, the sorrowful, the
      bereaved. They may all look into the manger and see their God.

      He came to a family; He made a family. We are all in that family,
      the children of the selfsame Father, the sons of the selfsame
      God, the brethren of Him of the manger—German and French, English
      and Austrian, Italian and Bulgar, Russian and Turk! Ay, and above
      all and with all American and Belgian. Sirs, we be, not twelve,
      but many brethren! What does that mean?

      There is one musical word with, I think, perhaps the ugliest
      meaning in the language. It is _rancour_. Let us do away with it,
      let us put it aside. If we are poor let us be brethren to the
      other poor, if we are rich let us be brethren to the other rich,
      if we are wise let us be brethren to the other wise, if we are
      foolish let us be brethren to the other foolish. Ah, that is not
      difficult; it is an easy task. But that is not enough.
      Brotherhood is broader, thank God! Let the poor be brethren to
      the rich and the rich to the poor, the wise to the ignorant, the
      misguided to the well-directed, the ignorant to the wise, the
      foolish to the discreet, the discreet to the foolish, the glad to
      the sorrowful, the sorrowful to the glad, the servants of the
      Lord to the sinners against Him!

“Then none was for a party;
Then all were for the state;
Then the great man helped the poor,
And the poor man loved the great:
Then lands were fairly portioned;
Then spoils were fairly sold:
The Romans were like brothers,
In the brave days of old.”

      Let us make out of the old pagan ideals present-day realities in
      our hearts as we go even unto Bethlehem and look into the cradle
      of the King; realities in His own nobler and better words:

        “_Jesus answered and said unto them, Go and shew John again
        those things which ye do hear and see: the blind receive their
        sight, and the lame walk, the lepers are cleansed, and the deaf
        hear, the dead are raised up, and the poor have the gospel
        preached to them. And blessed is he whosoever shall not be
        offended in Me_.”

        Peace, goodwill toward men! Peace to men of goodwill! That is
        what the angels sang. But there is nothing on earth to prevent
        us from making it our human song as well. As we stand by the
        cradle of the Master and peer into the manger at that which
        every human being loves, a baby, our earthly differences of
        nationality, of rank, power, station, and influence—things that
        are but the guinea’s stamp upon the gold of character and
        personality—fade into insignificance and become as nothing. The
        little child in life notices none of these distinctions, he
        marks nothing of them. Let us come as little children before
        Him. We may be war-battered, sin-marked, toil-stained,
        care-burdened. Let us forget it all this Christmas morning.

        It was a poor place, that manger—the poorest place on earth—but
        it was a place. It was somewhere. Let us give humanity even as
        little as a manger. Let us not take up the Christ Child as we
        see Him and throw Him out into the streets, or into no man’s
        land. That is what we do when we mock Him, when we deny Him,
        when we laugh Him to scorn. Let us not shut Him out of His home
        place in our souls. Let us not refuse to open when His hand
        knocks upon the door. That is what we do when we are
        indifferent to Him. Let us take him out of the manger cradle,
        each one of us, and enthrone Him in the most precious place we
        have, our inmost hearts.

        It all happened a very long time ago and much water has run in
        the brooks of the world under the bridges thereof since that
        time, but the mangers of the world are never empty. They are
        always full. In one sense, Christ is being born everywhere at
        this very hour and at all hours.

        Let us give the Child the best we have, the best we can. Let us
        even now go down unto Bethlehem, laden with what we have for
        the use of the King, and let us see in every child of man that
        lacks anything this Christmas morning the image of Him who in
        that manger lay in Bethlehem and let us minister to their needs
        in love.

“The little Christ is coming down[1]
Across the fields of snow;
The pine trees greet Him where they stand,
The willows bend to kiss His hand,
The mountain laurel is ablush
In hidden nooks; the wind, ahush
And tiptoe, lest the violets wake
Before their time for His sweet sake;
The stars, down dropping, form a crown
Upon the waiting hills below—
The little Christ is coming down
Across the fields of snow.

“The little Christ is coming down
Across the city streets;
The wind blows coldly from the north,
His dimpled hands are stretching forth,
And no one knows and no one cares,
The priests are busy with their prayers,
The jostling crowd hastes on apace,
And no one sees the pleading face,
None hears the cry as through the town
He wanders with His small cold feet—
The little Christ is coming down
Acrossthe city streets.”

        What welcome shall we have for Him, my friends?

 [1] These loving and appealing verses were written by Harriet F.
 Blodgett, of whom unfortunately I know absolutely nothing but her
 name. I am sure, however, that if they had been written today another
 verse, even more touching than those I have quoted, would have been
 inspired by present conditions. And we should have seen “The Little
 Christ” coming down between the lines in Flanders, on the Balkan
 Frontier, amid the snows of Russia and the deserts of Mesopotamia, and
 perhaps, as of old, even walking on the waters in the midst of the
 sea.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

CHRISTMAS IN THE SNOWS

        _Being Some Personal Adventures in the Far West_[2]


        The love of Christmas is as strong in the West as it is in any
        section of the country—perhaps, indeed, stronger, for people
        who have few pleasures cherish holidays more highly than those
        for whom many cheap amusements are provided. But when the
        manifestation of the Christmas spirit is considered, there is a
        great difference between the West and the East. There are vast
        sections of country in which evergreens do not grow and to
        which it would not pay to ship them; consequently Christmas
        trees are not common, and therefore they are the more prized
        when they may be had. There are no great rows nor small
        clusters of inviting shops filled with suggestive and
        fascinating contents at attractive prices. The distances from
        centres of trade are so great that the things which may be
        purchased even in the smallest towns in more favourable
        localities for a few cents have there almost a prohibitive
        price put upon them. The efforts of the people to give their
        children a merry Christmas in the popular sense, however, are
        strong and sometimes pitiful.

        It must not be forgotten that the West is settled by Eastern
        people, and that no very great difference exists between them
        save for the advantages presented by life in the West for the
        higher development of character. Western people are usually
        brighter, quicker, more progressive and less conservative, and
        more liberal than those from whom they came. The survival of
        the fittest is the rule out there and the qualities of
        character necessary to that end are brought to the top by the
        strenuous life necessitated by the hardships of the frontier.
        If the people are not any better than they were, it is because
        they are still clinging to the obsolete ideas of the East.

        The Eastern point of view always reminds me of the reply of the
        bishop to the layman who was deploring the poor quality of the
        clergy. “Yes,” said the bishop, “some of them are poor; but
        consider the stock from which they come. You see, we have
        nothing but laymen out of which to make them.”

        The East never understands the West—the real West that is,
        which lies beyond the Mississippi, the Missouri, and the Rocky
        Mountains. They know nothing of its ideas, its capacities, its
        possibilities, its educational facilities, its culture, its
        real power, in the East. And they do not wish to learn,
        apparently. The Easterners fatuously think, like Job, that they
        are the people, and wisdom will die with them. Some years since
        an article in the “Forum” on the theme, “Kansas more civilized
        than New York” conclusively proved the proposition to the
        satisfaction of the present writer at least.

        Yet I know numberless dwellers in Gotham whose shibboleth is
        “nothing outside of New York City but scenery,” and they are a
        little dubious about admitting that. When one describes the
        Grand Canyon or the Royal Gorge they point to Nassau or Wall
        Street, and the Woolworth tower challenges Pike’s Peak!

        I sat at a dinner table one day when the salted almonds were
        handed me with the remark: “I suppose you never saw anything
        like these out West. Try some.” And my wife has been quite
        gravely asked if we feared any raids by the Indians and if they
        troubled us by their marauding in Kansas. I have found it
        necessary to inform the curious that we did not live in tepees
        or wigwams when in Nebraska or Colorado.

        Shortly after I came East to live I was talking with a man and
        a very stupid man at that, who informed me that he graduated
        from Harvard; to which surprising statement he added the
        startling information, for the benefit of my presumably
        untutored occidental mind, that it was a college near Boston!
        They have everything in the West that the East has so far as
        their sometimes limited means will provide them and when they
        have no money they have patience, endurance, grim
        determination, and courage, which are better than money in the
        long run.

        The cities and smaller towns especially as a rule are cleaner,
        better governed, more progressive, better provided with
        improvements and comforts than corresponding places in the
        East. Scarcely a community exists without its water works,
        electric light plant, telephone system, trolleys, paved
        streets, etc. Of course, this does not apply to the extreme
        frontier in which my field of work largely lay so many years
        ago. The conditions were different there—the people too in that
        now far-distant time.

        But to return to Christmas. One Christmas day I left my family
        at one o’clock in the morning. Christmas salutations were
        exchanged at that very sleepy hour and I took the fast express
        to a certain station whence I could drive up country to a
        little church in a farming country in which there had never
        been a Christmas service. It was a bitter cold morning, deep
        snow on the ground, and a furious north wind raging.

        The climate is variable indeed out West. I have spent Christmas
        days on which it rained all day and of all days in the year on
        which to have it rain, Christmas is the worst. Still, the
        farmers would be thankful. It was usually safe to be thankful
        out there whenever it rained. I knew a man once who said you
        could make a fortune by always betting two to one that it would
        not rain, no matter what the present promise of the weather
        was. You were bound to win nine times out of ten.

        I hired a good sleigh and two horses, and drove to my
        destination. The church was a little old brick building right
        out in the prairie. There was a smouldering fire in a
        miserable, worn-out stove which hardly raised the temperature
        of the room a degree although it filled the place with smoke.
        The wind had free entrance through the ill-fitting window and
        door frames and a little pile of snow formed on the altar
        during the service. I think there were twelve people who had
        braved the fury of the storm. There was not an evergreen within
        a hundred miles of the place and the only decoration was
        sage-brush. To wear vestments was impossible, and I conducted
        the service in a buffalo overcoat and a fur cap and gloves as I
        have often done. It was short and the sermon was shorter. Mem.:
        If you want short sermons give your Rector a cold church or a
        hot one!

        After service I went to dinner at the nearest farm-house. Such
        a Christmas dinner it was! There was no turkey, and they did
        not even have a chicken. The menu was corn-bread, ham, and
        potatoes, and mighty few potatoes at that. There were two
        children in the family, a girl of six and a boy of five. They
        were glad enough to get the ham. Their usual bill of fare was
        composed of potatoes and corn-bread, and sometimes corn-bread
        alone. My wife had put up a lunch for me, fearing that I might
        not be able to get anything to eat, in which there was a small
        mince-pie turnover; and the children had slipped a small box of
        candy in my bag as a Christmas gift. I produced the turnover
        which by common consent was divided between the astonished
        children. Such a glistening of eyes and smacking of small lips
        you never saw!

        “This pie makes it seem like Christmas, after all,” said the
        little girl, with her mouth full.

        “Yes,” said the boy, ditto, “that and the ham.”

        “We didn’t have any Christmas this year,” continued the small
        maiden. “Last year mother made us some potato men” (_i.e._,
        little animal and semi-human figures made out of potatoes and
        matches with buttons for eyes; they went into many stockings
        among the very poor out West then).

        “But this year,” interrupted the boy, “potatoes are so scarce
        that we couldn’t have ’em. Mother says that next year perhaps
        we will have some real Christmas.”

        They were so brave about it that my heart went out to them.
        Children and no Christmas gifts! Only the chill, bare room, the
        wretched, meagre meal. I ransacked my brain. Finally something
        occurred to me. After dinner I excused myself and hurried back
        to the church. There were two small wicker baskets there which
        were used for the collection—old but rather pretty. I selected
        the best one. Fortunately I had in my grip a neat little
        “housewife” which contained a pair of scissors, a huge thimble,
        needles, thread, a tiny little pin-cushion, an emery bag,
        buttons, etc. I am, like most ex-sailors, something of a
        needleman myself. I emptied the contents into the collection
        basket and garnished the dull little affair with the bright
        ribbon ties ripped off the “housewife” and went back to the
        house.

        To the boy I gave my penknife which happened to be nearly new,
        and to the girl the church basket with the sewing things for a
        work-basket. The joy of those children was one of the finest
        things I have ever witnessed. The face of the little girl was
        positively filled with awe as she lifted from the basket, one
        by one, the pretty and useful articles the “housewife” had
        supplied and when I added the small box of candy that my
        children had provided me, they looked at me with feelings of
        reverence, as a visible incarnation of Santa Claus. They were
        the cheapest and most effective Christmas presents it was ever
        my pleasure to bestow. I hope to be forgiven for putting the
        church furniture to such a secular use.

        Another Christmas day I had a funeral. There was no snow, no
        rain. The day was warm. The woman who died had been the wife of
        one of the largest farmers in the diocese. He actually owned a
        continuous body of several thousands of acres of fine land,
        much of it under cultivation. She had been a fruitful mother
        and five stalwart sons, all married, and several daughters
        likewise, with numerous grandchildren represented her
        contribution to the world’s population. They were the people of
        the most consideration in the little community in which they
        lived. We had the services in the morning in the Methodist
        church, which was big enough to hold about six hundred people.
        As it was a holiday, it was filled to the very doors. One of my
        farmer friends remarked as we stood on the front steps watching
        the crowd assembling:

        “My, doc, all of them wagons gatherin’ here makes it seem more
        like circus day than a funeral.”

        I had been asked to preach a sermon, which I essayed to do. The
        confusion was terrific. In order to be present themselves the
        mothers in Israel had been obliged to bring their children, and
        the most domestic of attentions were being bestowed upon them
        freely. They cried and wailed and expostulated with their
        parents in audible tones until I was nearly frantic. I found
        myself shouting consoling platitudes to a sobbing,
        grief-stricken band of relatives and endeavouring to drown the
        noise of the children by roaring—the lion’s part à la Bottom.
        It was distracting. I was a very young minister at the time and
        the perspiration fairly rained from me. That’s what makes me
        remember it was a warm day.

        When we got through the services after every one of the six
        hundred had, in the language of the local undertaker, “viewed
        the remains,” we went to the cemetery. I rode behind a horse
        which was thirty-eight years old. I do not know what his
        original colour had been but at present he was white and hoary
        with age.

        “I always use him for funerals,” said the undertaker, “because
        he naturally sets the proper pace for a funeral procession.”

        “Mercy,” said I, “I hope he won’t die on the road.”

        “Well, if he does,” continued the undertaker, “your services
        will come in handy. We can bury him proper. I am awful fond of
        that horse. I shouldn’t wonder if he hadn’t been at as many as
        a thousand funerals in his life.”

        I thought that he had all the gravity of his grewsome
        experiences, especially in his gait. The Christmas dinners were
        all late on account of the funeral but they were bountiful and
        good nevertheless and I much enjoyed mine.

        Another Christmas I was snow-bound on one of the obscure
        branches of a Western railroad. If the train had been on time I
        would have made a connection and have reached home by Christmas
        Eve, but it was very evident, as the day wore on, that it was
        not going to be on time. Indeed it was problematical whether it
        would get anywhere at all. It was snowing hard outside. Our
        progress had become slower and slower. Finally in a deep cut we
        stopped. There were four men, one woman, and two little
        children in the car—no other passengers in the train. The train
        was of that variety known out West as a “plug” consisting of a
        combination baggage and smoker and one coach.

        One of the trainmen started on a lonely and somewhat dangerous
        tramp of several miles up the road to the next station to call
        for the snow-plough, and the rest of us settled down to spend
        the night. Certainly we could not hope to be extricated before
        the next evening, especially as the storm then gave no signs of
        abating. We all went up to the front of the car and sat around
        the stove in which we kept up a bright fire,—fortunately we had
        plenty of fuel—and in such circumstances we speedily got
        acquainted with each other. One of the men was a “drummer,” a
        travelling man for a notion house; another was a cow-boy; the
        third was a big cattle-man; and I was the last. We soon found
        that the woman was a widow who had maintained herself and the
        children precariously since the death of her husband by sewing
        and other feminine odd jobs but had at last given up the
        unequal struggle and was going back to live with her mother,
        also a widow who had some little property.

        The poor little threadbare children had cherished anticipations
        of a joyous Christmas with their grandmother. From their talk
        we could hear that a Christmas tree had been promised them and
        all sorts of things. They were intensely disappointed at the
        blockade. They cried and sobbed and would not be comforted.
        Fortunately the woman had a great basket filled with
        substantial provisions which, by the way, she generously shared
        with the rest of us, so we were none of us hungry. As the night
        fell, we tipped up two of the seats, placed the bottoms
        sideways, and with our overcoats made two good beds for the
        little folks. Just before they went to sleep the drummer said
        to me:

        “Say, parson, we’ve got to give those children some Christmas.”

        “That’s what,” said the cow-boy.

        “I’m agreed,” added the cattle-man.

        “Madam,” said the drummer, addressing the woman with the easy
        assurance of his class, after a brief consultation between us,
        “we are going to give your kids some Christmas.”

        The woman beamed at him gratefully.

        “Yes, children,” said the now enthused drummer, as he turned to
        the open-mouthed children, “Santa Claus is coming round
        to-night sure. We want you to hang up your stockings.”

        “We ain’t got none,” quivered the little girl, “’ceptin’ those
        we’ve got on and ma says it’s too cold to take ’em off.”

        “I’ve got two new pair of woollen socks,” said the cattle-man
        eagerly, “which I ain’t never wore, and you are welcome to
        ’em.”

        There was a clapping of little hands in childish glee, and then
        the two faces fell as the elder remarked.

        “But Santa Claus will know they are not our stockings and he
        will fill them with things for you instead.”

        “Lord love you,” said the burly cattle-man, roaring with
        infectious laughter, “he wont bring me nothin’. One of us will
        sit up anyway and tell him it’s for you. You’ve got to hustle
        to bed right away because he may be here any time now.”

        Then came one of those spectacles which we sometimes meet once
        or twice in a lifetime. The children knelt down on the rough
        floor of the car beside their improvised beds. Instinctively
        the hands of the men went to their heads and at the first words
        of “Now I lay me down to sleep,” four hats came off. The
        cow-boy stood twirling his hat and looking at the little
        kneeling figures; the cattle-man’s vision seemed dimmed; while
        in the eyes of the travelling man there shone a distant look—a
        look across snow-filled prairies to a warmly lighted home.

        The children were soon asleep. Then the rest of us engaged in
        earnest conversation. What should we give them? was the
        question.

        “It don’t seem to me that I’ve got anything to give ’em,” said
        the cow-boy mournfully, “unless the little kid might like my
        spurs, an’ I would give my gun to the little girl, though on
        general principles I don’t like to give up a gun. You never
        know when you’re goin’ to need it, ’specially with strangers,”
        he added with a rather suspicious glance at me. I would not
        have harmed him for the world.

        “I’m in much the same fix,” said the cattle-man. “I’ve got a
        flask of prime old whiskey here, but it don’t seem like it’s
        very appropriate for the occasion, though it’s at the service
        of any of you gents.”

        “Never seen no occasion in which whiskey wasn’t appropriate,”
        said the cow-boy, mellowing at the sight of the flask.

        “I mean ’taint fit for kids,” explained the cattle-man handing
        it over.

        “I begun on’t rather early,” remarked the puncher, taking a
        long drink, “an’ I always use it when my feelin’s is onsettled,
        like now.” He handed it back with a sigh.

        “Never mind, boys,” said the drummer. “You all come along with
        me to the baggage car.”

        So off we trooped. He opened his trunks, and spread before us
        such a glittering array of trash and trinkets as almost took
        away our breath.

        “There,” he said, “look at that. We’ll just pick out the best
        things from the lot, and I’ll donate them all.”

        “No, you don’t,” said the cow-boy. “My ante’s in on this game,
        an’ I’m goin’ to buy what chips I want, an’ pay fer ’em too,
        else there ain’t going to be no Christmas around here.”

        “That’s my judgment, too,” said the cattle-man.

        “I think that will be fair,” said I. “The travelling man can
        donate what he pleases, and we can each of us buy what we
        please, as well.”

        I think we spent hours looking over the stock which the
        obliging man spread out all over the car for us. He was going
        home, he said, and everything was at our service. The trainmen
        caught the infection, too, and all hands finally went back to
        the coach with such a load of stuff as you never saw before. We
        filled the socks and two seats besides with it. The grateful
        mother was simply dazed.

        As we all stood about, gleefully surveying our handiwork
        including the bulging socks, the engineer remarked:

        “We’ve got to get some kind of a Christmas tree.”

        So two of us ploughed off on the prairie—it had stopped snowing
        and was bright moon-light—and wandered around until we found a
        good-sized piece of sage-brush, which we brought back and
        solemnly installed and the woman decorated it with bunches of
        tissue paper from the notion stock and clean waste from the
        engine. We hung the train lanterns around it.

        We were so excited that we actually could not sleep. The
        contagion of the season was strong upon us, and I know not
        which were the more delighted the next morning, the children or
        the amateur Santa Clauses, when they saw what the cow-boy
        called the “layout.”

        Great goodness! Those children never did have, and probably
        never will have, such a Christmas again. And to see the thin
        face of that mother flush with unusual colour when we handed
        her one of those monstrous red plush albums which we had
        purchased jointly and in which we had all written our names in
        lieu of our photographs, and between the leaves of which the
        cattle-man had generously slipped a hundred dollar bill, was
        worth being blockaded for a dozen Christmases. Her eyes filled
        with tears and she fairly sobbed before us.

        During the morning we had a little service in the car, in
        accordance with the custom of the Church, and I am sure no more
        heartfelt body of worshippers ever poured forth their thanks
        for the Incarnation than those men, that woman, and the little
        children. The woman sang “Jesus Lover of my Soul” from memory
        in her poor little voice and that small but reverent
        congregation—cow-boy, drummer, cattle-man, trainmen, and
        parson—solemnly joined in.

        “It feels just like church,” said the cow-boy gravely to the
        cattle-man. “Say I’m all broke up; let’s go in the other car
        and try your flask ag’in.” It was his unfailing resource for
        “onsettled feelin’s.”

        The train-hand who had gone on to division headquarters
        returned with the snow-plough early in the afternoon, but what
        was more to the purpose he brought a whole cooked turkey with
        him, so the children had turkey, a Christmas tree, and Santa
        Claus to their heart’s content! I did not get home until the
        day after Christmas.

        But, after all, what a Christmas I had enjoyed!

        During a season of great privation we were much assisted by
        barrels of clothing which were sent to us from the East. One
        day just before Christmas, I was distributing the contents of
        several barrels of wearing apparel and other necessities to the
        women and children at a little mission. The delight of the
        women, as the good warm articles of clothing for themselves and
        their children which they so sadly needed were handed out to
        them was touching; but the children themselves did not enter
        into the joy of the occasion with the same spontaneity. Finally
        just as I got to the bottom of one box and before I had opened
        the other one, a little boy sniffling to himself in the corner
        remarked, _sotto voce_:

        “Ain’t there no real Chris’mus gif’s in there for us little
        fellers, too?”

        I could quite enter into his feelings, for I could remember in
        my youthful days when careful relatives had provided me with a
        “cardigan” jacket, three handkerchiefs, and a half-dozen pairs
        of socks for Christmas, that the season seemed to me like a
        hollow mockery and the attempt to palm off necessities as
        Christmas gifts filled my childish heart with disapproval. I am
        older now and can face a Christmas remembrance of a cookbook, a
        silver cake-basket, or an ice-cream freezer (some of which I
        have actually received) with philosophical equanimity, if not
        gratitude.

        I opened the second box, therefore, with a great longing,
        though but little hope. Heaven bless the woman who had packed
        that box, for, in addition to the usual necessary articles,
        there were dolls, knives, books, games galore, so the small fry
        had some “real Chris’mus gif’s” as well as the others.

        After one of the blizzards a young ranchman who had gone into
        the nearest town some twenty miles away to get some Christmas
        things for his wife and little ones, was found frozen to death
        on Christmas morning, his poor little packages of petty
        Christmas gifts tightly clasped in his cold hands lying by his
        side. His horse was frozen too and when they found it, hanging
        to the horn of the saddle was a little piece of an evergreen
        tree—you would throw it away in contempt in the East, it was so
        puny. There it meant something. The love of Christmas? It was
        there in his dead hands. The spirit of Christmas? It showed
        itself in that bit of verdant pine over the lariat at the
        saddle-bow of the poor bronco.

        Do they have Christmas out West? Well, they have it in their
        hearts if no place else, and, after all, that is the place
        above all others where it should be.

 [2] This bit of personal history is reprinted from my book
 _Recollections of a Missionary in the Great West_ by the courtesy of
 Messrs. Charles Scribner’s Sons, the publishers thereof. Incidentally
 the reader will find much interesting matter in the way of
 reminiscence and anecdote in that little volume, should he chance upon
 it.
    There are some amusing things connected with the publication in
    serial form of these episodes. The great magazine in which it
    appeared has very strong views on certain subjects. Following out a
    policy which has deservedly won them perhaps the largest
    circulation of any magazine in the world it seemed to the editors
    necessary and desirable to make some changes in the story as
    originally written and as it appears hereafter.
    For instance the revised serial version made the cowboy lift the
    flask of whiskey to his lips and then it declared that after a long
    look at the sleeping children he put it down! I was quite agreeable
    to the change. I remember remarking that the cowboy certainly did
    “put it down.” It was a way cowboys had in those bygone days; so
    the editor and the author were both satisfied.
    Another amusing thing I recall in connection with the serial
    publication was this: The art editor of the magazine wrote to the
    officials of the railroad, the name of which I gave in the first
    version but which I now withhold, saying that the magazine had a
    story of a snow-bound train on the railroad in question and asking
    for pictures of snow-bound trains to help the artist illustrate it.
    By return mail came an indignant remonstrance almost threatening a
    lawsuit because the railroad in question, one of the southerly
    transcontinental roads, made a point in its appeal to travellers
    that its trains were never snow-bound! The art editor who was not
    without a vein of humour wrote back and asked if they could furnish
    him with pictures of snow-bound trains on competing roads and they
    sent him a box full! C.T.B.

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

A CHRISTMAS WISH

        _For Everybody, Everywhere_


        May peace and goodwill, prosperity and plenty, joy and
        satisfaction abound in your homes and in your hearts this day
        and all days. May opportunities for good work be many, and may
        you avail yourselves of them all. May your sorrows be
        lightened, may your griefs be assuaged. May your souls be
        fitted for what they must endure; may your backs be
        strengthened for your burdens; may your responsibilities be
        met; may your obligations be discharged; may your duties be
        performed. May love abound more and more until the perfect day
        breaks in your lives. In short, every wish that would be
        helpful, uplifting, and comforting, I wish you at this hour and
        in all hours.

        In the words of Tiny Tim.

        “_God Bless us every one!_”

        Cyrus Townsend Brady




End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Little Book for Christmas by Cyrus Townsend Brady

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK A LITTLE BOOK FOR CHRISTMAS ***

***** This file should be named 15343-0.txt or 15343-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/1/5/3/4/15343/

Produced by Gene Smethers and the PG Online Distributed Proofreading Team

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org



Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.


