The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Asse, by Lucius Apuleius

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Golden Asse

Author: Lucius Apuleius

Translator: William Adlington

Release Date: February 21, 2006 [EBook #1666]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN ASSE ***




Produced by Donal O'Danachair and David Widger





THE GOLDEN ASSE


by Lucius Apuleius "Africanus"



Translated by William Adlington


First published 1566 This version as reprinted from the edition of
1639. The original spelling, capitalisation and punctuation have been
retained.




Dedication


To the Right Honourable and Mighty Lord, THOMAS EARLE OF SUSSEX,
Viscount Fitzwalter, Lord of Egremont and of Burnell, Knight of the most
noble Order of the Garter, Iustice of the forrests and Chases from
Trent Southward; Captain of the Gentleman Pensioners of the House of the
QUEENE our Soveraigne Lady.

After that I had taken upon me (right Honourable) in manner of that
unlearned and foolish Poet, Cherillus, who rashly and unadvisedly
wrought a big volume in verses, of the valiant prowesse of Alexander the
Great, to translate this present booke, contayning the Metamorphosis of
Lucius Apuleius; being mooved thereunto by the right pleasant pastime
and delectable matter therein; I eftsoones consulted with myself, to
whom I might best offer so pleasant and worthy a work, devised by
the author, it being now barbarously and simply framed in our English
tongue. And after long deliberation had, your honourable lordship came
to my remembrance, a man much more worthy, than to whom so homely and
rude a translation should be presented. But when I again remembred the
jesting and sportfull matter of the booke, unfit to be offered to any
man of gravity and wisdome, I was wholly determined to make no Epistle
Dedicatory at all; till as now of late perswaded thereunto by my
friends, I have boldly enterprised to offer the same to your Lordship,
who as I trust wil accept the same, than if it did entreat of some
serious and lofty matter, light and merry, yet the effect thereof
tendeth to a good and vertuous moral, as in the following Epistle to the
reader may be declared. For so have all writers in times past employed
their travell and labours, that their posterity might receive some
fruitfull profit by the same. And therfore the poets feined not their
fables in vain, considering that children in time of their first
studies, are very much allured thereby to proceed to more grave and
deepe studies and disciplines, whereas their mindes would quickly loath
the wise and prudent workes of learned men, wherein in such unripe
years they take no spark of delectation at all. And not only that profit
ariseth to children by such feined fables, but also the vertues of
men are covertly thereby commended, and their vices discommended and
abhorred. For by the fable of Actaeon, where it is feigned that he saw
Diana washing her selfe in a well, hee was immediately turned into an
Hart, and so was slain of his own Dogs; may bee meant, That when a
man casteth his eyes on the vain and soone fading beauty of the world,
consenting thereto in his minde, hee seemeth to bee turned into a brute
beast, and so to be slain by the inordinate desire of his owne affects.
By Tantalus that stands in the midst of the floud Eridan, having before
him a tree laden with pleasant apples, he being neverthelesse always
thirsty and hungry, betokeneth the insatiable desires of covetous
persons. The fables of Atreus, Thiestes, Tereus and Progne signifieth
the wicked and abhominable facts wrought and attempted by mortall men.
The fall of Icarus is an example to proud and arrogant persons, that
weeneth to climb up to the heavens. By Mydas, who obtained of Bacchus,
that all things which he touched might be gold, is carped the foul
sin of avarice. By Phaeton, that unskilfully took in hand to rule the
chariot of the Sunne, are represented those persons which attempt things
passing their power and capacity. By Castor and Pollux, turned into a
signe in heaven called Gemini, is signified, that vertuous and godly
persons shall be rewarded after life with perpetuall blisse. And in this
feined jest of Lucius Apuleius is comprehended a figure of mans life,
ministring most sweet and delectable matter, to such as shall be
desirous to reade the same. The which if your honourable lordship shall
accept ant take in good part, I shall not onely thinke my small travell
and labour well employed, but also receive a further comfort to attempt
some more serious matter, which may be more acceptable to your Lordship:
desiring the same to excuse my rash and bold enterprise at this time, as
I nothing doubt of your Lordships goodnesse. To whome I beseech Almighty
God to impart long life, with encrease of much honour.

From Vniversity Colledge in Oxenforde, the xviij. of September, 1566.

Your Honours most bounden,

WIL. ADLINGTON.




The Life of Lucius Apuleius Briefly Described


LUCIUS APULEIUS African, an excellent follower of Plato his sect, born
in Madaura, a Countrey sometime inhabited by the Romans, and under the
jurisdiction of Syphax, scituate and lying on the borders of Numidia and
Getulia, whereby he calleth himself half a Numidian and half a Getulian:
and Sidonius named him the Platonian Madaurence: his father called
Theseus had passed all offices of dignity in his countrey with much
honour. His mother named Salvia was of such excellent vertue, that
she passed all the Dames of her time, borne of an ancient house, and
descended from the philosopher Plutarch, and Sextus his nephew. His
wife called Prudentila was endowed with as much vertue and riches as
any woman might be. Hee himselfe was of an high and comely stature,
gray eyed, his haire yellow, and a beautiful personage. He flourished
in Carthage in the time of Iolianus Avitus and Cl. Maximus Proconsuls,
where he spent his youth in learning the liberall sciences, and much
profited under his masters there, whereby not without cause hee calleth
himself the Nource of Carthage, and the celestial Muse and venerable
mistresse of Africke. Soone after, at Athens (where in times past the
well of all doctrine flourished) he tasted many of the cups of the
muses, he learned the Poetry, Geometry, Musicke, Logicke, and the
universall knowledge of Philosophy, and studied not in vaine the nine
Muses, that is to say, the nine noble and royal disciplines.

Immediately after he went to Rome, and studied there the Latine tongue,
with such labour and continuall study, that he achieved to great
eloquence, and was known and approved to be excellently learned, whereby
he might worthily be called Polyhistor, that is to say, one that knoweth
much or many things.

And being thus no lesse endued with eloquence, than with singular
learning, he wrote many books for them that should come after: whereof
part by negligence of times be now intercepted and part now extant, doe
sufficiently declare, with how much wisdome and doctrine hee flourished,
and with how much vertue hee excelled amongst the rude and barbarous
people. The like was Anacharsis amongst the most luskish Scythes. But
amongst the Bookes of Lucius Apuleius, which are perished and prevented,
howbeit greatly desired as now adayes, one was intituled Banquetting
questions, another entreating of the nature of fish, another of the
generation of beasts, another containing his Epigrams, another called
'Hermagoras': but such as are now extant are the foure books named
'Floridorum', wherein is contained a flourishing stile, and a savory
kind of learning, which delighteth, holdeth, and rejoiceth the reader
marvellously; wherein you shall find a great variety of things, as
leaping one from another: One excellent and copious Oration, containing
all the grace and vertue of the art Oratory, where he cleareth himself
of the crime of art Magick, which was slanderously objected against him
by his Adversaries, wherein is contained such force of eloquence and
doctrine, as he seemeth to passe and excell himselfe. There is another
booke of the god of the spirit of Socrates, whereof St. Augustine maketh
mention in his booke of the definition of spirits, and description
of men. Two other books of the opinion of Plato, wherein is briefly
contained that which before was largely expressed. One booke of
Cosmography, comprising many things of Aristotles Meteors. The Dialogue
of Trismegistus, translated by him out of Greeke into Latine, so fine,
that it rather seemeth with more eloquence turned into Latine, than it
was before written in Greeke. But principally these eleven Bookes of
the 'Golden Asse', are enriched with such pleasant matter, with such
excellency and variety of flourishing tales, that nothing may be more
sweet and delectable, whereby worthily they may be intituled The Bookes
of the 'Golden Asse', for the passing stile and matter therein. For what
can be more acceptable than this Asse of Gold indeed. Howbeit there be
many who would rather intitule it 'Metamorphosis', that is to say, a
transfiguration or transformation, by reason of the argument and matter
within.




The Preface of the Author To His Sonne, Faustinus

And unto the Readers of this Book

               THAT I to thee some joyous jests
                 may show in gentle gloze,
               And frankly feed thy bended eares
                 with passing pleasant prose:
               So that thou daine in seemly sort
                 this wanton booke to view,
               That is set out and garnisht fine,
                 with written phrases new.
               I will declare how one by hap
                 his humane figure lost,
               And how in brutish formed shape,
                 his loathed life he tost.
               And how he was in course of time
                 from such a state unfold,
               Who eftsoone turn'd to pristine shape
                 his lot unlucky told.

What and who he was attend a while, and you shall understand that it was
even I, the writer of mine own Metamorphosie and strange alteration of
figure. Hymettus, Athens, Isthmia, Ephire Tenaros, and Sparta, being
fat and fertile soiles (as I pray you give credit to the bookes of more
everlasting fame) be places where myne antient progeny and linage did
sometime flourish: there I say, in Athens, when I was yong, I went first
to schoole. Soone after (as a stranger) I arrived at Rome, whereas by
great industry, and without instruction of any schoolmaster, I attained
to the full perfection of the Latine tongue. Behold, I first crave and
beg your pardon, lest I should happen to displease or offend any of you
by the rude and rusticke utterance of this strange and forrein language.
And verily this new alteration of speech doth correspond to the
enterprised matter whereof I purpose to entreat, I will set forth unto
you a pleasant Grecian feast. Whereunto gentle Reader if thou wilt give
attendant eare, it will minister unto thee such delectable matter as
thou shalt be contented withall.




THE FIRST BOOKE




THE FIRST CHAPTER


How Apuleius riding in Thessaly, fortuned to fall into company with two
strangers, that reasoned together of the mighty power of Witches.

As I fortuned to take my voyage into Thessaly, about certaine affaires
which I had to doe ( for there myne auncestry by my mothers side
inhabiteth, descended of the line of that most excellent person
Plutarch, and of Sextus the Philosopher his Nephew, which is to us
a great honour) and after that by much travell and great paine I had
passed over the high mountaines and slipperie vallies, and had ridden
through the cloggy fallowed fields; perceiving that my horse did wax
somewhat slow, and to the intent likewise that I might repose and
strengthen my self (being weary with riding) I lighted off my horse,
and wiping the sweat from every part of his body, I unbrideled him,
and walked him softly in my hand, to the end he might pisse, and ease
himself of his weariness and travell: and while he went grazing freshly
in the field (casting his head sometimes aside, as a token of rejoycing
and gladnesse) I perceived a little before me two companions riding, and
so I overtaking them made a third. And while I listened to heare their
communication, the one of them laughed and mocked his fellow, saying,
Leave off I pray thee and speak no more, for I cannot abide to heare
thee tell such absurd and incredible lies; which when I heard, I desired
to heare some newes, and said, I pray you masters make me partaker
of your talk, that am not so curious as desirous to know all your
communication: so shall we shorten our journey, and easily passe this
high hill before us, by merry and pleasant talke.

But he that laughed before at his fellow, said againe, Verily this tale
is as true, as if a man would say that by sorcery and inchantment the
floods might be inforced to run against their course, the seas to be
immovable, the aire to lacke the blowing of windes, the Sunne to be
restrained from his naturall race, the Moone to purge his skimme upon
herbes and trees to serve for sorceries: the starres to be pulled from
heaven, the day to be darkened and the dark night to continue still.
Then I being more desirous to heare his talke than his companions, sayd,
I pray you, that began to tell your tale even now, leave not off so, but
tell the residue. And turning to the other I sayd, You perhappes that
are of an obstinate minde and grosse eares, mocke and contemme those
things which are reported for truth, know you not that it is accounted
untrue by the depraved opinion of men, which either is rarely seene,
seldome heard, or passeth the capacitie of mans reason, which if it be
more narrowly scanned, you shall not onely finde it evident and plaine,
but also very easy to be brought to passe.




THE SECOND CHAPTER


How Apuleius told to the strangers, what he saw a jugler do in Athens.

The other night being at supper with a sort of hungry fellowes, while
I did greedily put a great morsel of meate in my mouth, that was fried
with the flower of cheese and barley, it cleaved so fast in the passage
of my throat and stopped my winde in such sort that I was well nigh
choked. And yet at Athens before the porch there called Peale, I saw
with these eyes a jugler that swallowed up a two hand sword, with a very
keene edge, and by and by for a little money that we who looked on gave
him, hee devoured a chasing speare with the point downeward. And after
that hee had conveyed the whole speare within the closure of his body,
and brought it out againe behind, there appeared on the top thereof
(which caused us all to marvell) a faire boy pleasant and nimble,
winding and turning himself in such sort, that you would suppose he had
neither bone nor gristle, and verily thinke that he were the naturall
Serpent, creeping and sliding on the knotted staffe, which the god of
Medicine is feigned to beare. But turning me to him that began his tale,
I pray you (quoth I) follow your purpose, and I alone will give credit
unto you, and for your paynes will pay your charges at the next Inne we
come unto. To whom he answered Certes sir I thank you for your gentle
offer, and at your request I wil proceed in my tale, but first I will
sweare unto you by the light of this Sunne that shineth here, that
those things shall be true, least when you come to the next city called
Thessaly, you should doubt any thing of that which is rife in the
mouthes of every person, and done before the face of all men. And that I
may first make relation to you, what and who I am, and whither I go, and
for what purpose, know you that I am of Egin, travelling these countries
about from Thessaly to Etolia, and from Etolia to Boetia, to provide for
honey, cheese, and other victuals to sell againe: and understanding that
at Hippata (which is the principall city of all Thessaly), is accustomed
to be soulde new cheeses of exceeding good taste and relish, I fortuned
on a day to go thither, to make my market there: but as it often
happeneth, I came in an evill houre; for one Lupus a purveyor had bought
and ingrossed up all the day before, and so I was deceived.

Wherefore towards night being very weary, I went to the Baines to
refresh my selfe, and behold, I fortuned to espy my companion Socrates
sitting upon the ground, covered with a torn and course mantle; who was
so meigre and of so sallow and miserable a countenance, that I scantly
knew him: for fortune had brought him into such estate and calamity,
that he verily seemed as a common begger that standeth in the streets to
crave the benevolence of the passers by. Towards whom (howbeit he was my
singular friend and familiar acquaintance, yet half in despaire) I drew
nigh and said, Alas my Socrates, what meaneth this? how faireth it with
thee? What crime hast thou committed? verily there is great lamentation
and weeping for thee at home: Thy children are in ward by decree of
the Provinciall Judge: Thy wife (having ended her mourning time in
lamentable wise, with face and visage blubbered with teares, in such
sort that she hath well nigh wept out both her eyes) is constrained by
her parents to put out of remembrance the unfortunate losse and lacke of
thee at home, and against her will to take a new husband. And dost thou
live here as a ghost or hogge, to our great shame and ignominy?

Then he answered he to me and said, O my friend Aristomenus, now
perceive I well that you are ignorant of the whirling changes, the
unstable forces, and slippery inconstancy of Fortune: and therewithall
he covered his face (even then blushing for very shame) with his rugged
mantle insomuch that from his navel downwards he appeared all naked.

But I not willing to see him any longer in such great miserie and
calamitie, took him by the hand and lifted him up from the ground: who
having his face covered in such sort, Let Fortune (quoth he) triumph yet
more, let her have her sway, and finish that which shee hath begun.
And therewithall I put off one of my garments and covered him, and
immediately I brought him to the Baine, and caused him to be anointed,
wiped, and the filthy scurfe of his body to be rubbed away; which done,
though I were very weary my selfe, yet I led the poore miser to my Inne,
where he reposed his body upon a bed, and then I brought him meat and
drinke, and so wee talked together: for there we might be merry and
laugh at our pleasure, and so we were, untill such time as he (fetching
a pittifull sigh from the bottom of his heart, and beating his face in
miserable sort), began to say.




THE THIRD CHAPTER


How Socrates in his returne from Macedony to Larissa was spoyled and
robbed, and how he fell acquainted with one Meroe a Witch.

Alas poore miser that I am, that for the onely desire to see a game of
triall of weapons, am fallen into these miseries and wretched snares
of misfortune. For in my returne from Macedonie, wheras I sould all
my wares, and played the Merchant by the space of ten months, a little
before that I came to Larissa, I turned out of the way, to view the
scituation of the countrey there, and behold in the bottom of a deep
valley I was suddenly environed with a company of theeves, who robbed
and spoiled me of such things as I had, and yet would hardly suffer
me to escape. But I beeing in such extremity, in the end was happily
delivered from their hands, and so I fortuned to come to the house of an
old woman that sold wine, called Meroe, who had her tongue sufficiently
instructed to flattery: unto whom I opened the causes of my long
peregrination and careful travell, and of myne unlucky adventure: and
after that I had declared to her such things as then presently came to
my remembrance, shee gently entertained mee and made mee good cheere;
and by and by being pricked with carnall desire, shee brought me to her
own bed chamber; whereas I poore miser the very first night of our
lying together did purchase to my selfe this miserable face, and for
her lodging I gave to her such apparel as the theeves left to cover me
withall.

The I understanding the cause of his miserable estate, sayd unto him, In
faith thou art worthy to sustaine the most extreame misery and calamity,
which hast defiled and maculated thyne owne body, forsaken thy wife
traitorously, and dishonoured thy children, parents, and friends, for
the love of a vile harlot and old strumpet. When Socrates heard mee
raile against Meroe in such sort, he held up his finger to mee, and as
halfe abashed sayd, Peace peace I pray you, and looking about lest any
body should heare, I pray you (quoth he) I pray you take heed what you
say against so venerable a woman as shee is, lest by your intemperate
tongue you catch some harm. Then with resemblance of admiration, What
(quoth I) is she so excellent a person as you name her to be? I pray you
tell me. Then answered hee, Verily shee is a Magitian, which hath power
to rule the heavens, to bringe downe the sky, to beare up the earth, to
turne the waters into hills and the hills into running waters, to lift
up the terrestrial spirits into the aire, and to pull the gods out
of the heavens, to extinguish the planets, and to lighten the deepe
darknesse of hell. Then sayd I unto Socrates, Leave off this high and
mysticall kinde of talke, and tell the matter in a more plaine and
simple fashion. Then answered he, Will you hear one or two, or more of
her facts which she hath done, for whereas she enforceth not onely
the inhabitants of the countrey here, but also the Indians and the
Ethiopians the one and the other, and also the Antictons, to love her in
most raging sort, such as are but trifles and chips of her occupation,
but I pray you give eare, and I will declare of more greater matters,
which shee hath done openly and before the face of all men.




THE FOURTH CHAPTER


How Meroe the Witch turned divers persons into miserable beasts.

In faith Aristomenus to tell you the truth, this woman had a certaine
Lover, whom by the utterance of one only word she turned into a Bever,
because he loved another woman beside her: and the reason why she
transformed him into such a beast is, for that it is his nature, when
hee perceiveth the hunters and hounds to draw after him, to bite off his
members, and lay them in the way, that the hounds may be at a stop when
they find them, and to the intent it might so happen unto him (for that
he fancied another woman) she turned him into that kind of shape.

Semblably she changed one of her neighbours, being an old man and one
that sold wine, into a Frog, in that he was one of her occupation, and
therefore she bare him a grudge, and now the poore miser swimming in one
of his pipes of wine, and well nigh drowned in the dregs, doth cry and
call with an hoarse voice, for his old guests and acquaintance that pass
by. Like wise she turned one of the Advocates of the Court (because he
pleaded and spake against her in a rightful cause) into a horned Ram,
and now the poore Ram is become an Advocate. Moreover she caused, that
the wife of a certain lover that she had should never be delivered of
her childe, but according to the computation of all men, it is eight
yeares past since the poore woman first began to swell, and now shee is
encreased so big, that shee seemeth as though she would bring forth
some great Elephant: which when it was knowne abroad, and published
throughout all the towne, they tooke indignation against her, and
ordayned that the next day shee should most cruelly be stoned to death.
Which purpose of theirs she prevented by the vertue of her inchantments,
and as Medea (who obtained of King Creon but one days respit before her
departure) did burn all his house, him, and his daughter: so she, by her
conjurations and invocations of spirits, (which she useth in a certaine
hole in her house, as shee her selfe declared unto me the next day
following) closed all the persons in the towne so sure in their houses,
and with such violence of power, that for the space of two dayes they
could not get forth, nor open their gates nor doore, nor break downe
their walls, whereby they were inforced by mutuall consent to cry unto
her, and to bind themselves strictly by oaths, that they would never
afterwards molest or hurt her: and moreover, if any did offer her any
injury they would be ready to defend her. Whereupon shee, mooved by
their promises, and stirred by pitty, released all the towne. But shee
conveyed the principal Author of this ordinance about midnight, with
all his house, the walls, the ground, and the foundation, into another
towne, distant from thence an hundred miles, scituate and beeing on
the top of an high hill, and by reason thereof destitute of water, and
because the edifices and houses were so nigh built together, that it was
not possible for the house to stand there, she threw it downe before the
gate of the towne. Then I spake and said O my friend Socrates you
have declared unto me many marvellous things and strange chances, and
moreover stricken me with no small trouble of minde, yea rather with
great feare, lest the same old woman using the like practice, should
fortune to heare all our communication. Wherefore let us now sleepe, and
after that we have taken our rest, let us rise betimes in the morning,
and ride away hence before day, as far as we can possible.




THE FIFTH CHAPTER


How Socrates and Aristomenus slept together in one Chamber, and how they
were handled by Witches.

In speaking these words, and devising with my selfe of our departing the
next morrow, lest Meroe the witch should play by us as she had done by
divers other persons, it fortuned that Socrates did fall asleepe, and
slept very soundly, by reason of his travell and plenty of meat and wine
wherewithall hee had filled him selfe. Wherefore I closed and barred
fast the doores of the chamber, and put my bed behinde the doore, and
so layed mee downe to rest. But I could in no wise sleepe, for the great
feare which was in my heart, untill it was about midnight, and then I
began to slumber. But alas, behold suddenly the chamber doores brake
open, and locks, bolts, and posts fell downe, that you would verily have
thought that some Theeves had been presently come to have spoyled and
robbed us. And my bed whereon I lay being a truckle bed, fashioned in
forme of a Cradle, and one of the feet broken and rotten, by violence
was turned upside downe, and I likewise was overwhelmed and covered
lying in the same. Then perceived I in my selfe, that certaine affects
of the minde by nature doth chance contrary. For as teares oftentimes
trickle downe the cheekes of him that seeth or heareth some joyfull
newes, so I being in this fearfull perplexity, could not forbeare
laughing, to see how of Aristomenus I was made like unto a snail [in]
his shell. And while I lay on the ground covered in this sort, I peeped
under the bed to see what would happen. And behold there entred in two
old women, the one bearing a burning torch, and the other a sponge and
a naked sword; and so in this habit they stood about Socrates being
fast asleep. Then shee which bare the sword sayd unto the other, Behold
sister Panthia, this is my deare and sweet heart, which both day and
night hath abused my wanton youthfulnesse. This is he, who little
regarding my love, doth not only defame me with reproachfull words, but
also intendeth to run away. And I shall be forsaken by like craft as
Vlysses did use, and shall continually bewaile my solitarinesse as
Calipso. Which said, shee pointed towards mee that lay under the
bed, and shewed me to Panthia. This is hee, quoth she, which is his
Counsellor, and perswadeth him to forsake me, and now being at the point
of death he lieth prostrate on the ground covered with his bed, and hath
seene all our doings, and hopeth to escape scot-free from my hands,
but I will cause that hee will repente himselfe too late, nay rather
forthwith, of his former intemperate language, and his present
curiosity. Which words when I heard I fell into a cold sweat, and my
heart trembled with feare, insomuch that the bed over me did likewise
rattle and shake. Then spake Panthia unto Meroe and said, Sister let us
by and by teare him in pieces or tye him by the members, and so cut them
off. Then Meroe (being so named because she was a Taverner, and loved
wel good wines) answered, Nay rather let him live, and bury the corpse
of this poore wretch in some hole of the earth; and therewithall shee
turned the head of Socrates on the other side and thrust her sword up to
the hilts into the left part of his necke, and received the bloud that
gushed out, into a pot, that no drop thereof fell beside: which things
I saw with mine own eyes, and as I thinke to the intent that she might
alter nothing that pertained to sacrifice, which she accustomed to make,
she thrust her hand down into the intrals of his body, and searching
about, at length brought forth the heart of my miserable companion
Socrates, who having his throat cut in such sort, yeelded out a dolefull
cry, and gave up the ghost. Then Panthia stopped up the wide wound of
his throat with the Sponge and said, O sponge sprung and made of the
sea, beware that thou not passe by running river. This being said, one
of them moved and turned up my bed, and then they strid over mee, and
clapped their buttocks upon my face, and all bepissed mee until I was
wringing wet. When this was over they went their wayes, and the doores
closed fast, the posts stood in their old places, and the lockes and
bolts were shut againe. But I that lay upon the ground like one without
soule, naked and cold, and wringing wet with pisse, like to one that
were more than half dead, yet reviving my selfe, and appointed as I
thought for the Gallowes, began to say Alasse what shall become of me to
morrow, when my companion shall be found murthered here in the chamber?
To whom shall I seeme to tell any similitude of truth, when as I shall
tell the trueth in deed? They will say, If thou wert unable to resist
the violence of the women, yet shouldest thou have cried for help;
Wouldst thou suffer the man to be slaine before thy face and say
nothing? Or why did they not slay thee likewise? Why did they spare thee
that stood by and saw them commit that horrible fact? Wherefore although
thou hast escaped their hands, yet thou shalt not escape ours. While
I pondered these things with my selfe the night passed on, and so I
resolved to take my horse before day, and goe forward on my journey.

Howbeit the wayes were unknown to me, and thereupon I tooke up my
packet, unlocked and unbarred the doors, but those good and faithfull
doores which in the night did open of their owne accord, could then
scantly be opened with their keyes. And when I was out I cried, O sirrah
Hostler where art thou? Open the stable doore for I will ride away by
and by. The Hostler lying behinde the stable doore upon a pallet, and
half asleepe, What (quoth hee) doe you not know that the wayes be very
dangerous? What meane you to rise at this time of night? If you perhaps
guilty of some heynous crime, be weary of your life, yet thinke you not
that we are such Sots that we will die for you. Then said I, It is
well nigh day, and moreover, what can theeves take from him that hath
nothing? Doest thou not know (Foole as thou art) if thou be naked,
if ten Gyants should assaile thee, they could not spoyle or rob thee?
Whereunto the drowsie Hostler half asleepe, and turning on the other
side, answered, What know I whether you have murthered your Companion
whom you brought in yesternight, or no, and now seeke the means to
escape away? O Lord, at that time I remember the earth seemed ready to
open, and me thought I saw at hell gate the Dog Cerberus ready to devour
mee, and then I verily beleeved, that Meroe did not spare my throat,
mooved with pitty, but rather cruelly pardoned mee to bring mee to the
Gallowes. Wherefore I returned to my chamber, and there devised with my
selfe in what sort I should finish my life. But when I saw that fortune
should minister unto mee no other instrument than that which my bed
profered me, I said, O bed, O bed, most dear to me at this present,
which hast abode and suffered with me so many miseries, judge and
arbiter of such things as were done here this night, whome onely I may
call to witnesse for my innocency, render (I say) unto me some wholesome
weapon to end my life, that am most willing to dye. And therewithal I
pulled out a piece of the rope wherewith the bed was corded, and tyed
one end thereof about a rafter by the window, and with the other end I
made a sliding knot, and stood upon my bed, and so put my neck into
it, and leaped from the bed, thinking to strangle my selfe and so dye,
behold the rope beeing old and rotten burst in the middle, and I fell
down tumbling upon Socrates that lay under: And even at that same very
time the Hostler came in crying with a loud voyce, and sayd, Where
are you that made such hast at midnight, and now lies wallowing abed?
Whereupon (I know not whether it was by my fall, or by the great cry
of the Hostler) Socrates as waking out of sleepe, did rise up first and
sayd, It is not without cause that strangers do speake evill of all such
Hostlers, for this Catife in his comming in, and with his crying out, I
thinke under a colour to steale away something, hath waked me out of a
sound sleepe. Then I rose up joyfull with a merry countenance, saying,
Behold good Hostler, my friend, my companion and my brother, whom thou
didst falsly affirme to be slaine by mee this might. And therewithall I
embraced my friend Socrates and kissed him: but hee smelling the stinke
of the pisse wherewith those Hagges had embrued me, thrust me away and
sayd, Clense thy selfe from this filthy odour, and then he began gently
to enquire, how that noysome sent hapned unto mee. But I finely feigning
and colouring the matter for the time, did breake off his talk, and
tooke him by the hand and sayd, Why tarry we? Why lose wee the pleasure
of this faire morning? Let us goe, and so I tooke up my packet, and
payed the charges of the house and departed: and we had not gone a mile
out of the Towne but it was broad day, and then I diligently looked upon
Socrates throat, to see if I could espy the place where Meroe thrust in
her sword: but when I could not perceive any such thing, I thought with
my selfe, What a mad man am I, that being overcome with wine yester
night, have dreamed such terrible things? Behold I see Socrates is
sound, safe and in health. Where is his wound? Where is the Sponge?
Where is his great and new cut? And then I spake to him and said, Verily
it is not without occasion, that Physitians of experience do affirme,
That such as fill their gorges abundantly with meat and drinke, shall
dreame of dire and horrible sights: for I my selfe, not tempering my
appetite yester night from the pots of wine, did seeme to see this night
strange and cruel visions, that even yet I think my self sprinkled and
wet with human blood: whereunto Socrates laughing made answer and
said, Nay, thou art not wet with the blood of men, but art embrued with
stinking pisse; and verily I dreamed that my throat was cut, and that
I felt the paine of the wound, and that my heart was pulled out of my
belly, and the remembrance thereof makes me now to feare, for my knees
do so tremble that I can scarce goe any further, and therefore I would
faine eat somewhat to strengthen and revive my spirits. Then said I,
behold here thy breakefast, and therewithall I opened my script that
hanged upon my shoulder, and gave him bread and cheese, and we sate
downe under a greate Plane tree, and I eat part with him; and while I
beheld him eating greedily, I perceived that he waxed meigre and pale,
and that his lively colour faded away, insomuch that beeing in great
fear, and remembring those terrible furies of whom I lately dreamed, the
first morsell of bread that I put in my mouth (that was but very small)
did so stick in my jawes, that I could neither swallow it downe, nor yet
yeeld it up, and moreover the small time of our being together increased
my feare, and what is hee that seeing his companion die in the high-way
before his face, would not greatly lament and bee sorry? But when that
Socrates had eaten sufficiently hee waxed very thirsty, for indeed he
had well nigh devoured a whole Cheese: and behold evill fortune! There
was behind the Plane tree a pleasant running water as cleere as Crystal,
and I sayd unto him, Come hither Socrates to this water and drinke thy
fill. And then he rose and came to the River, and kneeled downe on the
side of the banke to drinke, but he had scarce touched the water with
lips, when as behold the wound in his throat opened wide, and the Sponge
suddenly fell out into the water, and after issued out a little remnant
of bloud, and his body being then without life, had fallen into the
river, had not I caught him by the leg and so pulled him up. And after
that I had lamented a good space the death of my wretched companion, I
buried him in the Sands there by the river.

Which done, in great feare I rode through many Outwayes and desart
places, and as culpable of the death of Socrates, I forsooke my
countrey, my wife, and my children, and came to Etolia where I married
another Wife.

This tale told Aristomenus, and his fellow which before obstinatly would
give no credit unto him, began to say, Verily there was never so foolish
a tale, nor a more absurd lie told than this. And then he spake unto me
saying, Ho sir, what you are I know not, but your habit and countenance
declareth that you should be some honest Gentleman, (speaking to
Apuleius) doe you beleeve this tale? Yea verily (quoth I), why not? For
whatsoever the fates have appointed to men, that I beleeve shall happen.
For may things chance unto me and unto you, and to divers others, which
beeing declared unto the ignorant be accounted as lies. But verily I
give credit unto his tale, and render entire thankes unto him, in that
by the pleasant relation thereof we have quickly passed and shortned our
journey, and I thinke that my horse was also delighted with the same,
and hath brought me to the gate of this city without any paine at all.
Thus ended both our talk and our journey, for they two turned on the
left hand to the next villages, and I rode into the city.




THE SIXTH CHAPTER

How Apuleius came unto a city named Hipate, and was lodged in one Milos
house, and brought him letters from one Demeas of Corinth.

After that those two Companions were departed I entred into the City:
where I espied an old woman, of whom I enquired whether that city was
called Hipata, or no: Who answered, Yes. Then I demaunded, Whether she
knew one Milo an Alderman of the city: Whereat she laughed and said:
Verily it is not without cause that Milo is called an Elderman, and
accounted as chiefe of those which dwel without the walls of the City.
To whom I sayd againe, I pray thee good mother do not mocke, but tell
me what manner of man he is, and where he dwelleth. Mary (quoth shee) do
you see these Bay windowes, which on one side abut to the gates of the
city, and on the other side to the next lane? There Milo dwelleth, very
rich both in mony and substance, but by reason of his great avarice
and insatiable covetousnes, he is evill spoken of, and he is a man that
liveth all by usurie, and lending his money upon pledges. Moreover he
dwelleth in a small house, and is ever counting his money, and hath a
wife that is a companion of his extreame misery, neither keepeth he
more in his house than onely one maid, who goeth apparelled like unto a
beggar. Which when I heard, I laughed in my self and thought, In
faith my friend Demeas hath served me well, which hath sent me being a
stranger, unto such a man, in whose house I shall not bee afeared either
of smoke or of the sent of meat; and therewithall I rode to the doore,
which was fast barred, and knocked aloud. Then there came forth a maid
which said, Ho sirrah that knocks so fast, in what kinde of sort will
you borrow money? Know you not that we use to take no gage, unless it be
either plate or Jewels? To whom I answered, I pray you maid speak more
gently, and tel me whether thy master be within or no? Yes (quoth shee)
that he is, why doe you aske? Mary (said I) I am come from Corinth, and
have brought him letters from Demeas his friend. Then sayd the Maid, I
pray you tarry here till I tell him so, and therewithall she closed fast
the doore, and went in, and after a while she returned againe and sayd,
My master desireth you to alight and come in. And so I did, whereas I
found him sitting upon a little bed, going to supper, and his wife sate
at his feet, but there was no meat upon the table, and so by appointment
of the maid I came to him and saluted him, and delivered the letters
which I had brought from Demeas. Which when hee had read hee sayd,
Verily, I thanke my friend Demeas much, in that hee hath sent mee so
worthy a guest as you are. And therewithall hee commanded his wife to
sit away and bid mee sit in her place; which when I refused by reason of
courtesie, hee pulled me by my garment and willed me to sit downe; for
wee have (quoth he) no other stool here, nor no other great store
of household stuffe, for fear of robbing. Then I according to his
commandement, sate down, and he fell in further communication with me
and sayd, Verily I doe conjecture by the comly feature of your body,
and by the maidenly shamefastnesse of your face that you are a Gentleman
borne, as my friend Demeas hath no lesse declared the same in his
letters. Wherfore I pray you take in good part our poore lodging, and
behold yonder chamber is at your commaundement, use it as your owne,
and if you be contented therewithall, you shall resemble and follow the
vertuous qualities of your good father Theseus, who disdained not the
slender and poore Cottage of Hecades.

And then he called his maid which was named Fotis, and said, Carry this
Gentlemans packet into the chamber, and lay it up safely, and bring
water quickly to wash him, and a towel to rub him, and other things
necessary, and then bring him to the next Baines, for I know that he is
very weary of travell.

These things when I heard, I partly perceived the manners of Milo, and
endeavouring to bring my selfe further into his favour, I sayd, Sir
there is no need of any of these things, for they have been everywhere
ministred unto mee by the way, howbeit I will go into the Baines, but
my chiefest care is that my horse be well looked to, for hee brought mee
hither roundly, and therefore I pray thee Fotis take this money and buy
some hay and oats for him.




THE SEVENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius going to buy fish, met with his companion Pythias.

When this was done, and all my things brought into the Chamber, I walked
towards the Baines; but first I went to the market to buy some victuals
for my supper, whereas I saw great plenty of fish set out to be sould:
and so I cheapened part thereof, and that which they at first held at an
hundred pence, I bought at length for twenty. Which when I had done, and
was departing away, one of myne old acquaintance, and fellow at Athens,
named Pithias, fortuned to passe by, and viewing me at a good space, in
the end brought me to his remembrance, and gently came and kissed mee,
saying, O my deare friend Lucius, it is a great while past since we two
saw one another, and moreover, from the time that wee departed from our
Master Vestius, I never heard any newes from you. I pray you Lucius tell
me the cause of your peregrination hither. Then I answered and sayd, I
will make relation thereof unto you tomorrow: but I pray you tell me,
what meaneth these servitors that follow you, and these rods or verges
which they beare, and this habit which you wear like unto a magistrate,
verily I thinke you have obtained your own desire, whereof I am right
glad. Then answered Pithias, I beare the office of the Clerke of the
market, and therfore if you will have any pittance for your supper
speake and I will purvey it for you. Then I thanked him heartily and
sayd I had bought meat sufficient already. But Pithias when hee espied
my basket wherein my fish was, tooke it and shaked it, and demanded of
me what I had payd for all my Sprots. In faith (quoth I), I could scarce
inforce the fishmonger to sell them for twenty pence. Which when I
heard, he brought me backe again into the market, and enquired of me
of whom I bought them. I shewed him the old man which sate in a corner,
whome by and by, by reason of his office, hee did greatly blame, and
sayd, Is it thus you serve and handle strangers, and specially our
friends? Wherefore sell you this fish so deare, which is not worth a
halfepenny? Now perceive I well, that you are an occasion to make this
place, which is the principall city of all Thessaly, to be forsaken of
all men, and to reduce it into an uninhabitable Desart, by reasone of
your excessive prices of victuals, but assure yourself that you shall
not escape without punishment, and you shall know what myne office is,
and how I ought to punish such as offend. Then he took my basket and
cast the fish on the ground, and commanded one of his Sergeants to tread
them under his feet. This done he perswaded me to depart, and sayd that
onely shame and reproach done unto the old Caitife did suffice him, So
I went away amazed and astonied, towards the Baines, considering with
myself and devising of the grace of my companion Pythias. Where when I
had well washed and refreshed my body, I returned againe to Milos house,
both without money and meat, and so got into my chamber. Then came Fotis
immediately unto mee, and said that her master desired me to come to
supper. But I not ignorant of Milos abstinence, prayed that I might be
pardoned since as I thought best to ease my wearied bones rather with
sleepe and quietnesse, than with meat. When Fotis had told this to Milo,
he came himselfe and tooke mee by the hand, and while I did modestly
excuse my selfe, I will not (quoth he) depart from this place, until
such time as you shall goe with me: and to confirm the same, hee bound
his words with an oath, whereby he enforced me to follow him, and so he
brought me into his chamber, where hee sate him downe upon the bed, and
demaunded of mee how his friend Demeas did, his wife, his children, and
all his family: and I made answer to him every question, specially hee
enquired the causes of my peregrination and travell, which when I had
declared, he yet busily demanded of the state of my Countrey, and the
chief magistrates there, and principally of our Lievtenant and Viceroy;
who when he perceived that I was not only wearied by travell, but also
with talke, and that I fell asleep in the midst of my tale, and further
that I spake nothing directly or advisedly, he suffered me to depart to
my chamber. So scaped I at length from the prating and hungry supper of
this rank old man, and being compelled by sleepe and not by meat, and
having supped only with talke, I returned into my chamber, and there
betooke me to my quiet and long desired rest.





THE SECOND BOOKE




THE EIGHTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius fortuned to meet with his Cousin Byrrhena.

As soone as night was past, and the day began to spring, I fortuned to
awake, and rose out of my bed as halfe amazed, and very desirous to know
and see some marvellous and strange things, remembring with my selfe
that I was in the middle part of all Thessaly, whereas by the common
report of all the World, the Sorceries and Inchauntments are most used,
I oftentimes repeated with my self the tale of my companion Aristomenus
touching the manner of this City, and being mooved by great desire, I
viewed the whole scituation thereof, neither was there any thing which
I saw there, but that I did beleeve to be the same which it was indeed,
but every thing seemed unto me to be transformed and altered into other
shapes, by the wicked power of Sorcerie and Inchantment, insomuch that I
thought that the stones which I found were indurate, and turned from
men into that figure, and that the birds which I heard chirping, and
the trees without the walls of the city, and the running waters, were
changed from men into such kinde of likenesses. And further I thought
that the Statues, Images and Walls could goe, and the Oxen and other
brute beasts could speake and tell strange newes, and that immediately
I should see and heare some Oracles from the heavens, and from the
gleed of the Sun. Thus being astonied or rather dismayed and vexed with
desire, knowing no certaine place whither I intended to go, I went from
street to street, and at length (as I curiously gazed on every thing)
I fortuned unwares to come into the market place, whereas I espied a
certaine woman, accompanied with a great many servants, towards whom I
drew nigh, and viewed her garments beset with gold and pretious stone,
in such sort that she seemed to be some noble matron. And there was
an old man which followed her, who as soon as he espied me, said to
himself, Verily this is Lucius, and then he came and embraced me, by and
by he went unto his mistresse and whispered in her eare, and came to
mee againe saying, How is it Lucius that you will not salute your deere
Cousin and singular friend? To whom I answered, Sir I dare not be so
bold as to take acquaintance of an unknown woman. Howbeit as halfe
ashamed I drew towards her, and shee turned her selfe and sayd, Behold
how he resembleth the very same grace as his mother Salvia doth, behold
his countenance and stature, agreeing thereto in each poynt, behold his
comely state, his fine slendernesse, his Vermilion colour, his haire
yellow by nature, his gray and quicke eye, like to the Eagle, and his
trim and comely gate, which do sufficiently prove him to be the naturall
childe of Salvia. And moreover she sayd, O Lucius, I have nourished thee
with myne owne proper hand: and why not? For I am not onely of kindred
to thy mother by blood, but also by nourice, for wee both descended of
the line of Plutarch, lay in one belly, sucked the same paps, and
were brought up together in one house. And further there is no other
difference betweene us two, but that she is married more honourably than
I: I am the same Byrrhena whom you have often heard named among your
friends at home: wherfore I pray you to take so much pains as to come
with me to my house, and use it as your owne. At whose words I was
partly abashed and sayd, God forbid Cosin that I should forsake myne
Host Milo without any reasonable cause; but verily I will, as often as I
have occasion to passe by thy house, come and see how you doe. And while
we were talking thus together, little by little wee came to her house,
and behold the gates of the same were very beautifully set with pillars
quadrangle wise, on the top wherof were placed carved statues and
images, but principally the Goddesse of Victory was so lively and with
such excellencie portrayed and set forth, that you would have verily
have thought that she had flyed, and hovered with her wings hither
and thither. On the contrary part, the image of the Goddesse Diana was
wrought in white marble, which was a marvellous sight to see, for shee
seemed as though the winde did blow up her garments, and that she did
encounter with them that came into the house. On each side of her were
Dogs made of stone, that seemed to menace with their fiery eyes, their
pricked eares, their bended nosethrils, their grinning teeth in such
sort that you would have thought they had bayed and barked. An moreover
(which was a greater marvel to behold) the excellent carver and deviser
of this worke had fashioned the dogs to stand up fiercely with their
former feet, and their hinder feet on the ground ready to fight. Behinde
the back of the goddesse was carved a stone in manner of a Caverne,
environed with mosse, herbes, leaves, sprigs, green branches and
bowes, growing in and about the same, insomuch that within the stone
it glistered and shone marvellously, under the brim of the stone hanged
apples and grapes carved finely, wherein Art envying Nature, shewed
her great cunning. For they were so lively set out, that you would have
thought if Summer had been come, they might have bin pulled and eaten;
and while I beheld the running water, which seemed to spring and leap
under the feet of the goddesse, I marked the grapes which hanged in the
water, which were like in every point to the grapes of the vine, and
seemed to move and stir by the violence of the streame. Moreover,
amongst the branches of the stone appeared the image of Acteon: and
how that Diana (which was carved within the same stone, standing in the
water) because he did see her naked, did turne him into an hart, and
so he was torne and slaine of his owne hounds. And while I was greatly
delighted with the view of these things, Byrrhena spake to me and sayd,
Cousin all things here be at your commandement. And therewithall shee
willed secretly the residue to depart: who being gone she sayd, My
most deare Cousin Lucius, I do sweare by the goddesse Diana, that I doe
greatly tender your safety, and am as carefull for you as if you were
myne owne naturall childe, beware I say, beware of the evil arts and
wicked allurements of that Pamphiles who is the wife of Milo, whom
you call your Host, for she is accounted the most chief and principall
Magitian and Enchantresse living, who by breathing out certain words and
charmes over bowes, stones and other frivolous things, can throw down
all the powers of the heavens into the deep bottome of hell, and reduce
all the whole world againe to the old Chaos. For as soone as she espieth
any comely yong man, shee is forthwith stricken with his love, and
presently setteth her whole minde and affection on him. She soweth
her seed of flattery, she invades his spirit and intangleth him with
continuall snares of unmeasurable love.

And then if any accord not to her filthy desire, or if they seeme
loathsome in her eye, by and by in the moment of an houre she turneth
them into stones, sheep or some other beast, as her selfe pleaseth, and
some she presently slayeth and murthereth, of whom I would you should
earnestly beware. For she burneth continually, and you by reason of your
tender age and comely beauty are capable of her fire and love.

Thus with great care Byrrhena gave me in charge, but I (that always
coveted and desired, after that I had heard talk of such Sorceries and
Witchcrafts, to be experienced in the same) little esteemed to beware
of Pamphiles, but willingly determined to bestow my money in learning of
that art, and now wholly to become a Witch. And so I waxed joyful, and
wringing my selfe out of her company, as out of linkes or chaines, I
bade her farewell, and departed toward the house of myne host Milo,
by the way reasoning thus with my selfe: O Lucius now take heed, be
vigilant, have a good care, for now thou hast time and place to satisfie
thy desire, now shake off thy childishnesse and shew thy selfe a man,
but especially temper thy selfe from the love of thyne hostesse, and
abstain from violation of the bed of Milo, but hardly attempt to winne
the maiden Fotis, for she is beautifull, wanton and pleasant in talke.
And soone when thou goest to sleepe, and when shee bringeth you gently
into thy chamber, and tenderly layeth thee downe in thy bed, and
lovingly covereth thee, and kisseth thee sweetly, and departeth
unwillingly, and casteth her eyes oftentimes backe, and stands still,
then hast thou a good occasion ministred to thee to prove and try the
mind of Fotis. Thus while I reasoned to myselfe I came to Milos doore,
persevering still in my purpose, but I found neither Milo nor his wife
at home.




THE NINTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius fell in love with Fotis.

When I was within the house I found my deare and sweet love Fotis
mincing of meat and making pottage for her master and mistresse, the
Cupboord was all set with wines, and I thought I smelled the savor of
some dainty meats: she had about her middle a white and clean apron,
and shee was girded about her body under the paps with a swathell of
red silke, and she stirred the pot and turned the meat with her fair and
white hands, in such sort that with stirring and turning the same, her
loynes and hips did likewise move and shake, which was in my mind a
comely sight to see.

These things when I saw I was halfe amazed, and stood musing with my
selfe, and my courage came then upon mee, which before was scant. And I
spake unto Fotis merrily and sayd, O Fotis how trimmely you can stirre
the pot, and how finely, with shaking your buttockes, you can make
pottage. The shee beeing likewise merrily disposed, made answer, Depart
I say, Miser from me, depart from my fire, for if the flame thereof doe
never so little blaze forth, it will burne thee extreamely and none can
extinguish the heat thereof but I alone, who in stirring the pot and
making the bed can so finely shake my selfe. When she had sayd these
words shee cast her eyes upon me and laughed, but I did not depart from
thence until such time as I had viewed her in every point. But what
should I speak of others, when as I doe accustome abroad to marke the
face and haire of every dame, and afterwards delight my selfe therewith
privately at home, and thereby judge the residue of their shape, because
the face is the principall part of all the body, and is first open to
our eyes. And whatsoever flourishing and gorgeous apparell doth work and
set forth in the corporal parts of a woman, the same doth the naturall
and comely beauty set out in the face. Moreover there be divers, that to
the intent to shew their grace and feature, wil cast off their partlets,
collars, habiliments, fronts, cornets and krippins, and doe more delight
to shew the fairnesse of their skinne, than to deck themselves up in
gold and pretious stones. But because it is a crime unto me to say so,
and to give no example thereof, know ye, that if you spoyle and cut the
haire of any woman or deprive her of the colour of her face, though shee
were never so excellent in beauty, though shee were throwne downe from
heaven, sprung of the Seas, nourished of the flouds, though shee were
Venus her selfe, though shee were waited upon by all the Court of Cupid,
though were girded with her beautifull skarfe of Love, and though shee
smelled of perfumes and musks, yet if shee appeared bald, shee could in
no wise please, no not her owne Vulcanus.

O how well doth a faire colour and a shining face agree with glittering
hair! Behold, it encountreth with the beams of the Sunne, and pleaseth
the eye marvellously. Sometimes the beauty of the haire resembleth the
colour of gold and honey, sometimes the blew plumes and azured feathers
about the neckes of Doves, especially when it is either anointed with
the gumme of Arabia, or trimmely tuft out with the teeth of a fine
combe, which if it be tyed up in the pole of the necke, it seemeth to
the lover that beholdeth the same, as a glasse that yeeldeth forth a
more pleasant and gracious comelinesse than if it should be sparsed
abroad on the shoulders of the woman, or hang down scattering behind.
Finally there is such a dignity in the haire, that whatsoever shee
be, though she be never to bravely attyred with gold, silks, pretious
stones, and other rich and gorgeous ornaments, yet if her hair be
not curiously set forth shee cannot seeme faire. But in my Fotis, her
garments unbrast and unlaste increased her beauty, her haire hanged
about her shoulders, and was dispersed abroad upon her partlet, and in
every part of her necke, howbeit the greater part was trussed upon her
pole with a lace. Then I unable to sustain the broiling heat that I was
in, ran upon her and kissed the place where she had thus laid her haire.
Whereat she turned her face, and cast her rolling eyes upon me, saying,
O Scholler, thou hast tasted now both hony and gall, take heed that thy
pleasure do not turn unto repentance. Tush (quoth I) my sweet heart, I
am contented for such another kiss to be broiled here upon this fire,
wherwithall I embraced and kissed her more often, and shee embraced and
kissed me likewise, and moreover her breath smelled like Cinnamon, and
the liquor of her tongue was like unto sweet Nectar, wherewith when my
mind was greatly delighted I sayd, Behold Fotis I am yours, and shall
presently dye unlesse you take pitty upon me. Which when I had said she
eftsoone kissed me, and bid me be of good courage, and I will (quoth
shee) satisfie your whole desire, and it shall be no longer delayed than
until night, when as assure your selfe I will come and lie with you;
wherfore go your wayes and prepare your selfe, for I intend valiantly
and couragiously to encounter with you this night. Thus when we had
lovingly talked and reasoned together, we departed for that time.




THE TENTH CHAPTER


How Byrrhena sent victuals unto Apuleius, and how hee talked with Milo
of Diophanes, and how he lay with Fotis.

When noone was come, Byrrhena sent to me a fat Pigge, five hennes, and a
flagon of old wine. Then I called Fotis and sayd, Behold how Bacchus the
egger and stirrer of Venery, doth offer him self of his owne accord, let
us therefore drink up this wine, that we may prepare our selves and
get us courage against soone, for Venus wanteth no other provision than
this, that the Lamp may be all the night replenished with oyle, and the
cups with wine. The residue of the day I passed away at the Bains and
in banquetting, and towards evening I went to supper, for I was bid by
Milo, and so I sate downe at the table, out of Pamphiles sight as
much as I could, being mindfull of the commandement of Byrrhena, and
sometimes I would cast myne eyes upon her as upon the furies of hell,
but I eftsoones turning my face behinde me, and beholding my Fotis
ministring at the table, was again refreshed and made merry. And behold
when Pamphiles did see the candle standing on the table, she said,
Verily wee shall have much raine to morrow. Which when her husband did
heare, he demanded of her by what reason she knew it? Mary (quoth shee)
the light on the table sheweth the same. Then Milo laughed and said,
Verily we nourish a Sybel prophesier, which by the view of a candle doth
divine of Celestiall things, and of the Sunne it selfe. Then I mused in
my minde and said unto Milo, Of truth it is a good experience and proof
of divination. Neither is it any marvell, for although this light is but
a small light, and made by the hands of men, yet hath it a remembrance
of that great and heavenly light, as of his parent, and doth shew unto
us what will happen in the Skies above. For I knew at Corinth a certain
man of Assyria, who would give answers in every part of the City, and
for the gaine of money would tell every man his fortune, to some he
would tel the dayes of their marriages, to others he would tell when
they should build, that their edifices should continue. To others, when
they should best go e about their affaires. To others, when they should
goe by sea or land: to me, purposing to take my journey hither, he
declared many things strange and variable. For sometimes hee sayd that
I should win glory enough: sometimes he sayd I should write a great
Historie: sometimes againe hee sayd that I should devise an incredible
tale: and sometimes that I should make Bookes. Whereat Milo laughed
againe, and enquired of me, of what stature this man of Assyria was,
and what he was named. In faith (quoth I) he is a tall man and somewhat
blacke, and hee is called Diophanes. Then sayd Milo, the same is he and
no other, who semblably hath declared many things here unto us, whereby
hee got and obtained great substance and Treasure.

But the poore miser fell at length into the hands of unpittifull and
cruell fortune: For beeing on a day amongst a great assembly of people,
to tell the simple sort their fortune, a certaine Cobler came unto
him, and desired him to tel when it should be best for him to take his
voyage, the which hee promised to do: the Cobler opened his purse and
told a hundred pence to him for his paines. Whereupon came a certaine
young gentleman and took Diophanes by the Garment. Then he turning
himselfe, embraced and kissed him, and desired the Gentleman, who
was one of his acquaintance, to sit downe by him: and Diophanes being
astonied with this sudden change, forgot what he was doing, and sayd, O
deare friend you are heartily welcome, I pray you when arrived you into
these parts? Then answered he, I will tell you soone, but brother I pray
you tell mee of your comming from the isle of Euboea, and how you sped
by the way? Whereunto Diophanes this notable Assyrian (not yet come unto
his minde, but halfe amased) soone answered and sayd, I would to god
that all our enemies and evil willers might fall into the like dangerous
peregrination and trouble. For the ship where we were in, after it was
by the waves of the seas and by the great tempests tossed hither
and thither, in great peril, and after that the mast and stern brake
likewise in pieces, could in no wise be brought to shore, but sunk into
the water, and so we did swim, and hardly escaped to land. And after
that, whatsoever was given unto us in recompense of our losses, either
by the pitty of strangers, or by the benevolence of our friends, was
taken away from us by theeves, whose violence when my brother Arisuatus
did assay to resist, hee was cruelly murthered by them before my face.
These things when he had sadly declared, the Cobler tooke up his money
againe which he had told out to pay for the telling of his fortune, and
ran away. The Diophanes comming to himselfe perceived what he had done,
and we all that stood by laughed greatly. But that (quoth Milo) which
Diophanes did tell unto you Lucius, that you should be happy and have a
prosperous journey, was only true. Thus Milo reasoned with me. But I
was not a little sorry that I had traind him into such a vaine of talke,
that I lost a good part of the night, and the sweete pleasure thereof:
but at length I boldly said to Milo, Let Diophanes fare well with his
evil fortune, and get againe that which he lost by sea and land, for
I verily do yet feel the wearinesse of my travell, whereof I pray you
pardon mee, and give me licence to depart to bed: wherewithall I rose up
and went unto my chamber, where I found all things finely prepared and
the childrens bed (because they should not heare what we did in the
night) was removed far off without the chamber doore. The table was all
covered with those meats that were left at supper, the cups were filled
halfe full with water, to temper and delay the wines, the flagon stood
ready prepared, and there lacked nothing that was necessary for the
preparation of Venus. And when I was entring into the bed, behold my
Fotis (who had brought her mistresse to bed) came in and gave me roses
and floures which she had in her apron, and some she threw about the
bed, and kissed mee sweetly, and tied a garland about my head, and
bespred the chamber with the residue. Which when shee had done, shee
tooke a cup of wine and delaied it with hot water, and profered it me to
drinke; and before I had drunk it all off she pulled it from my mouth,
and then gave it me againe, and in this manner we emptied the pot twice
or thrice together. Thus when I had well replenished my self with wine,
and was now ready unto Venery not onely in minde but also in body, I
removed my cloathes, and shewing to Fotis my great impatiencie I sayd, O
my sweet heart take pitty upon me and helpe me, for as you see I am now
prepared unto the battell, which you your selfe did appoint: for after
that I felt the first Arrow of cruell Cupid within my breast, I bent my
bow very strong, and now feare, (because it is bended so hard) lest my
string should breake: but that thou mayst the better please me, undresse
thy haire and come and embrace me lovingly: whereupon shee made no long
delay, but set aside all the meat and wine, and then she unapparelled
her selfe, and unattyred her haire, presenting her amiable body unto me
in manner of faire Venus, when shee goeth under the waves of the sea.
Now (quoth shee) is come the houre of justing, now is come the time of
warre, wherefore shew thy selfe like unto a man, for I will not retyre,
I will not fly the field, see then thou bee valiant, see thou be
couragious, since there is no time appointed when our skirmish shall
cease. In saying these words shee came to me to bed, and embraced me
sweetly, and so wee passed all the night in pastime and pleasure,
and never slept until it was day: but we would eftsoones refresh our
wearinesse, and provoke our pleasure, and renew our venery by drinking
of wine. In which sort we pleasantly passed away many other nights
following.




THE ELEVENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius supped with Byrrhena, and what a strange tale Bellephoron
told at the table.

It fortuned on a day, that Byrrhena desired me earnestly to suppe with
her; and shee would in no wise take any excusation. Whereupon I went to
Fotis, to aske counsell of her as of some Divine, who although she was
unwilling that I should depart one foot from her company, yet at length
shee gave me license to bee absent for a while, saying, Beware that
you tarry not long at supper there, for there is a rabblement of common
Barrettors and disturbers of the publique peace, that rove about in
the streets and murther all such as they may take, neither can law nor
justice redress them in any case. And they will the sooner set upon you,
by reason of your comelinesse and audacity, in that you are not afeared
at any time to walke in the streets.

Then I answered and sayd, Have no care of me Fotis, for I esteeme the
pleasure which I have with thee, above the dainty meats that I eat
abroad, and therefore I will returne againe quickly. Neverthelesse I
minde not to come without company, for I have here my sword, wherby I
hope to defend my selfe.

And so in this sort I went to supper, and behold I found in Byrrhena's
house a great company of strangers, and the chiefe and principall of the
city: the beds made of Citron and Ivory, were richly adorned and spread
with cloath of gold, the Cups were garnished pretiously, and there were
divers other things of sundry fashion, but of like estimation and price:
here stood a glasse gorgeously wrought, there stood another of Christall
finely painted. There stood a cup of glittering silver, and there stood
another of shining gold, and here was another of amber artificially
carved and made with pretious stones. Finally, there was all things
that might be desired: the Servitors waited orderly at the table in rich
apparell, the pages arrayed in silke robes, did fill great gemmes and
pearles made in the forme of cups, with excellent wine. Then one brought
in Candles and Torches, and when we were set down and placed in order,
we began to talke, to laugh, and to be merry. And Byrrhena spake unto
mee and sayd, I pray you Cousine how like you our countrey? Verily I
think there is no other City which hath the like Temples, Baynes, and
other commodities which we have here. Further we have abundance of
household stuffe, we have pleasure, we have ease, and when the Roman
merchants arrive in this City they are gently and quietly entertained,
and all that dwell within this province (when they purpose to solace and
repose themselves) do come to this city. Whereunto I answered, Verily
(quoth I) you tell truth, for I can finde no place in all the world
which I like better than this, but I greatly feare the blind inevitable
trenches of witches, for they say that the dead bodies are digged out of
their graves, and the bones of them that are burnt be stollen away, and
the toes and fingers of such as are slaine are cut off, and afflict and
torment such as live. And the old Witches as soone as they heare of the
death of any person, do forthwith goe and uncover the hearse and spoyle
the corpse, to work their inchantments. Then another sitting at the
table spake and sayd, In faith you say true, neither yet do they spare
or favor the living. For I know one not farre hence that was cruelly
handled by them, who being not contented with cutting off his nose, did
likewise cut off his eares, whereat all the people laughed heartily,
and looked at one that sate at the boords end, who being amased at their
gazing, and somewhat angry withall, would have risen from the table, had
not Byrrhena spake unto him and sayd, I pray thee friend Bellerophon sit
still and according to thy accustomed curtesie declare unto us the losse
of thy nose and eares, to the end that my cousin Lucius may be delighted
with the pleasantnes of the tale. To whom he answered, Madam in the
office of your bounty shall prevaile herein, but the insolencie of some
is not to be supported. This hee spake very angerly: But Byrrhena was
earnest upon him, and assured him hee should have no wrong at any mans
hand. Whereby he was inforced to declare the same, and so lapping up the
end of the Table cloath and carpet together, hee leaned with his elbow
thereon, and held out three forefingers of his right hand in manner of
an orator, and sayd, When I was a young man I went unto a certaine city
called Milet, to see the games and triumphs there named Olympia, and
being desirous to come into this famous province, after that I had
travelled over all Thessaly, I fortuned in an evil hour to come to the
City Larissa, where while I went up and down to view the streets to
seeke some reliefe for my poore estate (for I had spent all my money)
I espied an old man standing on a stone in the middest of the market
place, crying with a loud voice and saying, that if any man would watch
a dead corps that night hee should be reasonably rewarded for this
paines. Which when I heard, I sayd to one who passed by, What is here
to doe? Do dead men use to run away in this Countrey? Then answered he,
Hold your peace, for you are but a Babe and a stranger here, and not
without cause you are ignorant how you are in Thessaly, where the women
Witches bite off by morsels the flesh and faces of dead men, and thereby
work their sorceries and inchantments. Then quoth I, In good fellowship
tell me the order of this custody and how it is. Marry (quoth he) first
you must watch all the night, with your eyes bent continually upon the
Corps, never looking off, nor moving aside. For these Witches do turn
themselves into sundry kindes of beasts, whereby they deceive the eyes
of all men, sometimes they are transformed into birds, sometimes into
Dogs and Mice, and sometimes into flies. Moreover they will charme the
keepers of the corps asleepe, neither can it be declared what meanes and
shifts these wicked women do use, to bring their purpose to passe: and
the reward for such dangerous watching is no more than foure or sixe
shillings. But hearken further (for I had well nigh forgotten) if the
keeper of the dead body doe not render on the morning following, the
corps whole and sound as he received the same, he shall be punished in
this sort: That is, if the corps be diminished or spoyled in any part of
his face, hands or toes, the same shall be diminished and spoyled in the
keeper. Which when I heard him I tooke a good heart, and went unto the
Crier and bid him cease, for I would take the matter in hand, and so
I demanded what I should have. Marry (quoth he) a thousand pence, but
beware I say you young man, that you do wel defend the dead corps from
the wicked witches, for hee was the son of one of the chiefest of the
city. Tush (sayd I) you speak you cannot tell what, behold I am a man
made all of iron, and have never desire to sleepe, and am more quicke of
sight than Lynx or Argus. I had scarse spoken these words, when he tooke
me by the hand and brought mee to a certaine house, the gate whereof was
closed fast, so that I went through the wicket, then he brought me into
a chamber somewhat darke, and shewed me a Matron cloathed in mourning
vesture, and weeping in lamentable wise. And he spake unto her and said,
Behold here is one that will enterprise to watch the corpes of your
husband this night. Which when she heard she turned her blubbered face
covered with haire unto me saying, I pray you good man take good heed,
and see well to your office. Have no care (quoth I) so you will give
mee any thing above that which is due to be given. Wherewith shee was
contented, and then she arose and brought me into a chamber whereas the
corps lay covered with white sheets, and shee called seven witnesses,
before whom she shewed the dead body, and every part and parcell
thereof, and with weeping eyes desired them all to testifie the matter.
Which done, she sayd these words of course as follow: Behold, his nose
is whole, his eyes safe, his eares without scarre, his lips untouched,
and his chin sound: all which was written and noted in tables, and
subscribed with the hands of witnesses to confirme the same. Which done
I sayd unto the matron, Madam I pray you that I may have all things here
necessary. What is that? (quoth she). Marry (quoth I) a great lampe with
oyle, pots of wine, and water to delay the same, and some other drinke
and dainty dish that was left at supper. Then she shaked her head and
sayd, Away fool as thou art, thinkest thou to play the glutton here and
to looke for dainty meats where so long time hath not been seene any
smoke at all? Commest thou hither to eat, where we should weepe and
lament? And therewithall she turned backe, and commanded her maiden
Myrrhena to deliver me a lampe with oyle, which when shee had done they
closed the chamber doore and departed. Now when I was alone, I rubbed
myne eyes, and armed my selfe to keep the corpes, and to the intent I
would not sleepe, I began to sing, and so I passed the time until it was
midnight, when as behold there crept in a Wesel into the chamber, and
she came against me and put me in very great feare, insomuch that I
marvelled greatly at the audacity of so little a beast. To whom I said,
get thou hence thou whore and hie thee to thy fellowes, lest thou feele
my fingers. Why wilt thou not goe? Then incontinently she ranne away,
and when she was gon, I fell on the ground so fast asleepe, that Apollo
himself could not discern which of us two was the dead corps, for I lay
prostrat as one without life, and needed a keeper likewise. At length
the cockes began to crow, declaring that it was day: wherewithall I
awaked, and being greatly afeard ran to the dead body with the lamp
in my hand, and I viewed him round about: and immediately came in the
matron weeping with her Witnesses, and ran to the corps, and eftsoons
kissing him, she turned his body and found no part diminished. Then she
willed Philodespotus her steward to pay me my wages forthwith. Which
when he had done he sayd, We thanke you gentle young man for your paines
and verily for your diligence herein we will account you as one of the
family. Whereunto I (being joyous of by unhoped gaine, and ratling my
money in my hand) did answer, I pray you madam esteeme me as one of
your servants, and if you want my service at any time, I am at your
commandement. I had not fully declared these words, when as behold all
the servants of the house were assembled with weapons to drive me away,
one buffeted me about the face, another about the shoulders, some strook
me in the sides, some kicked me, and some tare my garments, and so I was
handled amongst them and driven from the house, as the proud young man
Adonis who was torn by a Bore. And when I was come into the next street,
I mused with my selfe, and remembred myne unwise and unadvised words
which I had spoken, whereby I considered that I had deserved much more
punishment, and that I was worthily beaten for my folly. And by and by
the corps came forth, which because it was the body of one of the chiefe
of the city, was carried in funeral pompe round about the market place,
according to the right of the countrey there. And forthwith stepped out
an old man weeping and lamenting, and ranne unto the Biere and embraced
it, and with deepe sighes and sobs cried out in this sort, O masters, I
pray you by the faith which you professe, and by the duty which you owe
unto the weale publique, take pitty and mercy upon this dead corps, who
is miserably murdered, and doe vengeance on this wicked and cursed woman
his wife which hath committed this fact: for it is shee and no other
which hath poysoned her husband my sisters sonne, to the intent to
maintaine her whoredome, and to get his heritage. In this sort the old
man complained before the face of all people. Then they (astonied at
these sayings, and because the thing seemed to be true) cried out, Burne
her, burne her, and they sought for stones to throw at her, and willed
the boys in the street to doe the same. But shee weeping in lamentable
wise, did swear by all the gods, that shee was not culpable of this
crime. No quoth the old man, here is one sent by the providence of
God to try out the matter, even Zachlas an Egypptian, who is the most
principall Prophecier in all this countrey, and who was hired of me for
money to reduce the soule of this man from hell, and to revive his body
for the triall hereof. And therewithall he brought forth a certaine
young man cloathed in linnen rayment, having on his feet a paire of
pantofiles, and his crowne shaven, who kissed his hands and knees,
saying, O priest have mercy, have mercy I pray thee by the Celestiall
Planets, by the Powers infernall, by the vertue of the naturall
elements, by the silences of the night, by the building of Swallows nigh
unto the towne Copton, by the increase of the floud Nilus, by the secret
mysteries of Memphis, and by the instruments and trumpets of the Isle
Pharos, have mercy I say, and call to life this dead body, and make that
his eyes which he closed and shut, may be open and see. Howbeit we meane
not to strive against the law of death, neither intend we to deprive the
earth of his right, but to the end this fact may be knowne, we crave
but a small time and space of life. Whereat this Prophet was mooved, and
took a certaine herb and layd it three times against the mouth of the
dead, and he took another and laid upon his breast in like sort. Thus
when hee had done hee turned himself into the East, and made certaine
orisons unto the Sunne, which caused all the people to marvell greatly,
and to looke for this strange miracle that should happen. Then I pressed
in amongst them nigh unto the biere, and got upon a stone to see this
mysterie, and behold incontinently the dead body began to receive
spirit, his principall veines did moove, his life came again and he held
up his head and spake in this sort: Why doe you call mee backe againe to
this transitorie life, that have already tasted of the water of Lethe,
and likewise been in the deadly den of Styx? Leave off, I pray, leave
off, and let me lie in quiet rest. When these words were uttered by the
dead corps, the Prophet drew nigh unto the Biere and sayd, I charge
thee to tell before the face of all the people here the occasion of thy
death: What, dost thou thinke that I cannot by my conjurations call up
the dead, and by my puissance torment thy body? Then the corps moved
his head again, and made reverence to the people and sayd, Verily I was
poisoned by the meanes of my wicked wife, and so thereby yeelded my
bed unto an adulterer. Whereat his wife taking present audacity, and
reproving his sayings, with a cursed minde did deny it. The people were
bent against her sundry wayes, some thought best that shee should be
buried alive with her husband: but some said that there ought no credit
to be given to the dead body. Which opinion was cleane taken away, by
the words which the corps spoke againe and sayd, Behold I will give
you some evident token, which never yet any other man knew, whereby
you shall perceive that I declare the truth: and by and by he pointed
towards me that stood on the stone, and sayd, When this the good Gard of
my body watched me diligently in the night, and that the wicked Witches
and enchantresses came into the chamber to spoyle mee of my limbes, and
to bring such their purpose did transforme themselves into the shape
of beasts: and when as they could in no wise deceive or beguile his
vigilant eyes, they cast him into so dead and sound a sleepe, that by
their witchcraft he seemed without spirit or life. After this they did
call me by my name, and never did cease til as the cold members of my
body began by little and little and little to revive. Then he being of
more lively soule, howbeit buried in sleep, in that he and I were named
by one name, and because he knew not that they called me, rose up first,
and as one without sence or perseverance passed by the dore fast closed,
unto a certain hole, whereas the Witches cut off first his nose, and
then his ears, and so that was done to him which was appointed to be
done to me. And that such their subtility might not be perceived, they
made him a like paire of eares and nose of wax: wherfore you may see
that the poore miser for lucre of a little mony sustained losse of his
members. Which when he had said I was greatly astonied, and minding to
prove whether his words were true or no, put my hand to my nose, and my
nose fell off, and put my hand to my ears and my ears fell off. Wherat
all the people wondred greatly, and laughed me to scorne: but I beeing
strucken in a cold sweat, crept between their legs for shame and escaped
away. So I disfigured returned home againe, and covered the losse of
myne ears with my long hair, and glewed this clout to my face to hide my
shame. As soon as Bellephoron had told his tale, they which sate at the
table replenished with wine, laughed heartily. And while they drank one
to another, Byrrhena spake to me and said, from the first foundation of
this city we have a custome to celebrate the festivall day of the god
Risus, and to-morrow is the feast when as I pray you to bee present, to
set out the same more honourably, and I would with all my heart that you
could find or devise somewhat of your selfe, that might be in honour
of so great a god. To whom I answered, verily cousin I will do as you
command me, and right glad would I be, if I might invent any laughing
or merry matter to please of satisfy Risus withall. Then I rose from the
table and took leave of Byrrhena and departed. And when I came into the
first street my torch went out, that with great pain I could scarce get
home, by reason it was so dark, for ear of stumbling: and when I was
well nigh come unto the dore, behold I saw three men of great stature,
heaving and lifting at Milos gates to get in: and when they saw me they
were nothing afeard, but assaied with more force to break down the dores
whereby they gave mee occasion, and not without cause, to thinke that
they were strong theeves. Whereupon I by and by drew out my sword which
I carried for that purpose under my cloak, and ran in amongst them, and
wounded them in such sort that they fell downe dead before my face.
Thus when I had slaine them all, I knocked sweating and breathing at
the doore til Fotis let me in. And then full weary with the slaughter of
those Theeves, like Hercules when he fought against the king Gerion, I
went to my chamber and layd me down to sleep.





THE THIRD BOOKE




THE TWELFTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was taken and put in prison for murther.

When morning was come, and that I was awaked from sleep, my heart burned
sore with remembrance of the murther I had committed the night before:
and I rose and sate downe on the side of the bed with my legges acrosse,
and wringing my hands, I weeped in most miserable sort. For I imagined
with my selfe, that I was brought before the Judge in the Judgement
place, and that he awarded sentence against me, and that the hangman was
ready to lead me to the gallows. And further I imagined and sayd, Alasse
what Judge is he that is so gentle or benigne, that will thinke that I
am unguilty of the slaughter and murther of these three men. Howbeit the
Assyrian Diophanes did firmely assure unto me, that my peregrination
and voyage hither should be prosperous. But while I did thus unfold my
sorrowes, and greatly bewail my fortune, behold I heard a great noyse
and cry at the dore, and in came the Magistrates and officers, who
commanded two sergeants to binde and leade me to prison, whereunto I was
willingly obedient, and as they led me through the street, all the City
gathered together and followed me, and although I looked always on the
ground for very shame, yet sometimes I cast my head aside and marvelled
greatly that among so many thousand people there was not one but laughed
exceedingly. Finally, when they had brought me through all the streets
of the city, in manner of those that go in procession, and do sacrifice
to mitigate the ire of the gods, they placed mee in the Judgement hall,
before the seat of the Judges: and after that the Crier had commanded
all men to keep silence, and people desired the Judges to give sentence
in the great Theatre, by reason of the great multitude that was there,
whereby they were in danger of stifling. And behold the prease of people
increased stil, some climed to the top of the house, some got upon the
beames, some upon the Images, and some thrust their heads through the
windowes, little regarding the dangers they were in, so they might see
me.

Then the officers brought mee forth openly into the middle of the hall,
that every man might behold me. And after that the Cryer had made a
noise, and willed all such that would bring any evidence against me,
should come forth, there stept out an old man with a glasse of water in
his hand, dropping out softly, who desired that hee might have liberty
to speake during the time of the continuance of the water. Which when it
was granted, he began his oration in this sort.




THE THIRTEENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was accused by an old man, and how he answered for
himselfe.

O most reverend and just Judges, the thing which I propose to declare to
you is no small matter, but toucheth the estate and tranquillity of this
whole City, and the punishment thereof may be a right good example to
others. Wherefore I pray you most venerable Fathers, to whom and every
one of whom it doth appertain, to provide for the dignity and safety of
the Commonweale, that you would in no wise suffer this wicked Homicide,
embrued with the bloud of so many murthered citisens, to escape
unpunished. And thinke you not that I am moved thereunto by envy or
hatred, but by reason of my office, in that I am captain of the night
Watch, and because no man alive should accuse mee to bee remisse in the
same I wil declare all the whole matter, orderly as it was done last
night.

This night past, when as at our accustomed houre I diligently searched
every part of the City, behold I fortuned to espy this cruell young man
drawing out his sword against three Citisens, and after a long combat
foughten between them, he murthered one after another miserably: which
when hee had done, moved in his conscience at so great a crime hee ran
away, and aided by the reason of darknes, slipt into a house, and there
lay hidden all night, but by the providence of the Gods, which suffereth
no heynous offence to pass unpunished, hee was taken by us this morning
before he escaped any further, and so brought hither to your honourable
presence to receive his desert accordingly.

So have you here a guilty person, a culpable homicide, and an accused
stranger, wherefore pronounce you judgement against this man beeing
an alien, when as you would most severely and sharply revenge such
an offence found in a known Citisen. In this sort the cruell accuser
finished and ended his terrible tale. Then the Crier commanded me to
speake, if I had any thing to say for my selfe, but I could in no wise
utter any word at all for weeping. And on the other side I esteemed not
so much his rigorous accusation, as I did consider myne owne miserable
conscience. Howbeit, beeing inspired by divine Audacity, at length I gan
say, Verily I know that it is an hard thing for him that is accused to
have slaine three persons, to perswade you that he is innocent, although
he should declare the whole truth, and confesse the matter how it was
indeed, but if your honours will vouchsafe to give me audience, I will
shew you, that if I am condemned to die, I have not deserved it as myne
owne desert, but that I was mooved by fortune and reasonable cause to
doe that fact. For returning somewhat late from supper yester night
(beeing well tippled with wine, which I will not deny) and approaching
nigh to my common lodging, which was in the house of one Milo a Citisen
of this city, I fortuned to espy three great theeves attempting to break
down his walls and gates, and to open the locks to enter in. And when
they had removed the dores out of the hookes, they consulted amongst
themselves, how they would handle such as they found in the house. And
one of them being of more courage, and of greater stature than the
rest, spake unto his fellows and sayd, Tush you are but boyes, take mens
hearts unto you, and let us enter into every part of the house, and such
as we find asleep let us kill, and so by that meanes we shall escape
without danger. Verily ye three Judges, I confess that I drew out my
sword against those three Citizens, but I thought it was the office and
duty of one that beareth good will to this weale publique, so to doe,
especially since they put me in great fear, and assayed to rob and spoyl
my friend Milo. But when those cruell and terrible men would in no case
run away, nor feare my naked sword, but boldly resist against me, I
ran upon them and fought valiantly. One of them which was the captain
invaded me strongly, and drew me by the haire with both his hands, and
began to beat me with a great stone: but in the end I proved the hardier
man, and threw him downe at my feet and killed him. I tooke likewise the
second that clasped me about the legs and bit me, and slew him also.
And the third that came running violently against me, after that I
had strucken him under the stomacke fell downe dead. Thus when I had
delivered my selfe, the house, Myne host, and all his family from this
present danger, I thought that I should not onely escape unpunished, but
also have some great reward of the city for my paines.

Moreover, I that have always been clear and unspotted of crime, and that
have esteemed myne innocency above all the treasure of the world, can
finde no reasonable cause why upon myne accusation I should be condemned
to die, since first I was mooved to set upon the theeves by just
occasion. Secondly, because there is none that can affirm, that there
hath been at any time either grudge or hatred between us. Thirdly, we
were men meere strangers and of no acquaintance. Last of all, no man can
prove that I committed that fact for lucre or gaine.

When I had ended my words in this sort, behold, I weeped againe
pitteously, and holding up my hands I prayed all the people by the mercy
of the Commonweale and for the love of my poore infants and children, to
shew me some pitty and favour. And when my hearts were somewhat relented
and mooved by my lamentable teares, I called all the gods to witnesse
that I was unguilty of the crime, and so to their divine providence, I
committed my present estate, but turning my selfe againe, I perceived
that all the people laughed exceedingly, and especially my good friend
and host Milo. Then thought I with my selfe, Alasse where is faith?
Where is remorse of conscience? Behold I am condemned to die as a
murtherer, for the safeguard of myne Host Milo and his family. Yet is
he not contented with that, but likewise laugheth me to scorne, when
otherwise he should comfort and help mee.




THE FOURTEENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was accused by two women, and how the slaine bodies were
found blowne bladders.

When this was done, out came a woman in the middle of the Theatre
arrayed in mourning vesture, and bearing a childe in her armes.
And after her came an old woman in ragged robes, crying and howling
likewise: and they brought with them the Olive boughs wherewith the
three slaine bodies were covered on the Beere, and cried out in this
manner: O right Judges, we pray by the justice and humanity which is in
you, to have mercy upon these slaine persons, and succour our Widowhood
and losse of our deare husbands, and especially this poore infant, who
is now an Orphan, and deprived of all good fortune: and execute your
justice by order and law, upon the bloud of this Theefe, who is the
occasion of all our sorrowes. When they had spoken these words, one of
the most antient Judges did rise and say, Touching this murther, which
deserveth great punishment, this malefactor himselfe cannot deny, but
our duty is to enquire and try out, whether he had Coadjutors to help
him. For it is not likely that one man alone could kill three such great
and valiant persons, wherefore the truth must be tried out by the racke,
and so wee shall learne what other companions he hath, and root out the
nest of these mischievous murtherers. And there was no long delay, but
according to the custome of Grecia, the fire, the wheele, and many other
torments were brought in. Then my sorrow encreased or rather doubled, in
that I could not end my life with whole and unperished members. And
by and by the old woman, who troubled all the Court with her howling,
desired the Judges, that before I should be tormented on the racke, I
might uncover the bodies which I had slaine, that every man might
see their comely shape and youthfull beauty, and that I might receive
condign and worthy punishment, according to the quality of my offence:
and therewithall shee made a sign of joy. Then the Judge commanded me
forthwith to discover the bodies of the slain, lying upon the beere,
with myne own handes, but when I refused a good space, by reason I would
not make my fact apparent to the eies of all men, the Sergeant charged
me by commandement of the Judges, and thrust me forward to do the
same. I being then forced by necessity, though it were against my wil,
uncovered the bodies: but O good Lord what a strange sight did I see,
what a monster? What sudden change of all my sorrows? I seemed as
though I were one of the house of Proserpina and of the family of death,
insomuch that I could not sufficiently expresse the forme of this new
sight, so far was I amased and astonied thereat: for why, the bodies of
the three slaine men were no bodies, but three blown bladders mangled
in divers places, and they seemed to be wounded in those parts where
I remembred I wounded the theeves the night before. Whereat the people
laughed exceedingly: some rejoyced marvellously at the remembrance
thereof, some held their stomackes that aked with joy, but every man
delighted at this passing sport, so passed out of the theatre. But I
from the time that I uncovered the bodies stood stil as cold as ice,
no otherwise than as the other statues and images there, neither came I
into my right senses, until such time as Milo my Host came and tooke mee
by the hand, and with civil violence lead me away weeping and sobbing,
whether I would or no. And because that I might be seene, he brought me
through many blind wayes and lanes to his house, where he went about to
comfort me, beeing sad and yet fearfull, with gentle entreaty of talke.
But he could in no wise mitigate my impatiency of the injury which I
conceived within my minde. And behold, by and by the Magistrates and
Judges with their ensignes entred into the house, and endeavoured to
pacify mee in this sort, saying, O Lucius, we are advertised of your
dignity, and know the genealogie of your antient lineage, for the
nobility of your Kinne doe possesse the greatest part of all this
Province: and thinke not that you have suffered the thing wherfore you
weepe, to any reproach and ignominy, but put away all care and sorrow
out of your minde. For this day, which we celebrate once a yeare in
honour of the god Risus, is alwaies renowned with some solemne novel,
and the god doth continually accompany with the inventor therof, and wil
not suffer that he should be sorrowfull, but pleasantly beare a joyfull
face. And verily all the City for the grace that is in you, intend to
reward you with great honours, and to make you a Patron. And further
that your statue or image may be set up for a perpetuall remembrance.

To whome I answered, As for such benefits as I have received of the
famous City of Thessaly, I yeeld and render the most entire thanks, but
as touching the setting up of any statues or images, I would wish that
they should bee reserved for myne Auntients, and such as are more worthy
than I.

And when I had spoken these words somewhat gravely, and shewed my selfe
more merry than I was before, the Judges and magistrates departed, and I
reverently tooke my leave of them, and bid them farewell. And behold,
by and by there came one running unto me in haste, and sayd, Sir,
your cousin Byrrhena desireth you to take the paines according to your
promise yester night, to come to supper, for it is ready. But I
greatly fearing to goe any more to her house in the night, said to the
messenger, My friend I pray you tell to my cousine your mistresse, that
I would willingly be at her commandement, but for breaking my troth and
credit. For myne host Milo enforced me to assure him, and compelled
me by the feast of this present day, that I should not depart from his
company, wherefore I pray you to excuse, and to defer my promise to
another time.

And while I was speaking these words, Milo tooke me by the hand, and led
me towards the next Baine: but by the way I went couching under him,
to hide my selfe from the sight of men, because I had ministred such
an occasion of laughter. And when I had washed and wiped my selfe, and
returned home againe, I never remembred any such thing, so greatly was
I abashed at the nodding and pointing of every person. Then went I to
supper with Milo, where God wot we fared but meanly. Wherefore feigning
that my head did ake by reason of my sobbing and weeping all day, I
desired license to depart to my Chamber, and so I went to bed.




THE FIFTEENTH CHAPTER


How Fotis told to Apuleius, what witchcraft her mistresse did use.

When I was a bed I began to call to minde all the sorrowes and griefes
that I was in the day before, until such time as my love Fotis, having
brought her mistresse to sleepe, came into the chamber, not as shee was
wont to do, for she seemed nothing pleasant neither in countenance nor
talke, but with sowre face and frowning looke, gan speak in this sort,
Verily I confesse that I have been the occasion of all thy trouble this
day, and therewith shee pulled out a whippe from under her apron, and
delivered it unto mee saying, Revenge thyself upon mee mischievous
harlot, or rather slay me.

And thinke you not that I did willingly procure this anguish and sorrow
unto you, I call the gods to witnesse. For I had rather myne owne body
to perish, than that you should receive or sustaine any harme by my
means, but that which I did was by the commandement of another, and
wrought as I thought for some other, but behold the unlucky chance
fortuned on you by my evill occasion.

The I, very curious and desirous to know the matter, answered, In faith
(quoth I), this most pestilent and evill favoured whip which thou hast
brought to scourge thee withal, shal first be broken in a thousand
pieces, than it should touch or hurt thy delicate and dainty skin. But I
pray you tell me how have you been the cause and mean of my trouble and
sorrow? For I dare sweare by the love that I beare unto you, and I will
not be perswaded, though you your selfe should endeavour the same, that
ever you went to trouble or harm me: perhaps sometimes you imagined an
evil thought in your mind, which afterwards you revoked, but that is not
to bee deemed as a crime.

When I had spoken these words, I perceived by Fotis eys being wet with
tears and well nigh closed up that shee had a desire unto pleasure and
specially because shee embraced and kissed me sweetly. And when she was
somewhat restored unto joy shee desired me that shee might first shut
the chamber doore, least by the untemperance of her tongue, in
uttering any unfitting words, there might grow further inconvenience.
Wherewithall shee barred and propped the doore, and came to me againe,
and embracing me lovingly about the neck with both her armes, spake with
a soft voice and said, I doe greatly feare to discover the privities
of this house, and to utter the secret mysteries of my dame. But I have
such confidence in you and in your wisedome, by reason that you are come
of so noble a line, and endowed with so profound sapience, and further
instructed in so many holy and divine things, that you will faithfully
keepe silence, and that whatsoever I shall reveale or declare unto
you, you would close them within the bottome of your heart, and never
discover the same: for I ensure you, the love that I beare unto you,
enforceth mee to utter it. Now shal you know all the estate of our
house, now shal you know the hidden secrets of my mistres, unto whome
the powers of hel do obey, and by whom the celestial planets are
troubled, the gods made weake, and the elements subdued, neither is the
violence of her art in more strength and force, than when she espieth
some comly young man that pleaseth her fancie, as oftentimes it hapneth,
for now she loveth one Boetian a fair and beautiful person, on whom she
employes al her sorcerie and enchantment, and I heard her say with mine
own ears yester night, that if the Sun had not then presently gon downe,
and the night come to minister convenient time to worke her magicall
enticements, she would have brought perpetuall darkness over all the
world her selfe. And you shall know, that when she saw yester night,
this Boetian sitting at the Barbers a polling, when she came from the
Baines shee secretly commanded me to gather up some of the haires of his
head which lay dispersed upon the ground, and to bring it home. Which
when I thought to have done the Barber espied me, and by reason it was
bruited though all the City that we were Witches and Enchantresses,
he cried out and said, Wil you never leave off stealing of young mens
haires? In faith I assure you, unlesse you cease your wicked sorceries,
I will complaine to the Justices. Wherewithall he came angerly towards
me, and tooke away the haire which I had gathered, out of my apron:
which grieved me very much, for I knew my Mistresses manners, that she
would not be contented but beat me cruelly.

Wherefore I intended to runne away, but the remembrance of you put
alwayes the thought out of my minde, and so I came homeward very
sorrowful: but because I would not seeme to come to my mistresse sight
with empty hands, I saw a man shearing of blowne goat skinnes, and the
hayre which he had shorne off was yellow, and much resembled the haire
of the Boetian, and I tooke a good deale thereof, and colouring of the
matter, I brought it to my mistresse. And so when night came, before
your return form supper, she to bring her purpose to passe, went up to
a high Gallery of her house, opening to the East part of the world, and
preparing her selfe according to her accustomed practise, shee gathered
together all substance for fumigations, she brought forth plates of
mettal carved with strange characters, she prepared the bones of such as
were drowned by tempest in the seas, she made ready the members of dead
men, as the nosethrils and fingers, shee set out the lumps of flesh of
such as were hanged, the blood which she had reserved of such as were
slaine and the jaw bones and teeth of willed beasts, then she said
certaine charmes over the haire, and dipped it in divers waters, as in
Wel water, Cow milk, mountain honey, and other liquor. Which when she
had done, she tied and lapped it up together, and with many perfumes
and smells threw it into an hot fire to burn. Then by the great force
of this sorcerie, and the violence of so many confections, those bodies
whose haire was burning in the fire, received humane shape, and felt,
heard and walked: And smelling the sent of their owne haire, came and
rapped at our doores in stead of Boetius. Then you being well tipled,
and deceived by the obscurity of the night, drew out your sword
courageously like furious Ajax, and kild not as he did, whole heard
of beastes, but three blowne skinnes, to the intent that I, after the
slaughter of so many enemies, without effusion of bloud might embrace
and kisse, not an homicide but an Utricide.

Thus when I was pleasantly mocked and taunted by Fotis, I sayd unto her,
verily now may I for this atcheived enterprise be numbered as Hercules,
who by his valiant prowesse performed the twelve notable Labors, as
Gerion with three bodies, and as Cerberus with three heads, for I have
slaine three blown goat skinnes. But to the end that I may pardon thee
of that thing which though hast committed, perform, the thing which
I most earnestly desire of thee, that is, bring me that I may see and
behold when thy mistresse goeth about any Sorcery or enchantment, and
when she prayeth unto the gods: for I am very desirous to learne that
art, and as it seemeth unto mee, thou thy selfe hath some experience in
the same. For this I know and plainly feele, That whereas I have always
yrked and loathed the embrace of Matrones, I am so stricken and subdued
with thy shining eyes, ruddy cheekes, glittering haire, sweet cosses,
and lilly white paps, that I have neither minde to goe home, nor to
depart hence, but esteeme the pleasure which I shall have with thee this
night, above all the joyes of the world. Then (quoth she) O my Lucius,
how willing would I be to fulfil your desire, but by reason shee is
so hated, she getteth her selfe into solitary places, and out of the
presence of every person, when she mindeth to work her enchantments.
Howbeit I regarde more to gratify your request, than I doe esteeme the
danger of my life: and when I see opportunitie and time I will assuredly
bring you word, so that you shal see all her enchantments, but always
upon this condition, that you secretly keepe close such things as are
done.

Thus as we reasoned together the courage of Venus assailed, as well our
desires as our members, and so she unrayed herself and came to bed, and
we passed the night in pastime and dalliance, till as by drowsie and
unlusty sleep I was constrained to lie still.




THE SIXTEENTH CHAPTER


How Fotis brought Apuleius to see her Mistresse enchant.

On a day Fotis came running to me in great feare, and said that her
mistresse, to work her sorceries on such as shee loved, intended the
night following to transforme her selfe into a bird, and to fly whither
she pleased. Wherefore she willed me privily to prepare my selfe to see
the same. And when midnight came she led me softly into a high chamber,
and bid me look thorow the chink of a doore: where first I saw how shee
put off all her garments, and took out of a certain coffer sundry kindes
of Boxes, of the which she opened one, and tempered the ointment therein
with her fingers, and then rubbed her body therewith from the sole of
the foot to the crowne of the head, and when she had spoken privily with
her selfe, having the candle in her hand, she shaked the parts of her
body, and behold, I perceived a plume of feathers did burgen out, her
nose waxed crooked and hard, her nailes turned into clawes, and so she
became an Owle. Then she cried and screeched like a bird of that kinde,
and willing to proove her force, mooved her selfe from the ground by
little and little, til at last she flew quite away.

Thus by her sorcery shee transformed her body into what shape she would.
Which when I saw I was greatly astonied: and although I was inchanted by
no kind of charme, yet I thought that I seemed not to have the likenesse
of Lucius, for so was I banished from my sences, amazed in madnesse, and
so I dreamed waking, that I felt myne eyes, whether I were asleepe or
no. But when I was come againe to my selfe, I tooke Fotis by the hand,
and moved it to my face and said, I pray thee while occasion doth serve,
that I may have the fruition of the fruits of my desire, and grant me
some of this oyntment. O Fotis I pray thee by thy sweet paps, to make
that in the great flames of my love I may be turned into a bird, so
I will ever hereafter be bound unto you, and obedient to your
commandement. Then said Fotis, Wil you go about to deceive me now, and
inforce me to work my own sorrow? Are you in the mind that you will not
tarry in Thessaly? If you be a bird, where shall I seek you, and when
shall I see you? Then answered I, God forbid that I should commit such
a crime, for though I could fly in the aire as an Eagle or though I were
the messenger of Jupiter, yet would I have recourse to nest with thee:
and I swear by the knot of thy amiable hair, that since the time I first
loved thee, I never fancied any other person: moreover, this commeth to
my minde, that if by the vertue of the oyntment I shall become an Owle,
I will take heed I will come nigh no mans house: for I am not to learn,
how these matrons would handle their lovers, if they knew that they were
transformed into Owles: Moreover, when they are taken in any place they
are nayled upon posts, and so they are worthily rewarded, because it
is thought that they bring evill fortune to the house. But I pray you
(which I had almost forgotten) to tell me by what meanes when I am an
Owle, I shall return to my pristine shape, and become Lucius againe.
Feare not (quoth she) for my mistres hath taught me the way to bring
that to passe, neither thinke you that she did it for any good will and
favour, but to the end that I might help her, and minister some remedy
when she returneth home.

Consider I pray you with your selfe, with what frivolous trifles so
marvellous a thing is wrought: for by Hercules I swear I give her
nothing else save a little Dill and Lawrell leaves, in Well water, the
which she drinketh and washeth her selfe withall. Which when she had
spoken she went into the chamber and took a box out of the coffer,
which I first kissed and embraced, and prayed that I might [have] good
successe in my purpose. And then I put off all my garments, and greedily
thrust my hand into the box, and took out a good deale of oyntment and
rubbed my selfe withall.




THE SEVENTEENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius thinking to be turned into a Bird, was turned into an Asse,
and how he was led away by Theves.

After that I had well rubbed every part and member of my body, I hovered
with myne armes, and moved my selfe, looking still when I should bee
changed into a Bird as Pamphiles was, and behold neither feathers nor
appearance of feathers did burgen out, but verily my haire did turne
in ruggednesse, and my tender skin waxed tough and hard, my fingers and
toes losing the number of five, changed into hoofes, and out of myne
arse grew a great taile, now my face became monstrous, my nosthrils
wide, my lips hanging downe, and myne eares rugged with haire: neither
could I see any comfort of my transformation, for my members encreased
likewise, and so without all helpe (viewing every part of my poore body)
I perceived that I was no bird, but a plaine Asse.

The I though to blame Fotis, but being deprived as wel of language as
of humane shape, I looked upon her with my hanging lips and watery eyes.
Who as soon as shee espied me in such sort, cried out, Alas poore wretch
that I am, I am utterly cast away. The feare I was in, and my haste hath
beguiled me, but especially the mistaking of the box, hath deceived me.
But it forceth not much, in regard a sooner medicine may be gotten for
this than for any other thing. For if thou couldst get a rose and eat
it, thou shouldst be delivered from the shape of an Asse, and become
my Lucius againe. And would to God I had gathered some garlands this
evening past, according to my custome, then thou shouldst not continue
an Asse one nights space, but in the morning I shall seek some remedy.
Thus Fotis lamented in pittifull sort, but I that was now a perfect
asse, and for Lucius a brute beast, did yet retaine the sence and
understanding of a man. And did devise a good space with my selfe,
whether it were best for me to teare this mischievous and wicked harlot
with my mouth, or to kicke and kill her with my heels. But a better
thought reduced me from so rash a purpose: for I feared lest by the
death of Fotis I should be deprived of all remedy and help. Then shaking
myne head, and dissembling myne ire, and taking my adversity in good
part, I went into the stable to my owne horse, where I found another
asse of Milos, somtime my host, and I did verily think that mine owne
horse (if there were any natural conscience or knowledge in brute
beasts) would take pitty on me, and profer me lodging for that night:
but it chanced far otherwise. For see, my horse and the asse as it were
consented together to work my harm, and fearing lest I should eat up
their provender, would in no wise suffer me to come nigh the manger, but
kicked me with their heels from their meat, which I my self gave them
the night before. Then I being thus handled by them, and driven away,
got me into a corner of the stable, where while I remembred their
uncurtesie, and how on the morrow I should return to Lucius by the help
of a Rose, when as I thought to revenge my selfe of myne owne horse, I
fortuned to espy in the middle of a pillar sustaining the rafters of the
stable the image of the goddesse Hippone, which was garnished and decked
round about with faire and fresh roses: then in hope of present remedy,
I leaped up with my fore feet as high as I could, stretching out my
neck, and with my lips coveting to snatch some roses. But in an evill
houre I did go about that enterprise, for behold the boy to whom I gave
charge of my horse, came presently in, and finding me climbing upon the
pillar, ranne fretting towards me and said, How long shall wee suffer
this wild Asse, that doth not onely eat up his fellowes meat, but also
would spoyl the images of the gods? Why doe I not kill this lame theefe
and weake wretch. And therewithall looking about for some cudgel, hee
espied where lay a fagot of wood, and chusing out a crabbed truncheon
of the biggest hee could finde, did never cease beating of mee poore
wretch, until such time as by great noyse and rumbling, hee heard
the doores of the house burst open, and the neighbours crying in most
lamentable sort, which enforced him being stricken in feare, to fly his
way. And by and by a troupe of theeves entred in, and kept every part
and corner of the house with weapons. And as men resorted to aid and
help them which were within the doores, the theeves resisted and kept
them back, for every man was armed with a sword and target in his hand,
the glimpses whereof did yeeld out such light as if it had bin day. Then
they brake open a great chest with double locks and bolts, wherein was
layd all the treasure of Milo, and ransackt the same: which when they
had done they packed it up and gave every man a portion to carry: but
when they had more than they could beare away, yet were they loth to
leave any behind, but came into the stable, and took us two poore asses
and my horse, and laded us with greater trusses than wee were able to
beare. And when we were out of the house, they followed us with great
staves, and willed one of their fellows to tarry behind, and bring
them tydings what was done concerning the robbery: and so they beat us
forward over great hils out of the way. But I, what with my heavy
burden and long journy, did nothing differ from a dead asse: wherfore I
determined with my self to seek some civil remedy, and by invocation
of the name of the prince of the country to be delivered from so many
miseries: and on a time I passed through a great faire, I came among a
multitude of Greeks, and I thought to call upon the renowned name of the
Emperor and say, O Cesar, and cried out aloud O, but Cesar I could in
no wise pronounce. The Theeves little regarding my crying, did lay me on
and beat my wretched skinne in such sort, that after it was neither apt
nor meet to make Sives or Sarces. Howbeit at last Jupiter administred
to me an unhoped remedy. For when we had passed through many townes
and villages, I fortuned to espy a pleasant garden, wherein beside many
other flowers of delectable hiew, were new and fresh roses: and being
very joyful, and desirous to catch some as I passed by, I drew neerer
and neerer: and while my lips watered upon them, I thought of a better
advice more profitable for me, lest if from an asse I should become a
man, I might fall into the hands of the theeves, and either by suspition
that I were some witch, or for feare that I should utter their theft,
I should be slaine, wherefore I abstained for that time from eating of
Roses, and enduring my present adversity, I did eat hay as other Asses
did.





THE FOURTH BOOKE




THE EIGHTEENTH CHAPTER

How Apuleius thinking to eat Roses, was cruelly beaten by a Gardener,
and chased by dogs.

When noone was come, that the broyling heate of the sunne had most
power, we turned into a village to certaine of the theeves acquaintance
and friends, for verily their meeting and embracing together did give
me, poore asse, cause to deeme the same, and they tooke the trusse from
my backe, and gave them part of the Treasure which was in it, and they
seemed to whisper and tell them that it was stollen goods, and after
that we were unladen of our burthens, they let us loose in a medow to
pasture, but myne own horse and Miloes Asse would not suffer me to feed
there with them, but I must seeke my dinner in some other place.

Wherefore I leaped into a garden which was behinde the stable, and being
well nigh perished with hunger, although I could find nothing there
but raw and green fallets, yet I filled my hungry guts therwithall
abundantly, and praying unto all the gods, I looked about in every place
if I could espy any red roses in the gardens by, and my solitary being
alone did put me in good hope, that if I could find any remedy, I should
presently of an Asse be changed into Lucius out of every mans sight. And
while I considered these things, I loked about, and behold I saw a farre
off a shadowed valley adjoyning nigh unto a wood, where amongst divers
other hearbes and pleasant verdures, me thought I saw bright flourishing
Roses of bright damaske colour; and said within my bestaill minde,
Verily that place is the place of Venus and the Graces, where secretly
glistereth the royall hew, of so lively and delectable a floure. Then I
desiring the help of the guide of my good fortune, ranne lustily towards
the wood, insomuch that I felt myself that I was no more an Asse, but a
swift coursing horse: but my agility and quicknes could not prevent the
cruelty of my fortune, for when I came to the place I perceived that
they were no roses, neither tender nor pleasant, neither moystened with
the heavenly drops of dew, nor celestial liquor, which grew out of the
thicket and thornes there. Neither did I perceive that there was any
valley at all, but onely the bank of the river, environed with great
thick trees, which had long branches like unto lawrell, and bearing a
flour without any manner of sent, and the common people call them by the
name of Lawrel roses, which be very poyson to all manner of beasts. Then
was I so intangled with unhappy fortune that I little esteemed mine own
danger, and went willingly to eat of these roses, though I knew them to
be present poyson: and as I drew neere I saw a yong man that seemed
to be the gardener, come upon mee, and when he perceived that I had
devoured all his hearbes in the garden, he came swearing with a great
staffe in his hand, and laid upon me in such sort, that I was well nigh
dead, but I speedily devised some remedy my self, for I lift up my legs
and kicked him with my hinder heels, that I left him lying at the hill
foot wel nigh slain, and so I ran away. Incontinently came out his wife,
who seeing her husband halfe dead, cried and howled in pittifull sort,
and went toward her husband, to the intent that by her lowd cries shee
might purchase to me present destruction. Then all the persons of the
town, moved by her noise came forth, and cried for dogs to teare me
down. Out came a great company of Bandogs and mastifes, more fit to
pul down bears and lions than me, whom when I beheld I thought verily
I should presently die: but I turned myself about, and ranne as fast as
ever I might to the stable from whence I came. Then the men of the towne
called in their dogs, and took me and bound mee to the staple of a post,
and scourged me with a great knotted whip till I was well nigh dead, and
they would undoubtedly have slaine me, had it not come to passe, that
what with the paine of their beating, and the greene hearbes that lay in
my guts, I caught such a laske that I all besprinkled their faces with
my liquid dung, and enforced them to leave off.




THE NINETEENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was prevented of his purpose, and how the Theeves came to
their den.

Not long after, the theeves laded us againe, but especially me, and
brought us forth of the stable, and when wee had gone a good part of our
journey what with the long way, my great burthen, the beating of staves,
and my worne hooves, I was so weary that I could scantly go. Then I
saw a little before mee a river running with fair water, and I said to
myself, Behold, now I have found a good occasion: for I will fall down
when I come yonder, and surely I will not rise againe, neither with
scourging nor with beating, for I had rather be slaine there presently,
than goe any further.

And the cause why I had determined so to doe was this, I thought that
the theeves when they did see me so feeble and weake that I could not
travell, to the intent they would not stay in their journey, they would
take the burthen from my backe and put it on my fellowes, and so for
my further punishment to leave me as a prey to the wolves and ravening
beasts. But evill fortune prevented so good a consideration; for the
other Asse being of the same purpose that I was of, by feigned and
coloured wearinesse fell downe first, with all his burthen on the ground
as though hee were dead, and he would not rise neither with beating nor
with pricking, nor stand upon his legs, though they pulled him by the
tail, by his legs, and by his eares: which when the theeves beheld, as
without all hope they said one unto another, What should we stand here
so long about a dead or rather a stony asse? let us bee gone: and so
they tooke his burthen, and divided some to mee, and some to my horse.
And then they drew out their swords and cut off his legs, and threw
his body from the point of a hill down into a great valley. Then I
considering with my selfe of the evill fortune of my poore companion,
and purposed now to forget all subtility and deceit, and to play the
good Asse to get my masters favour, for I perceived by their talke that
we were come home well nigh at our journeys end. And after that wee had
passed over a little hill, we came to our appointed place, and when we
were unladen of our burthens, and all things carried in, I tumbled and
wallowed in the dust, to refresh my selfe in stead of water. The thing
and the time compelleth me to make description of the places, and
especially of the den where the theeves did inhabit, I will prove my
wit in what I can doe, and the consider you whether I was an Asse in
judgement and sence, or no. For first there was an exceeding great hill
compassed about with big trees very high, with many turning bottoms full
of sharp stones, whereby it was inaccessible. There was many winding
and hollow vallies, environed with thickets and thornes, and naturally
fortressed round about. From the top of the hill ranne a running water
as cleare as silver, that watered all the valleyes below, that it seemed
like unto a sea inclosed, or a standing floud. Before the denne
where was no hill stood an high tower, and at the foot thereof were
sheep-coats fenced and walled with clay. Before the gate of the house
were pathes made in stead of wals, in such sort that you could easily
judge it to be a very den for theeves, and there was nothing else except
a little coat covered with thatch, wherein the theeves did nightly
accustome to watch by order, as I after perceived. And when they were
all crept into the house, and we were all tied fast with halters at the
dore, they began to chide with an old woman there, crooked with age, who
had the government and rule of all the house, and said, How is it old
witch, old trot, and strumpet, that thou sittest idley all day at home,
and having no regard to our perillous labours, hast provided nothing for
our suppers, but sittest eating and swilling thyself from morning till
night? Then the old woman trembled, and scantly able to speak gan
say, Behold my puissant and faithfull masters, you shall have meat and
pottage enough by and by: here is first store of bread, wine plenty,
filled in cleane rinsed pots, likewise here is hot water prepared to
bathe you.

Which when she had said, they put off all their garments and refreshed
themselves by the fire. And after they were washed and noynted with
oyle, they sate downe at the table garnished with all kind of dainty
meats. They were no sooner sate downe, but in came another company of
yong men more in number than was before, who seemed likewise to bee
Theeves, for they brought in their preyes of gold and silver, Plate,
jewels, and rich robes, and when they had likewise washed, they sate
among the rest, and served one another by order. Then they drank and eat
exceedingly, laughing, crying and making much noyse, that I thought that
I was among the tyrannous and wilde Lapithes, Thebans, and Centaures.
At length one of them more valiant than the rest, spake in this sort, We
verily have manfully conquered the house of Milo of Hippata, and beside
all the riches and treasure which by force we have brought away, we are
all come home safe, and are increased the more by this horse and this
Asse. But you that have roved about in the country of Boetia, have lost
your valiante captaine Lamathus, whose life I more regarded than all the
treasure which you have brought: and therfore the memory of him shall
bee renowned for ever amongst the most noble kings and valiant captains:
but you accustome when you goe abroad, like men with ganders hearts to
creepe through every corner and hole for every trifle. Then one of them
that came last answered, Why are you only ignorant, that the greater the
number is, the sooner they may rob and spoyle the house? And although
the family be dispersed in divers lodgings, yet every man had rather
to defend his own life, than to save the riches of his master: but
when there be but a few theeves, then will they not only rather regard
themselves, but also their substance, how little or great soever it be.
And to the intent you may beleeve me I will shew you an example: wee
were come nothing nigh to Thebes, where is the fountain of our art and
science, but we learned where a rich Chuffe called Chriseros did dwell,
who for fear of offices in the publique wel dissembled his estate,
and lived sole and solitary in a small coat, howbeit replenished with
aboundance of treasure, and went daily in ragged and torn apparel.
Wherefore wee devised with our selves to go to his house and spoyl him
of all his riches. And when night came we drew towards the dore, which
was so strongly closed, that we could neither move it, nor lift it out
of the hooks, and we thought it best not to break it open lest by the
noyse we should raise up to our harm the neighbours by. Then our strong
and valiant captaine Lamathus trusting in his own strength and force,
thrust in his had through a hole in the dore, and thought to pull back
the bolt: but the covetous caitif Chriseros being awake, and making no
noise came softly to the dore and caught his hand and with a great naile
nailed it fast to the post: which when he had done, he ran up to the
high chamber and called every one of his neighbours by name, desiring
them to succour him with all possible speed, for his own house was on
fire. Then every one for fear of his owne danger came running out to aid
him, wherewith we fearing our present peril, knew not what was best to
be don, whether wee should leave our companion there, or yeeld ourselves
to die with him: but we by his consent devised a better way, for we cut
off his arm by the elbow and so let it hang there: then wee bound his
wound with clouts, lest we should be traced by the drops of blood: which
don we took Lamathus and led him away, for fear we would be taken: but
being so nigh pursued that we were in present danger, and that Lamathus
could not keepe our company by reason of faintnesse; and on the other
side perceiving that it was not for his profit to linger behinde, he
spake unto us as a man of singular courage and vertue, desiring us by
much entreaty and prayer and by the puissance of the god Mars, and the
faith of our confederacy, to deliver his body from torment and miserable
captivity: and further he said, How is it possible that so courageous a
Captaine can live without his hand, wherewith he could somtime rob and
slay so many people? I would thinke myself sufficiently happy if I could
be slaine by one of you. But when he saw that we all refused to commit
any such fact, he drew out his sword with his other hand, and after
that he had often kissed it, he drove it clean through his body. Then
we honoured the corps of so puissant a man, and wrapped it in linnen
cloathes and threw it into the sea. So lieth our master Lamathus, buried
and did in the grave of water, and ended his life as I have declared.
But Alcinus, though he were a man of great enterprise, yet could he not
beware by Lamathus, nor voide himselfe from evill fortune, for on a day
when he had entred into an old womans house to rob her, he went up into
a high chamber, where hee should first have strangled her: but he had
more regard to throw down the bags of mony and gold out at a window,
to us that stood under; and when he was so greedy that he would leave
nothing behinde, he went into the old womans bed where she lay asleep,
and would have taken off the coverlet to have thrown downe likewise, but
shee awaked, and kneeling on her knees, desired him in this manner:
O sir I pray you cast not away such torn and ragged clouts into my
neighbours houses, for they are rich enough, and need no such things.
Then Alcinus thinking her words to be true, was brought in beleefe, that
such things as he had throwne out already, and such things as hee should
throw out after, was not fallen downe to his fellowes, but to other mens
houses, wherefore hee went to the window to see, and as hee thought to
behold the places round about, thrusting his body out of the window, the
old woman marked him wel, and came behind him softly, and though shee
had but small strength, yet with sudden force she tooke him by the
heeles and thrust him out headlong, and so he fell upon a marvellous
great stone and burst his ribs, wherby he vomited and spewed great
flakes of blood, and presently died. Then wee threw him to the river
likewise, as we had done Lamathus before.

When we had thus lost two of our companions, we liked not Thebes, but
marched towards the next city called Platea, where we found a man of
great fame called Demochares, that purposed to set forth a great game,
where should be a triall of all kind of weapons: hee was come of a good
house, marvellous rich, liberall, and wel deserved that which he had and
had prepared many showes and pleasures for the Common people, insomuch
that there is no man can either by wit or eloquence shew in words his
worthy preparations: for first he had provided all sorts of armes, hee
greatly delighted in hunting and chasing, he ordained great towers and
Tables to move hither and thither: hee made many places to chase and
encounter in: he had ready a great number of men and wilde beasts, and
many condemned persons were brought from the Judgement place, to try
and fight with those beasts. But amongst so great preparations of noble
price, he bestowed the most part of his patrimony in buying of Beares,
which he nourished to his great cost, and esteemed more than all the
other beasts, which either by chasing hee caught himself, or which he
dearely bought, or which were given him from divers of his friends.

Howbeit for all his sumptuous cost, hee could not be free from the
malitious eyes of envy, for some of them were well nigh dead with too
long tying up, some meagre with the broyling heat of the sunne, some
languished with lying, but all having sundry diseases, were so afflicted
that they died one after another, and there was well nigh none left, in
such sort that you might see them lying in the streets pittiously dead.
And the common people having no other meat to feed on, little regarding
any curiosity, would come forth and fill their bellies with the flesh
of the beares. Then by and by Babulus and I devised a pretty sport, wee
drew one of the greatest of the Beares to our lodging, as though wee
would prepare to eat thereof, where wee flayed of his skinne, and kept
his ungles whole, but we medled not with the head, but cut it off by
the necke, and so let it hang to the skinne. Then we rased off the flesh
from the necke, and cast dust thereon, and set it in the sun to dry.




THE TWENTIETH CHAPTER


How Thrasileon was disguised in a Beares skin, and how he was handled.

When the skin was a drying we made merry with the flesh, and then we
devised with our selves, that one of us being more valiant than the rest
both in body and courage (so that he would consent thereto) should
put on the skin, and feigning that he were a Beare, should be led to
Demochares house in the night, by which means we thought to be received
and let in. Many were desirous to play the Beare, but especially one
Thrasileon of a couragious minde would take this enterprise in hand.
Then wee put in into the Beares skin, which him finely in every point,
wee buckled it fast under his belly, and covered the seam with the
haire, that it might not be seen. After this we made little holes
through the bears head, and through his nosthrils and eyes, for
Thrasileon to see out and take wind at, in such sort that he seemed a
very lively and natural beast: when this was don we went into a cave
which we hired for the purpose, and he crept in after like a bear with
a good courage. Thus we began our subtility, and then wee imagined thus,
wee feigned letters as though they came from one Nicanor which dwelt
in the Country of Thracia, which was of great acquaintance with this
Demochares, wherein we wrote, that hee had sent him being his friend,
the first fruits of his coursing and hunting. When night was come, which
was a meet time for our purpose, we brought Thrasileon and our forged
letters and presented them to Demochares. When Demochares beheld
this mighty Beare, and saw the liberality of Nicanor his friend, hee
commanded his servants to deliver unto us x. crowns, having great store
in his coffers. Then (as the novelty of a thing doth accustom to stir
mens minds to behold the same) many persons came on every side to see
this bear: but Thrasileon, lest they should by curious viewing and
prying perceive the truth, ran upon them to put them in feare that they
durst not come nigh. The people said, Verily Demochares is right happy,
in that after the death of so many beasts, hee hath gotten maugre
fortunes head, so goodly a bear. Then Demochares commanded him with all
care to be put in the park with all the other beasts: but immediately
I spake unto him and said, Sir I pray you take heed how you put a beast
tired with the heat of the sun and with long travell, among others which
as I hear say have divers maladies and diseases, let him rather lie in
some open place in your house nie some water, where he may take air and
ease himself, for doe you not know that such kind of beasts do greatly
delight to couch under the shadow of trees and hillocks neer pleasant
wells and waters? Hereby Demochares admonished, and remembring how many
he had before that perished, was contented that we should put the
bear where we would. Moreover we said unto him, that we ourselves were
determined to lie all night neer the Bear, to look unto him, and to give
him meat and drink at his due houre.

Then he answered, Verily masters you need not put yourselves to such
paines, for I have men that serve for nothing but that purpose. So wee
tooke leave of him and departed: and when we were come without the gates
of the town, we perceived before us a great sepulchre standing out of
the highway in a privy and secret place, and thither we went and
opened the mouth thereof, whereas we found the sides covered with the
corruption of man, and the ashes and dust of his long buried body,
wherein we got ourselves to bring our purpose to passe, and having
respect to the dark time of night, according to our custome, when
we thought that every one was asleepe, we went with our weapons and
besieged the house of Demochares round about. Then Thrasileon was ready
at hand, and leaped out of the caverne, and went to kill all such as he
found asleepe: but when he came to the Porter, he opened the gates and
let us in, and then he shewed us a large Counter, wherein we saw the
night before a great aboundance of treasure: which when by violence
we had broke open, I bid every one of my fellows take as much gold and
silver as they could carry away: and beare it to the sepulchre, and
still as they carried away I stood at the gate, watching diligently when
they would returne. The Beare running about the house, to make such of
the family afeared as fortuned to wake and come out. For who is he that
is so puissant and couragious, that at the ougly sight of so great a
monster will not quayle and keep his chamber especially in the night?
But when wee had brought this matter to so good a point, there chanced a
pittifull case, for as I looked for my companions that should come from
the sepulchre, behold there was a Boy of the house that fortuned to
looke out of a window, and espied the Bear running about, and he went
and told all the servants of the house. Whereupon incontinently they
came forth with Torches, Lanthornes, and other lights, that they might
see all the yard over: they came with clubs, speares, naked swords,
Greyhounds, and Mastifes to slay the poore beast. Then I during this
broyle thought to run away, but because I would see Thrasileon fight
with the Dogs, I lay behinde the gate to behold him. And although I
might perceive that he was well nigh dead, yet remembred he his owne
faithfulnes and ours, and valiantly resisted the gaping and ravenous
mouths of the hell hounds, so tooke hee in gree the pagiant which
willingly he tooke in hand himself, and with much adoe tumbled at length
out of the house: but when hee was at liberty abroad yet could he not
save himself, for all the dogs of the Streete joyned themselves to the
greyhounds and mastifes of the house, and came upon him.

Alas what a pittifull sight it was to see our poore Thrasileon thus
environed and compassed with so many dogs that tare and rent him
miserably. Then I impatient of so great a misery, ranne in among the
prease of people, and ayding him with my words as much as I might,
exhorted them all in this manner: O great and extreame mischance, what
a pretious and excellent beast have we lost. But my words did nothing
prevaile, for there came out a tall man with a speare in his hand, that
thrust him cleane through, and afterwards many that stood by drew out
their swords, and so they killed him. But verily our good Captaine
Thrasileon, the honour of our comfort, received his death so patiently,
that he would not bewray the league betweene us, either by crying,
howling, or any other meanes, but being torn with dogs and wounded with
weapons, did yeeld forth a dolefull cry, more like unto a beast than a
man. And taking his present fortune in good part, with courage and glory
enough did finish his life, with such a terror unto the assembly, that
no person was hardy until it was day, as to touch him, though hee were
starke dead: but at last there came a Butcher more valiant than the
rest, who opening the panch of the beast, slit out an hardy and ventrous
theefe.

In this manner we lost our Captain Thrasileon, but he left not his fame
and honour.

When this was done wee packed up our treasure, which we committed to the
sepulchre to keepe, and got out of the bounds of Platea, thus thinking
with our selves, that there was more fidelity amongst the dead than
amongst the living, by reason that our preyes were so surely kept in the
sepulchre. So being wearied with the weight of our burthens, and well
nigh tyred with long travell, having lost three of our soldiers, we are
come home with these present cheats.

Thus when they had spoken in memory of their slaine companions, they
tooke cups of gold, and sung hymns unto the god mars, and layd them
downe to sleep. Then the old woman gave us fresh barley without measure,
insomuch that my horse fed so abundantly that he might well thinke hee
was at some banquet that day. But I that was accustomed to eat bran
and flower, thought that but a sower kinde of meate. Wherfore espying a
corner where lay loaves of bread for all the house I got me thither and
filled my hungry guts therewith.




THE TWENTY-FIRST CHAPTER


How the Theeves stole away a Gentlewoman, and brought her to their den.

When night was come the Theeves awaked and rose up, and when they had
buckled on their weapons, and disguised their faces with visards, they
departed. And yet for all the great sleep that came upon me, I could in
no wise leave eating: and whereas when I was a man I could be contented
with one or two loaves at the most, now my huts were so greedy that
three panniers full would scantly serve me, and while I considered these
things the morning came, and being led to a river, notwithstanding
my Assie shamefastnesse I quencht my thirst. And suddenly after, the
Theeves returned home carefull and heavy, bringing no burthens with
them, no not so much as traffe or baggage, save only a maiden, that
seemed by her habit to be some gentlewoman borne, and the daughter of
some worthy matron of that country, who was so fair and beautiful, that
though I were an Asse, yet I had a great affection for her. The virgin
lamented and tare her hair, and rent her garments, for the great sorrow
she was in; but the theeves brought her within the cave, and assisted
her to comfort in this sort, Weep not fair gentlewoman we pray you, for
be you assured we wil do no outrage or violence to your person: but take
patience a while for our profit, for necessity and poore estate hath
compelled us to do this enterprise: we warrant you that your parents,
although they bee covetous, will be contented to give us a great
quantity of mony to redeeme and ransome you from our hands.

With such and like flattering words they endeavoured to appease the
gentlewoman, howbeit shee would in no case be comforted, but put her
head betwixt her knees, and cried pittiously. Then they called the old
woman, and commaunded her to sit by the maiden, and pacify her dolor
as much as shee might. And they departed away to rob, as they were
accustomed to doe, but the virgin would not asswage her griefes, nor
mitigate her sorrow by any entreaty of the old woman, but howled and
sobbed in such sort, that she made me poore Asse likewise to weepe, and
thus she said, Alas can I poore wench live any longer, that am come of
so good a house, forsaken of my parents, friends, and family, made a
rapine and prey, closed servilely in this stony prison, deprived of all
pleasure, wherein I have been brought up, thrown in danger, ready to be
rent in pieces among so many sturdy theeves and dreadful robbers, can
I (I say) cease from weeping, and live any longer? Thus she cried and
lamented, and after she had wearied herself with sorrow and blubbered
her face with teares, she closed the windowes of her hollow eyes, and
laid her downe to sleepe. And after that she had slept, she rose again
like a furious and mad woman, and beat her breast and comely face more
that she did before.

Then the old woman enquired the causes of her new and sudden
lamentation. To whom sighing in pittifull sort she answered, Alas now I
am utterly undone, now am I out of all hope, O give me a knife to kill
me, or a halter to hang me. Whereat the old [woman] was more angry,
and severely commanded her to tell her the cause of her sorrow, and
why after her sleep, she should renew her dolour and miserable weeping.
What, thinke you (quoth she) to deprive our young men of the price of
your ransome? No, no therefore cease your crying, for the Theeves doe
little esteeme your howling, and if you do not, I will surely burn you
alive. Hereat the maiden was greatly feared, and kissed her hand and
said, O mother take pitty upon me and my wretched fortune, and give me
license a while to speake, for I think I shall not long live, let there
be mercy ripe and franke in thy venerable hoare head, and hear the sum
of my calamity.

There was a comely young man, who for his bounty and grace was beloved
entirely of all the towne, my cousine Germane, and but three years older
than I; we two were nourished and brought up in one house, lay under one
roofe, and in one chamber, and at length by promise of marriage, and by
consent of our parents we were contracted together. The marriage day was
come, the house was garnished with lawrel, and torches were set in
every place in the honour of Hymeneus, my espouse was accompanied by his
parents, kinsfolke, and friends, and made sacrifices in the temples and
publique places. And when my unhappy mother pampered me in her lap, and
decked me like a bride, kissing me sweetly, and making me a parent for
Children, behold there came in a great multitude of theeves armed like
men of warre, with naked swords in their hands, who went not about
to doe any harme, neither to take any thing away, but brake into the
chamber where I was, and violently tooke me out of my mothers armes,
when none of our family would resist for feare.

In this sort was our marriage disturbed, like the marriage of Hyppodame
and Perithous. But behold my good mother, now my unhappy fortune is
renewed and encreased: For I dreamed in my sleepe, that I was pulled out
of our house, out of our chamber, and out of my bed, and that I removed
about in solitary and unknowne places, calling upon the name of my
unfortunate husband, and how that he, as soone as he perceived that he
was taken away, even smelling with perfumes and crowned with garlands,
did trace me by the steppes, desiring the aid of the people to assist
him, in that his wife was violently stollen away, and as he went crying
up and down, one of the theeves mooved with indignation, by reason of
his pursuit, took up a stone that lay at his feet, and threw it at my
husband and killed him. By the terror of which sight, and the feare of
so dreadfull a dreame, I awaked.

Then the old woman rendring out like sighes, began to speake in this
sort: My daughter take a good heart unto you, and bee not afeared at
feigned and strange visions and dreams, for as the visions of the day
are accounted false and untrue, so the visions of the night doe often
change contrary. And to dream of weeping, beating, and killing, is a
token of good luck and prosperous change. Whereas contrary to dreame
of laughing, carnal dalliance, and good cheere, is a signe of sadnesse,
sicknesse, loss of substance, and displeasure. But I will tell thee a
pleasant tale, to put away all thy sorrow, and to revive thy spirits.
And so shee began in this manner.





THE MARRIAGE OF CUPID AND PSYCHES




THE TWENTY-SECOND CHAPTER


The most pleasant and delectable tale of the marriage of Cupid and
Psyches.

There was sometimes a certaine King, inhabiting in the West parts,
who had to wife a noble Dame, by whom he had three daughters exceeding
fair: of whom the two elder were of such comly shape and beauty, as
they did excell and pass all other women living, whereby they were
thought worthily to deserve the praise and commendation of every person,
and deservedly to be preferred above the residue of the common sort.
Yet the singular passing beauty and maidenly majesty of the youngest
daughter did so farre surmount and excell then two, as no earthly
creature could by any meanes sufficiently expresse or set out the same.

By reason wherof, after the fame of this excellent maiden was spread
about in every part of the City, the Citisens and strangers there beeing
inwardly pricked by the zealous affection to behold her famous person,
came daily by thousands, hundreths, and scores, to her fathers palace,
who was astonied with admiration of her incomparable beauty, did no less
worship and reverence her with crosses, signes, and tokens, and other
divine adorations, according to the custome of the old used rites and
ceremonies, than if she were the Lady Venus indeed, and shortly after
the fame was spread into the next cities and bordering regions, that the
goddess whom the deep seas had born and brought forth, and the froth of
the waves had nourished, to the intent to show her high magnificencie
and divine power on earth, to such as erst did honour and worship her,
was now conversant among mortall men, or else that the earth and not
the sea, by a new concourse and influence of the celestiall planets,
had budded and yeelded forth a new Venus, endued with the floure of
virginity.

So daily more and more encreased this opinion, and now is her flying
fame dispersed into the next Island, and well nigh unto every part and
province of the whole world. Wherupon innumerable strangers resorted
from farre Countries, adventuring themselves by long journies on
land and by great perils on water, to behold this glorious virgin. By
occasion wherof such a contempt grew towards the goddesse Venus, that no
person travelled unto the Towne Paphos, nor to the Isle Gyndos, nor
to Cythera to worship her. Her ornaments were throwne out, her temples
defaced, her pillowes and cushions torne, her ceremonies neglected, her
images and Statues uncrowned, and her bare altars unswept, and fowl with
the ashes of old burnt sacrifice. For why, every person honoured and
worshipped this maiden in stead of Venus, and in the morning at her
first comming abroad offered unto her oblations, provided banquets,
called her by the name of Venus, which was not Venus indeed, and in her
honour presented floures and garlands in most reverend fashion.

This sudden change and alteration of celestiall honour, did greatly
inflame and kindle the love of very Venus, who unable to temper her
selfe from indignation, shaking her head in raging sort, reasoned with
her selfe in this manner, Behold the originall parent of all these
elements, behold the Lady Venus renowned throughout all the world,
with whome a mortall maiden is joyned now partaker of honour: my name
registred in the city of heaven is prophaned and made vile by terrene
absurdities. If I shall suffer any mortall creature to present my
Majesty on earth, or that any shall beare about a false surmised
shape of her person, then in vaine did Paris the sheepheard (in whose
judgement and competence the great Jupiter had affiance) preferre me
above the residue of the goddesses, for the excellency of my beauty: but
she, whatever she be that hath usurped myne honour, shal shortly repent
her of her unlawful estate. And by and by she called her winged sonne
Cupid, rash enough and hardy, who by his evill manners contemning all
publique justice and law, armed with fire and arrowes, running up and
down in the nights from house to house, and corrupting the lawfull
marriages of every person, doth nothing but that which is evill, who
although that hee were of his owne proper nature sufficiently prone to
worke mischiefe, yet she egged him forward with words and brought him to
the city, and shewed him Psyches (for so the maid was called) and having
told the cause of her anger, not without great rage, I pray thee (quoth
she) my dear childe, by motherly bond of love, by the sweet wounds
of thy piercing darts, by the pleasant heate of thy fire, revenge the
injury which is done to thy mother by the false and disobedient beauty
of a mortall maiden, and I pray thee, that without delay shee may fall
in love with the most miserablest creature living, the most poore, the
most crooked, and the most vile, that there may bee none found in all
the world of like wretchednesse. When she had spoken these words she
embraced and kissed her sonne, and took her voyage toward the sea.

When she came upon the sea she began to cal the gods and goddesses,
who were obedient at her voyce. For incontinent came the daughters of
Nereus, singing with tunes melodiously: Portunus with his bristled and
rough beard, Salita with her bosome full of fish, Palemon the driver of
the Dolphine, the Trumpetters of Tryton, leaping hither and thither, and
blowing with heavenly noyse: such was the company which followed Venus,
marching towards the ocean sea.

In the meane season Psyches with all her beauty received no fruit
of honor. She was wondred at of all, she was praised of all, but she
perceived that no King nor Prince, nor any one of the superiour sort
did repaire to wooe her. Every one marvelled at her divine beauty, as it
were some Image well painted and set out. Her other two sisters, which
were nothing so greatly exalted by the people, were royally married to
two Kings: but the virgin Psyches, sitting alone at home, lamented her
solitary life, and being disquieted both in mind and body, although
she pleased all the world, yet hated shee in her selfe her owne beauty.
Whereupon the miserable father of this unfortunate daughter, suspecting
that the gods and powers of heaven did envy her estate, went to the town
called Milet to receive the Oracle of Apollo, where he made his prayers
and offered sacrifice, and desired a husband for his daughter: but
Apollo though he were a Grecian, and of the country of Ionia, because of
the foundation of Milet, yet hee gave answer in Latine verse, the sence
whereof was this:--

     Let Psyches corps be clad in mourning weed,
     And set on rock of yonder hill aloft:
     Her husband is no wight of humane seed,
     But Serpent dire and fierce as might be thought.
     Who flies with wings above in starry skies,
     And doth subdue each thing with firie flight.
     The gods themselves, and powers that seem so wise,
     With mighty Jove, be subject to his might,
     The rivers blacke, and deadly flouds of paine
     And darkness eke, as thrall to him remaine.

The King, sometimes happy when he heard the prophesie of Apollo,
returned home sad and sorrowful, and declared to his wife the miserable
and unhappy fate of his daughter. Then they began to lament and weep,
and passed over many dayes in great sorrow. But now the time approached
of Psyches marriage, preparation was made, blacke torches were lighted,
the pleasant songs were turned into pittifull cries, the melody of
Hymeneus was ended with deadly howling, the maid that should be married
did wipe her eyes with her vaile. All the family and people of the city
weeped likewise, and with great lamentation was ordained a remisse time
for that day, but necessity compelled that Psyches should be brought to
her appointed place, according to the divine appointment.

And when the solemnity was ended, they went to bring the sorrowful
spowse, not to her marriage, but to her final end and burial. And while
the father and mother of Psyches did go forward weeping and crying unto
this enterprise, Psyches spake unto them in this sort: Why torment your
unhappy age with continuall dolour? Why trouble you your spirits, which
are more rather mine than yours? Why soyle ye your faces with teares,
which I ought to adore and worship? Why teare you my eyes in yours? why
pull you your hory haires? Why knocke ye your breasts for me? Now you
see the reward of my excellent beauty: now, now you perceive, but too
late, the plague of envy. When the people did honour me, and call me
new Venus, then yee should have wept, then you should have sorrowed as
though I had been dead: for now I see and perceive that I am come to
this misery by the only name of Venus, bring mee, and as fortune has
appointed, place me on the top of the rocke, I greatly desire to end my
marriage, I greatly covet to see my husband. Why doe I delay? why should
I refuse him that is appointed to destroy all the world.

Thus ended she her words, and thrust her selfe among the people that
followed. Then they brought her to the appointed rocke of the high hill,
and set [her] hereon, and so departed. The Torches and lights were
put out with the teares of the people, and every man gone home, the
miserable Parents well nigh consumed with sorrow, gave themselves to
everlasting darknes.

Thus poore Psyches being left alone, weeping and trembling on the toppe
of the rocke, was blowne by the gentle aire and of shrilling Zephyrus,
and carried from the hill with a meek winde, which retained her garments
up, and by little and little bought her downe into a deepe valley,
where she was laid in a bed of most sweet and fragrant flowers.

Thus faire Psyches being sweetly couched among the soft and tender
hearbs, as in a bed of sweet and fragrant floures, and having qualified
the thoughts and troubles of her restlesse minde, was now well reposed.
And when she had refreshed her selfe sufficiently with sleepe, she rose
with a more quiet and pacified minde, and fortuned to espy a pleasant
wood invironed with great and mighty trees. Shee espied likewise a
running river as cleare as crystall: in the midst of the wood well nigh
at the fall of the river was a princely Edifice, wrought and builded not
by the art or hand of man, but by the mighty power of God: and you would
judge at the first entry therin, that it were some pleasant and worthy
mansion for the powers of heaven. For the embowings above were of
Citron and Ivory, propped and undermined with pillars of gold, the walls
covered and seeled with silver, divers sorts of beasts were graven and
carved, that seemed to encounter with such as entered in. All things
were so curiously and finely wrought, that it seemed either to be the
worke of some Demy god, or of God himselfe. The pavement was all of
pretious stones, divided and cut one from another, whereon was carved
divers kindes of pictures, in such sort that blessed and thrice blessed
were they that might goe upon such a pavement: Every part and angle of
the house was so well adorned, that by reason of the pretious stones and
inestimable treasure there, it glittered and shone in such sort, that
the chambers, porches, and doores gave light as it had beene the Sunne.
Neither otherwise did the other treasure of the house disagree unto
so great a majesty, that verily it seemed in every point an heavenly
Palace, fabricate and built for Jupiter himselfe.

Then Psyches moved with delectation approched nigh and taking a bold
heart entred into the house, and beheld every thing there with great
affection, she saw storehouses wrought exceedingly fine, and replenished
with aboundance of riches. Finally, there could nothing be devised
which lacked there: but among such great store of treasure this was
most marvellous, that there was no closure, bolt, nor locke to keepe the
same. And when with great pleasure shee had viewed all these things, she
heard a voyce without any body, that sayd, Why doe you marvell Madame
at so great riches? behold, all that you see is at your commandement,
wherefore goe you into the chamber, and repose your selfe upon the bed,
and desire what bath you will have, and wee whose voyces you heare bee
your servants, and ready to minister unto you according to your desire.
In the meane season, royall meats and dainty dishes shall be prepared
for you.

Then Psyches perceived the felicity of divine providence, and according
to the advertisement of the incorporeall voyces she first reposed her
selfe upon the bed, and then refreshed her body in the baines. This
done, shee saw the table garnished with meats, and a chaire to sit
downe.

When Psyches was set downe, all sorts of divine meats and wines were
brought in, not by any body, but as it were with a winde, for she saw no
person before her, but only heard voyces on every side. After that all
the services were brought to the table, one came in and sung invisibly,
another played on the harpe, but she saw no man. The harmony of the
Instruments did so greatly shrill in her eares, that though there were
no manner of person, yet seemed she in the midst of a multitude of
people.

All these pleasures finished, when night aproched Psyches went to bed,
and when she was layd, that the sweet sleep came upon her, she greatly
feared her virginity, because shee was alone. Then came her unknowne
husband and lay with her: and after that hee had made a perfect
consummation of the marriage, he rose in the morning before day, and
departed. Soone after came her invisible servants, and presented to her
such things as were necessary for her defloration. And thus she passed
forth a great while, and as it happeneth, the novelty of the things by
continuall custome did encrease her pleasure, but especially the sound
of the instruments was a comfort to her being alone.

During this time that Psyches was in this place of pleasures, her father
and mother did nothing but weepe and lament, and her two sisters hearing
of her most miserable fortune, came with great dolour and sorrow to
comfort and speake with her parents.

The night following, Psyches husband spake unto her (for she might feele
his eyes, his hands, and his ears) and sayd, O my sweet Spowse and dear
wife, fortune doth menace unto thee imminent danger, wherof I wish thee
greatly to beware: for know that thy sisters, thinking that thou art
dead, bee greatly troubled, and are coming to the mountain by thy steps.
Whose lamentations if thou fortune to heare, beware that thou doe in no
wise make answer, or looke up towards them, for if thou doe thou shalt
purchase to mee great sorrow, and to thyself utter destruction.
Psyches hearing her Husband, was contented to doe all things as hee had
commanded.

After that hee was departed and the night passed away, Psyches lamented
and lamented all the day following, thinking that now shee was past all
hopes of comfort, in that shee was closed within the walls of a prison,
deprived of humane conversation, and commaunded not to aid her sorrowful
Sisters, no nor once to see them. Thus she passed all the day in
weeping, and went to bed at night, without any refection of meat or
baine.

Incontinently after came her husband, who when he had embraced her
sweetly, began to say, Is it thus that I find you perform your promise,
my sweet wife? What do I finde heere? Passe you all the day and the
night in weeping? And wil you not cease in your husbands armes? Goe too,
doe what ye will, purchase your owne destruction, and when you find it
so, then remember my words, and repent but too late. Then she desired
her husband more and more, assuring him that shee should die, unlesse he
would grant that she might see her sisters, wherby she might speak with
them and comfort them, wherat at length he was contented, and moreover
hee willed that shee should give them as much gold and jewels as she
would. But he gave her a further charge saying, Beware that ye covet
not (being mooved by the pernicious counsell of you sisters) to see the
shape of my person, lest by your curiosity you deprive your selfe of so
great and worthy estate. Psyches being glad herewith, rendered unto him
most entire thankes, and said, Sweet husband, I had rather die than to
bee separated from you, for whosoever you bee, I love and retaine you
within my heart, as if you were myne owne spirit or Cupid himselfe: but
I pray you grant this likewise, that you would commaund your servant
Zephyrus to bring my sisters downe into the valley as he brought mee.

Wherewithall shee kissed him sweetly, and desired him gently to grant
her request, calling him her spowse, her sweetheart, her Joy and her
Solace. Wherby she enforced him to agree to her mind, and when morning
came he departed away.

After long search made, the sisters of Psyches came unto the hill where
she was set on the rocke, and cried with a loud voyce in such sort that
the stones answered againe. And when they called their sister by her
name, that their lamentable cries came unto her eares, shee came forth
and said, Behold, heere is shee for whom you weepe, I pray you torment
your selves no more, cease your weeping. And by and by she commaunded
Zephyrus by the appointment of her husband to bring them downe. Neither
did he delay, for with gentle blasts he retained them up and laid them
softly in the valley. I am not able to expresse the often embracing,
kissing and greeting which was between them three, all sorrows and tears
were then layd apart.

Come in (quoth Psyches) into our house, and refresh your afflicted
mindes with your sister.

After this she shewed them the storehouses of treasure, shee caused them
to hear the voyces which served her, the bain was ready, the meats were
brought in, and when they had filled themselves with divine delecates,
they conceived great envy within their hearts, and one of them being
curious, did demand what her husband was, of what estate, and who was
Lord of so pretious a house? But Psyches remembring the promise which
she had made to her husband, feigned that hee was a young man, of comely
stature, with a flaxen beard, and had great delight in hunting the dales
and hills by. And lest by her long talke she should be found to trip or
faile in her words, she filled their laps with gold, silver, and Jewels,
and commanded Zephyrus to carry them away.

When they were brought up to the mountain, they made their wayes
homeward to their owne houses, and murmured with envy that they bare
against Psyches, saying, behold cruell and contrary fortune, behold how
we, borne all of one Parent, have divers destinies: but especially
we that are the elder two bee married to strange husbands, made as
handmaidens, and as it were banished from our Countrey and friends.
Whereas our younger sister hath great abundance of treasure, and hath
gotten a god to her husband, although shee hath no skill how to use such
great plenty of riches. Saw you not sister what was in the house, what
great store of jewels, what glittering robes, what Gemmes, what gold we
trod on? That if shee hath a husband according as shee affirmeth, there
is none that liveth this day more happy in all the world than she. And
so it may come to passe, at length for the great affection which hee may
beare unto her that hee may make her a goddesse, for by Hercules, such
was her countenance, so she behaved her self, that as a goddesse she had
voices to serve her, and the windes did obey her.

But I poore wretch have first married an husband elder than my father,
more bald than a Coot, more weake than a childe, and that locketh me up
all day in the house.

Then said the other sister, And in faith I am married to a husband that
hath the gout, twyfold, crooked, nor couragious in paying my debt, I am
faine to rub and mollifie his stony fingers with divers sorts of oyles,
and to wrap them in playsters and salves, so that I soyle my white and
dainty hands with the corruption of filthy clouts, not using my self
like a wife, but more like a servant. And you my sister seem likewise to
be in bondage and servitude, wherefore I cannot abide to see our
younger sister in such felicity; saw you not I pray you how proudly and
arrogantly she handled us even now? And how in vaunting her selfe she
uttered her presumptuous minde, how she cast a little gold into our
laps, and being weary of our company, commanded that we should be borne
and blown away?

Verily I live not, nor am a woman, but I will deprive her of all her
blisse. And if you my sister bee so far bent as I, let us consult
together, and not to utter our minde to any person, no not to our
parents, nor tell that ever we saw her. For it sufficeth that we have
seene her, whom it repenteth to have seene. Neither let us declare her
good fortune to our father, nor to any other, since as they seeme not
happy whose riches are unknowne: so shall she know that she hath sisters
no Abjects, but worthier than she.

But now let us goe home to our husbands and poore houses, and when we
are better instructed, let us return to suppresse her pride. So this
evill counsell pleased these two evil women, and they hid the treasure
which Psyches gave them, and tare their haire, renewing their false and
forged teares. When their father and mother beheld them weep and lament
still, they doubled their sorrowes and griefes, but full of yre and
forced with Envy, they tooke their voyage homeward, devising the
slaughter and destruction of their sister.

In the meane season the husband of Psyches did warne her againe in the
night with these words: Seest thou not (quoth he) what perill and danger
evill fortune doth threaten unto thee, whereof if thou take not good
heed it will shortly come upon thee. For the unfaithfull harlots doe
greatly endeavor to set their snares to catch thee, and their purpose is
to make and perswade thee to behold my face, which if thou once fortune
to see, as I have often told, thou shalt see no more. Wherfore if these
naughty hagges, armed with wicked minds, doe chance to againe (as I
think no otherwise but that they will) take heed that thou talk not with
them but simply suffer them to speake what they will, howbeit if thou
canst not refraine thy selfe, beware that thou have no communication
of thy husband, nor answer a word if they fortune to question of me, so
will we encrease our stocke, and this young and tender childe, couched
in this young and tender belly of thine, shall be made an immortall god,
otherwise a mortal creature. Then Psyches was very glad that she should
bring forth a divine babe, and very joyfull in that she should be
honored as a mother. She reckened and numbered carefully the days and
months that passed, and beeing never with child before, did marvel
greatly that in so short a time her belly should swel so big. But those
pestilent and wicked furies breathing out their Serpentine poyson, took
shipping to bring their enterprise to passe. The Psyches was warned
again by her husband in this sort: Behold the last day, the extream
case, and the enemies of thy blood, hath armed themselves against us,
pitched their campe, set their host in array, and are marching towards
us, for now thy two sisters have drawn their swords and are ready
to slay thee. O with what force are we assailed on this day! O sweet
Psyches I pray thee to take pitty on thy selfe, of me, and deliver thy
husband and this infant within thy belly from so great danger, and see
not, neither heare these cursed women, which are not worthy to be called
thy sisters, for their great hatred and breach of sisterly amity, for
they wil come like Syrens to the mountains, and yeeld out their pittious
and lamentable cries. When Psyches had heard these words she sighed
sorrowfully and said, O deare husband this long time have you had
experience and triall of my faith, and doubt you not that I will
persever in the same, wherefore command your winde Zephyrus, that hee
may doe as hee hath done before, to the intent that where you have
charged me not to behold your venerable face, yet that I may comfort
myself with the sight of my sisters. I pray you by these beautifull
haires, by these round cheekes delicate and tender, by your pleasant hot
breast, whose shape and face I shall learn at length by the childe in my
belly, grant the fruit of my desire, refresh your deare Spowse Psyches
with joy, who is bound and linked unto you for ever. I little esteeme to
see your visage and figure, little doe I regard the night and darknesse
thereof, for you are my only light.

Her husband being as it were inchanted with these words and compelled by
violence of her often embracing, wiping away her teares with his haire,
did yeeld unto his wife. And when morning came, departed as hee was
accustomed to doe.

Now her sisters arrived on land, and never rested til they came to the
rock, without visiting their parents, and leapt down rashly from the
hill themselves. Then Zephyrus according to the divine commandment
brought them down, although it were against his wil, and laid them in
the vally without any harm: by and by they went into the palace to their
sister without leave, and when they had eftsoone embraced their prey,
and thanked her with flattering words for the treasure which she gave
them, they said, O deare sister Psyches, know you that you are now no
more a child, but a mother: O what great joy beare you unto us in your
belly? What a comfort will it be unto all the house? How happy shall
we be, that shall see this Infant nourished amongst so great plenty of
Treasure? That if he be like his parents, as it is necessary he should,
there is no doubt but a new cupid shall be borne. By this kinde of
measures they went about to winne Psyches by little and little, but
because they were wearie with travell, they sate them downe in chaires,
and after that they had washed their bodies in baines they went into a
parlour, where all kinde of meats were ready prepared. Psyches commanded
one to play with his harpe, it was done. Then immediately others sung,
others tuned their instruments, but no person was seene, by whose sweet
harmony and modulation the sisters of Psyches were greatly delighted.

Howbeit the wickednesse of these cursed women was nothing suppressed
by the sweet noyse of these instruments, but they settled themselves to
work their treasons against Psyches, demanding who was her husband, and
of what Parentage. Then shee having forgotten by too much simplicity,
what shee had spoken before of her husband, invented a new answer, and
said that her husband was of a great province, a merchant, and a man of
middle age, having his beard intersparsed with grey haires. Which when
shee had spoken (because shee would have no further talke) she filled
their laps with Gold and Silver, and bid Zephyrus to bear them away.

In their returne homeward they murmured within themselves, saying, How
say you sister to so apparent a lye of Psyches? First she sayd that her
husband was a young man of flourishing yeares, and had a flaxen beard,
and now she sayth that he is halfe grey with age. What is he that in
so short a space can become so old? You shall finde it no otherwise my
sister, but that either this cursed queane hath invented a great lie, or
else that she never saw the shape of her husband. And if it be so that
she never saw him, then verily she is married to some god, and hath a
young god in her belly. But if it be a divine babe, and fortune to come
to the eares of my mother (as God forbid it should) then may I go and
hang my selfe: wherfore let us go to our parents, and with forged lies
let us colour the matter.

After they were thus inflamed, and had visited their Parents, they
returned againe to the mountaine, and by the aid of the winde Zephyrus
were carried down into the valley, and after they had streined their eye
lids, to enforce themselves to weepe, they called unto Psyches in this
sort, Thou (ignorant of so great evill) thinkest thy selfe sure and
happy, and sittest at home nothing regarding thy peril, whereas wee goe
about thy affaires and are carefull lest any harme should happen unto
you: for we are credibly informed, neither can we but utter it unto you,
that there is a great serpent full of deadly poyson, with a ravenous
gaping throat, that lieth with thee every night Remember the Oracle
of Apollo, who pronounced that thou shouldest he married to a dire and
fierce Serpent, and many of the Inhabitants hereby, and such as hunt
about in the countrey, affirme that they saw him yesternight returning
from pasture and swimming over the River, whereby they doe undoubtedly
say, that hee will not pamper thee long with delicate meats, but when
the time of delivery shall approach he will devoure both thee and thy
child: wherefore advise thy selfe whether thou wilt agree unto us
that are carefull of thy safety, and so avoid the perill of death, bee
contented to live with thy sisters, or whether thou remaine with the
Serpent and in the end be swallowed into the gulfe of his body. And
if it be so that thy solitary life, thy conversation with voices, this
servile and dangerous pleasure, and the love of the Serpent doe more
delight thee, say not but that we have played the parts of naturall
sisters in warning thee.

Then the poore and simple miser Psyches was mooved with the feare of
so dreadful words, and being amazed in her mind, did cleane forget the
admonitions of her husband, and her owne promises made unto him, and
throwing her selfe headlong into extreame misery, with a wanne and
sallow countenance, scantly uttering a third word, at length gan say in
this sort: O my most deare sisters, I heartily thanke you for your great
kindnesse toward me, and I am now verily perswaded that they which have
informed you hereof hath informed you of nothing but truth, for I never
saw the shape of my husband, neither know I from whence he came, only
I heare his voice in the night, insomuch that I have an uncertaine
husband, and one that loveth not the light of the day: which causeth me
to suspect that he is a beast, as you affirme. Moreover, I doe greatly
feare to see him, for he doth menace and threaten great evill unto mee,
if I should goe about to spy and behold his shape wherefore my loving
sisters if you have any wholeome remedy for your sister in danger, give
it now presently. Then they opened the gates of their subtill mindes,
and did put away all privy guile, and egged her forward in her fearefull
thoughts, perswading her to doe as they would have her whereupon one
of them began and sayd, Because that wee little esteeme any perill or
danger, to save your life we intend to shew you the best way and meane
as we may possibly do. Take a sharpe razor and put it under the pillow
of your bed; and see that you have ready a privy burning lampe with
oyle, hid under some part of the hanging of the chamber, and finely
dissembling the matter when according to his custome he commeth to bed
and sleepeth soundly, arise you secretly, and with your bare feet goe
and take the lampe, with the Razor in your right hand and with valiant
force cut off the head of the poysonous serpent, wherein we will aid and
assist you: and when by the death of him you shall be made safe, we wil
marry you to some comely man.

After they had thus inflamed the heart of their sister fearing lest some
danger might happen unto them by reason of their evill counsell, they
were carried by the wind Zephyrus to the top of the mountaine, and so
they ran away and tooke shipping.

When Psyches was left alone (saving that she seemed not to be alone,
being stirred by so many furies) she was in a tossing minde like the
waves of the sea, and although her wil was obstinate, and resisted to
put in execution the counsell of her Sisters, yet she was in doubtfull
and divers opinions touching her calamity. Sometime she would, sometime
she would not, sometime she is bold, sometime she feareth, sometime
shee mistrusteth, somtime she is mooved, somtime she hateth the beast,
somtime she loveth her husband: but at length night came, when as she
prepared for her wicked intent.

Soon after her husband Came, and when he had kissed and embraced her he
fell asleep. Then Psyches (somwhat feeble in body and mind, yet mooved
by cruelty of fate) received boldnes and brought forth the lampe, and
tooke the razor, so by her audacity she changed her mind: but when
she took the lamp and came to the bed side, she saw the most meeke and
sweetest beast of all beasts, even faire Cupid couched fairly, at whose
sight the very lampe encreased his light for joy, and the razor turned
his edge.

But when Psyches saw so glorious a body shee greatly feared, and amazed
in mind, with a pale countenance all trembling fel on her knees
and thought to hide the razor, yea verily in her owne heart, which
doubtlesse she had done, had it not through feare of so great an
enterprise fallen out of her hand. And when she saw and beheld the
beauty of the divine visage shee was well recreated in her mind, she saw
his haires of gold, that yeelded out a sweet savor, his neck more white
than milk, his purple cheeks, his haire hanging comely behinde and
before, the brightnesse whereof did darken the light of the lamp, his
tender plume feathers, dispersed upon his sholders like shining flours,
and trembling hither and thither, and his other parts of his body so
smooth and so soft, that it did not repent Venus to beare such a childe.
At the beds feet lay his bow, quiver, and arrowes, that be the weapons
of so great a god: which when Psyches did curiously behold, she
marvelling at her husbands weapons, took one of the arrows out of the
quiver, and pricked her selfe withall, wherwith she was so grievously
wounded that the blood followed, and thereby of her owne accord shee
added love upon love; then more broyling in the love of Cupid shee
embraced him and kissed him and kissed him a thousand times, fearing the
measure of his sleepe But alas while shee was in this great joy, whether
it were for envy for desire to touch this amiable body likewise, there
fell out a droppe of burning oyle from the lampe upon the right shoulder
of the god. O rash and bold lampe, the vile ministery of love, how
darest thou bee so bold as to burne the god of all fire? When as he
invented thee, to the intent that all lovers might with more joy passe
the nights in pleasure.

The god beeing burned in this sort, and perceiving that promise and
faith was broken, bee fled away without utterance of any word, from the
eyes and hands of his most unhappy wife. But Psyches fortuned to catch
him as hee was rising by the right thigh, and held him fast as hee flew
above in the aire, until such time as constrained by wearinesse shee let
goe and fell downe upon the ground. But Cupid followed her downe, and
lighted upon the top of a Cypresse tree, and angerly spake unto her in
this manner: O simple Psyches, consider with thy selfe how I, little
regarding the commandement of my mother (who willed mee that thou
shouldst bee married to a man of base and miserable condition) did come
my selfe from heaven to love thee, and wounded myne owne body with my
proper weapons, to have thee to my Spowse: And did I seeme a beast unto
thee, that thou shouldst go about to cut off my head with a razor, who
loved thee so well? Did not I alwayes give thee a charge? Did not I
gently will thee to beware? But those cursed aides and Counsellors of
thine shall be worthily rewarded for their pains. As for thee thou shalt
be sufficiently punished by my absence. When hee had spoken these words
he tooke his flight into the aire. Then Psyches fell flat on the ground,
and as long as she could see her husband she cast her eyes after him
into the aire, weeping and lamenting pitteously: but when hee was gone
out of her sight shee threw her selfe into the next running river,
for the great anguish and dolour that shee was in for the lack of her
husband, howbeit the water would not suffer her to be drowned, but tooke
pity upon her, in the honour of Cupid which accustomed to broyle and
burne the river, and threw her upon the bank amongst the herbs.

Then Pan the rusticall god sitting on the river side, embracing and
[instructing] the goddesse Canna to tune her songs and pipes, by whom
were feeding the young and tender Goats, after that he perceived Psyches
in sorrowful case, not ignorant (I know not by what meanes) of her
miserable estate, endeavored to pacific her in this sort: O faire maid,
I am a rusticke and rude heardsman, howbeit by reason of my old age
expert in many things, for as farre as I can learnt by conjecture (which
according as wise men doe terme is called divination) I perceive by your
uncertaine gate, your pale hew, your sobbing sighes, and your watery
eyes, that you are greatly in love. Wherefore hearken to me, and goe
not about to slay your selfe, nor weepe not at all, but rather adore
and worship the great god Cupid, and winne him unto you by your gentle
promise of service.

When the god of Shepherds had spoken these words, she gave no answer,
but made reverence to him as to a god, and so departed.

After that Psyches had gone a little way, she fortuned unawares to come
to a city where the husband of one of her Sisters did dwell. Which when
Psyches did understand, shee caused that her sister had knowledge of
her comming, and so they met together, and after great embracing and
salutation, the sister of Psyches demaunded the cause of her travell
thither. Marry (quoth she) doe you not remember the counsell you gave
me, whereby you would that I should kill the beast which under colour of
my husband did lie with mee every night? You shall understand, that
as soone as I brought forth the lampe to see and behold his shape, I
perceived that he was the sonne of Venus, even Cupid himselfe that lay
with mee. Then I being stricken with great pleasure, and desirous to
embrace him, could not thoroughly asswage my delight, but alas by evill
ill chance the oyle of the lampe fortuned to fall on his shoulder which
caused him to awake, and seeing me armed with fire and weapons, gan say,
How darest thou be so bold to doe so great a mischiefe? Depart from me
and take such things as thou didst bring: for I will have thy sister
(and named you) to my wife, and she shall be placed in thy felicity, and
by and by hee commaunded Zephyrus to carry me away from the bounds of
his house.

Psyches had scantly finished her tale but her sister pierced with the
pricke of carnall desire and wicked envy ran home, and feigning to
her husband that she had heard word of the death of her parents tooke
shipping and came to the mountaine. And although there blew a contrary
winde, yet being brought in a vaine hope shee cried O Cupid take me a
more worthy wife, and thou Zephyrus beare downe thy mistresse, and so
she cast her selfe headlong from the mountaine: but shee fell not into
the valley neither alive nor dead, for all the members and parts of her
body were torne amongst the rockes, wherby she was made prey unto the
birds and wild beasts, as she worthily deserved.

Neither was the vengeance of the other delayed, for Psyches travelling
in that country, fortuned to come to another city where her other sister
did dwel; to whom when shee had declared all such things as she told to
her other sister shee ran likewise unto the rock and was slaine in like
sort Then Psyches travelled about in the countrey to seeke her husband
Cupid, but he was gotten into his mothers chamber and there bewailed the
sorrowful wound which he caught by the oyle of a burning lamp.

Then the white bird the Gull, which swims on the waves of the water,
flew toward the Ocean sea, where he found Venus washing and bathing her
selfe: to whom she declared that her son was burned and in danger of
death, and moreover that it was a common brute in the mouth of every
person (who spake evill of all the family of Venus) that her son doth
nothing but haunt harlots in the mountain, and she her self lasciviously
use to ryot in the sea: wherby they say that they are flow become
no more gratious, pleasant nor gentle, but incivile, monstrous and
horrible. Moreover, that marriages are not for any amity, or for love of
procreation, but full of envy, discord, and debate. This the curious Gul
did clatter in the ears of Venus, reprehending her son. But Venus began
to cry and sayd, What hath my sonne gotten any Love? I pray thee gentle
bird that doest serve me so faithfully, tell me what she is, and what is
her name that hath troubled my son in such sort? whether shee be any of
the Nymphs, of the number of the goddesses, of the company of the Muses,
or of the mistery of the Graces? To whom the bird answered, Madam I know
not what shee is, but this I know that she is called Psyches. Then Venus
with indignation cried out, What is it she? the usurper of my beauty,
the Vicar of my name? What did he think that I was a bawd, by whose shew
he fell acquainted with the maid? And immediately she departed and went
to her chamber, where she found her son wounded as it was told unto her,
whom when she beheld she cries out in this sort.

Is this an honest thing, is this honourable to thy parents? is this
reason, that thou hast violated and broken the commandement of thy
mother and soveraign mistresse: and whereas thou shouldst have vexed my
enemy with loathsom love, thou hast done otherwise?

For being of tender and unripe yeares, thou hast with too licentious
appetite embraced my most mortall Foe, to whome I shall bee made a
mother, and she a Daughter.

Thou presumest and thinkest, thou trifling boy, thou Varlet, and without
all reverence, that thou art most worthy and excellent, and that I am
not able by reason of myne age to have another son, which if I should
have, thou shouldst well understand that I would beare a more worthier
than thou. But to worke thee a greater despight, I do determine to adopt
one of my servants, and to give him these wings, this fire, this bow,
and these Arrowes, and all other furniture which I gave to thee, not
to this purpose, neither is any thing given thee of thy father for this
intent: but first thou hast been evill brought up and instructed in thy
youth thou hast thy hands ready and sharpe. Thou hast often offended thy
antients, and especially me that am thy mother, thou hast pierced mee
with thy darts thou contemnest me as a widow, neither dost t thou
regard thy valiant and invincible father, and to anger me more, thou art
amorous of harlots and wenches: hot I will cause that thou shalt shortly
repent thee, and that this marriage shal be dearely bought. To what a
point am I now driven? What shall I do? Whither shall I goe? How shall
I represse this beast? Shall I aske ayd of myne enemy Sobriety, whom I
have often offended to engender thee? Or shall I seeke for counsel of
every poore rusticall woman? No, no, yet had I rather dye, howbeit I
will not cease my vengeance, to her must I have recourse for helpe, and
to none other (I meane to Sobriety), who may correct thee sharpely, take
away thy quiver, deprive thee of thy arrowes, unbend thy bow, quench thy
fire, and which is more subdue thy body with punishment: and when that
I have rased and cut off this thy haire, which I have dressed with myne
owne hands, and made to glitter like gold, and when I have clipped thy
wings, which I my selfe have caused to burgen, then shall I thinke to
have revenged my selfe sufficiently upon thee for the injury which thou
hast done. When shee had spoken these words shee departed in a great
rage out of her chamber.

Immediatelie as she was going away came Juno and Ceres, demaunding the
cause of her anger. Then Venus answered, Verily you are come to comfort
my sorrow, but I pray you with all diligence to seeke out one whose name
is Psyches, who is a vagabond, and runneth about the Countries, and (as
I thinke) you are not ignorant of the brute of my son Cupid, and of his
demeanour, which I am ashamed to declare. Then they understanding the
whole matter, endeavoured to mitigate the ire of Venus in this sort:
What is the cause Madam, or how hath your son so offended, that you
shold so greatly accuse his love, and blame him by reason that he is
amorous? and why should you seeke the death of her, whom he doth fancie?
We most humbly intreat you to pardon his fault if he have accorded to
the mind of any maiden: what do you not know that he is a young man? Or
have you forgotten of what yeares he is? Doth he seeme alwayes unto
you to be a childe? You are his mother, and a kind woman, will you
continually search out his dalliance? Will you blame his luxury? Will
you bridle his love? and will you reprehend your owne art and delights
in him? What God or man is hee, that can endure that you should sowe or
disperse your seed of love in every place, and to make restraint thereof
within your owne doores? certes you will be the cause of the suppression
of the publike paces of young Dames. In this sort this goddesse
endeavoured to pacifie her mind, and to excuse Cupid with al their power
(although he were absent) for feare of his darts and shafts of love.
But Venus would in no wise asswage her heat, but (thinking that they
did rather trifle and taunt at her injuries) she departed from them,
and tooke her voiage towards the sea in all haste. In the meane season
Psyches hurled her selfe hither and thither, to seeke her husband, the
rather because she thought that if he would not be appeased with the
sweet flattery of his wife, yet he would take mercy on her at her
servile and continuall prayers. And (espying a Church on the top of a
high hill) she said, What can I tell whether my husband and master be
there or no? wherefore she went thitherward, and with great paine
and travell, moved by hope, after that she climbed to the top of the
mountaine, she came to the temple, and went in, wheras behold she espied
sheffes of corn lying on a heap, blades withered with garlands, and
reeds of barly, moreover she saw hooks, sithes, sickles, and other
instruments, to reape, but every thing lay out of order, and as it were
cast in by the hands of laborers which when Psyches saw she gathered
up and put everything in order, thinking that she would not despise or
contemne the temples of any of the Gods, but rather get the favour and
benevolence of them all: by and by Ceres came in, and beholding her
busie and curious in her chapell, cried out a far off, and said, O
Psyches needfull of mercy, Venus searcheth for thee in every place to
revenge her selfe and to punish thee grievously, but thou hast more mind
to be heere, and carest for nothing lesse, then for thy safety. Then
Psyches fell on her knees before her, watring her feet with her teares,
wiping the ground with her haire, and with great weeping and lamentation
desired pardon, saying, O great and holy Goddesse, I pray thee by thy
plenteous and liberall right hand, by the joyfull ceremonies of thy
harvest, by the secrets of thy Sacrifice, by the flying chariots of
thy dragons, by the tillage of the ground of Sicilie, which thou hast
invented, by the marriage of Proserpin, by the diligent inquisition of
thy daughter, and by the other secrets which are within the temple of
Eleusis in the land of Athens, take pitty on me thy servant Psyches, and
let me hide my selfe a few dayes amongst these sheffes of corne, untill
the ire of so great a Goddesse be past, or until that I be refreshed of
my great labour and travell. Then answered Ceres, Verely Psyches, I am
greatly moved by thy prayers and teares, and desire with all my heart
to aide thee, but if I should suffer thee to be hidden here, I should
increase the displeasure of my Cosin, with whom I have made a treatie
of peace, and an ancient promise of amity: wherefore I advise thee to
depart hence and take it not in evil part in that I will not suffer thee
to abide and remaine here within my temple. Then Psyches driven away
contrary to her hope, was double afflicted with sorrow and so she
returned back againe. And behold she perceived a far off in a vally
a Temple standing within a Forest, faire and curiously wrought, and
minding to over-passe no place whither better hope did direct her, and
to the intent she would desire pardon of every God, she approached nigh
unto the sacred doore, whereas she saw pretious riches and vestiments
ingraven with letters of gold, hanging upon branches of trees, and the
posts of the temple testifying the name of the goddesse Juno, to whom
they were dedicate, then she kneeled downe upon her knees, and imbraced
the Alter with her hands, and wiping her teares, gan pray in this sort:
O deere spouse and sister of the great God Jupiter which art adored and
worshipped amongst the great temples of Samos, called upon by women
with child, worshipped at high Carthage, because thou wast brought from
heaven by the lyon, the rivers of the floud Inachus do celebrate thee:
and know that thou art the wife of the great god, and the goddesse of
goddesses; all the east part of the world have thee in veneration,
all the world calleth thee Lucina: I pray thee to be my advocate in my
tribulations, deliver me from the great danger which pursueth me, and
save me that am weary with so long labours and sorrow, for I know that
it is thou that succorest and helpest such women as are with child and
in danger. Then Juno hearing the prayers of Psyches, appeared unto her
in all her royalty, saying, Certes Psyches I would gladly help thee, but
I am ashamed to do any thing contrary to the will of my daughter in law
Venus, whom alwaies I have loved as mine owne child, moreover I shall
incurre the danger of the law, intituled, De servo corrupto, whereby
am forbidden to retaine any servant fugitive, against the will of his
Master. Then Psyches cast off likewise by Juno, as without all hope of
the recovery of her husband, reasoned with her selfe in this sort: Now
what comfort or remedy is left to my afflictions, when as my prayers
will nothing availe with the goddesses? what shall I do? whither shall I
go? In what cave or darknesse shall I hide my selfe, to avoid the
furor of Venus? Why do I not take a good heart, and offer my selfe with
humilitie unto her, whose anger I have wrought? What do I know whether
he (whom I seeke for) be in his mothers house or no? Thus being in
doubt, poore Psyches prepared her selfe to her owne danger, and devised
how she might make her orison and prayer unto Venus. After that Venus
was weary with searching by Sea and Land for Psyches, shee returned
toward heaven, and commanded that one should prepare her Chariot, which
her husband Vulcanus gave unto her by reason of marriage, so finely
wrought that neither gold nor silver could be compared to the
brightnesse therof. Four white pigeons guided the chariot with great
diligence, and when Venus was entred in a number of sparrowes flew
chirping about, making signe of joy, and all other kind of birds sang
sweetly, foreshewing the comming of the great goddesse: the clouds gave
place, the heavens opened, and received her joyfully, the birds that
followed nothing feared the Eagle, Hawkes, or other ravenous foules of
the aire. Incontinently she went unto the royall Pallace of God Jupiter,
and with a proud and bold petition demanded the service of Mercury, in
certaine of her affaires, whereunto Jupiter consented: then with much
joy shee descended from Heaven with Mercury, and gave him an earnest
charge to put in execution her words, saying: O my Brother, borne
in Arcadia, thou knowest well, that I (who am thy sister) did never
enterprise to doe any thing without thy presence, thou knowest also how
long I have sought for a girle and cannot finde her, wherefore there
resteth nothing else save that thou with thy trumpet doe pronounce the
reward to such as take her: see thou put in execution my commandment,
and declare that whatsoever he be that retaineth her wittingly, against
my will shall not defend himselfe by any meane or excusation: which when
she had spoken, she delivered unto him a libell, wherein was contained
the name of Psyches, and the residue of his publication, which done,
she departed away to her lodging. By and by, Mercurius (not delaying the
matter) proclaimed throughout all the world, that whatsoever hee were
that could tell any tydings of a Kings fugitive Daughter, the servant
of Venus, named Psyches, should bring word to Mercury, and for reward of
his paines, he should receive seaven sweet kisses of Venus After that
Mercury had pronounced these things, every man was enflamed with desire
to search out Psyches.

This proclamation was the cause that put all doubt from Psyches, who was
scantly come in the sight of the house of Venus, but one of her servants
called Custome came out, who espying Psyches, cried with a loud voyce,
saying: O wicked harlot as thou art, now at length thou shalt know
that thou hast a mistresse above thee. What, dost thou make thy selfe
ignorant, as though thou didst not understand what travell wee have
taken in searching for thee? I am glad that thou art come into my
hands, thou art now in the golfe of hell, and shalt abide the paine and
punishment of thy great contumacy, and therewithall she tooke her by the
haire, and brought her in, before the presence of the goddesse Venus.
When Venus spied her, shee began to laugh, and as angry persons
accustome to doe, she shaked her head, and scratched her right eare
saying, O goddesse, goddesse, you are now come at length to visit your
husband that is in danger of death, by your meanes: bee you assured,
I will handle you like a daughter: where be my maidens, Sorrow and
Sadnesse? To whom (when they came) she delivered Psyches to be cruelly
tormented; then they fulfilled the commandement of their Mistresse,
and after they had piteously scourged her with rods and whips, they
presented her againe before Venus; then she began to laugh againe,
saying: Behold she thinketh (that by reason of her great belly, which
she hath gotten by playing the whore) to move me to pitty, and to make
me a grandmother to her childe. Am not I happy, that in the flourishing
time of al mine age, shall be called a grandmother, and the sonne of
a vile harlot shall bee accounted the nephew of Venus: howbeit I am a
foole to tearm him by the name of my son, since as the marriage was made
betweene unequall persons, in the field without witnesses, and not by
the consent of parents, wherefore the marriage is illegitimate, and the
childe (that shall be borne) a bastard; if we fortune to suffer thee to
live so long till thou be delivered. When Venus had spoken these words
she leaped upon the face of poore Psyches, and (tearing her apparell)
tooke her by the haire, and dashed her head upon the ground. Then she
tooke a great quantity of wheat, of barly, poppy seede, peason, lintles,
and beanes, and mingled them altogether on a heape saying: Thou evil
favoured girle, thou seemest unable to get the grace of thy lover, by
no other meanes, but only by diligent and painefull service, wherefore I
will prove what thou canst doe: see that thou separate all these graines
one from another, disposing them orderly in their quantity, and let it
be done before night. When she had appointed this taske unto Psyches,
she departed to a great banket that was prepared that day. But Psyches
went not about to dissever the graine, (as being a thing impossible to
be brought to passe by reason it lay so confusedly scattered) but
being astonyed at the cruell commandement of Venus, sate still and said
nothing. Then the little pismire the emote, taking pitty of her great
difficulty and labour, cursing the cruellnesse of the daughter of
Jupiter, and of so evill a mother, ran about, hither and thither, and
called to all her friends, Yee quick sons of the ground, the mother of
all things, take mercy on this poore maid, espouse to Cupid, who is in
great danger of her person, I pray you helpe her with all diligence.
Incontinently one came after another, dissevering and dividing the
graine, and after that they had put each kinde of corne in order, they
ranne away againe in all haste. When night came, Venus returned home
from the banket wel tippled with wine, smelling of balme, and crowned
with garlands of roses, who when shee had espied what Psyches had done,
gan say, This is not the labour of thy hands, but rather of his that is
amorous of thee: then she gave her a morsel of brown bread, and went to
sleep. In the mean season, Cupid was closed fast in the surest chamber
of the house, partly because he should not hurt himself with wanton
dalliance, and partly because he should not speake with his love: so
these two lovers were divided one from another. When night was passed
Venus called Psyches, and said, Seest thou yonder Forest that extendeth
out in length with the river? there be great sheepe shining like gold,
and kept by no manner of person. I command thee that thou go thither
and bring me home some of the wooll of their fleeces. Psyches arose
willingly not to do her commandement, but to throw her selfe headlong
into water to end her sorrows. Then a green reed inspired by divine
inspiration, with a gratious tune and melody gan say, O Psyches I pray
thee not to trouble or pollute my water by the death of thee, and yet
beware that thou goe not towards the terrible sheepe of this coast,
untill such time as the heat of the sunne be past, for when the sunne
is in his force, then seeme they most dreadfull and furious, with their
sharpe hornes, their stony foreheads and their gaping throats, wherewith
they arme themselves to the destruction of mankinde. But untill they
have refreshed themselves in the river, thou must hide thy selfe here
by me, under this great plaine tree, and as soone as their great fury is
past, thou maist goe among the thickets and bushes under the wood side
and gather the lockes their golden Fleeces, which thou shalt finde
hanging upon the briers. Then spake the gentle and benigne reed, shewing
a mean to Psyches to save her life, which she bore well in memory, and
with all diligence went and gathered up such lockes as shee found,
and put them in her apron, and carried them home to Venus. Howbeit the
danger of this second labour did not please her, nor give her sufficient
witnesse of the good service of Psyches, but with a sower resemblance of
laughter, did say: Of a certaine I know that this is not thy fact, but I
will prove if that thou bee of so stout, so good a courage, and singular
prudency as thou seemest to bee. Then Venus spake unto Psyches againe
saying: Seest thou the toppe of yonder great Hill, from whence there
runneth downe waters of blacke and deadly colour, which nourisheth the
floods of Stix, Cocytus? I charge thee to goe thither, and bring me a
vessell of that water: wherewithall she gave her a bottle of Christall,
menacing and threatening her rigorously. Then poor Psyches went in all
haste to the top of the mountaine, rather to end her life, then to
fetch any water, and when she was come up to the ridge of the hill, she
perceived that it was impossible to bring it to passe: for she saw a
great rocke gushing out most horrible fountaines of waters, which ran
downe and fell by many stops and passages into the valley beneath: on
each side shee did see great Dragons, which were stretching out their
long and bloody Neckes, that did never sleepe, but appointed to keepe
the river there: the waters seemed to themselves likewise saying, Away;
away, what wilt thou doe? flie, flie, or else thou wilt be slaine. Then
Psyches (seeing the impossibility of this affaire) stood still as though
she were transformed into a stone and although she was present in body,
yet was she absent in spirit and sense, by reason of the great perill
which she saw, insomuch that she could not comfort her self with
weeping, such was the present danger that she was in. But the royall
bird of great Jupiter, the Eagle remembring his old service which he had
done, when as by the pricke of Cupid he brought up the boy Ganimedes, to
the heavens, to be made butler of Jupiter, and minding to shew the like
service in the person of the wife of Cupid, came from the high-house of
the Skies, and said unto Psyches, O simple woman without all experience,
doest thou thinke to get or dip up any drop of this dreadfull water? No,
no, assure thy selfe thou art never able to come nigh it, for the Gods
themselves do greatly feare at the sight thereof. What, have you not
heard, that it is a custome among men to sweare by the puissance of the
Gods, and the Gods do sweare by the majesty of the river Stix? but give
me thy bottle, and sodainly he tooke it, and filled it with the water
of the river, and taking his flight through those cruell and horrible
dragons, brought it unto Psyches: who being very joyfull thereof,
presented it to Venus, who would not yet be appeased, but menacing
more and more said, What, thou seemest unto me a very witch and
enchauntresse, that bringest these things to passe, howbeit thou shalt
do nothing more. Take this box and to Hell to Proserpina, and desire her
to send me a little of her beauty, as much as will serve me the space of
one day, and say that such as I had is consumed away since my sonne
fell sicke, but returne againe quickly, for I must dresse my selfe
therewithall, and goe to the Theatre of the Gods: then poore Psyches
perceived the end of all fortune, thinking verely that she should never
returne, and not without cause, when as she was compelled to go to the
gulfe and furies of hell. Wherefore without any further delay, she went
up to an high tower to throw her selfe downe headlong (thinking that it
was the next and readiest way to hell) but the tower (as inspired) spake
unto her saying, O poore miser, why goest thou about to slay thy selfe?
Why dost thou rashly yeeld unto thy last perill and danger? know thou
that if thy spirit be once separated from thy body, thou shalt surely go
to hell, but never to returne againe, wherefore harken to me; Lacedemon
a Citie in Greece is not farre hence: go thou thither and enquire for
the hill Tenarus, whereas thou shalt find a hold leading to hell, even
to the Pallace of Pluto, but take heede thou go not with emptie hands
to that place of darknesse: but Carrie two sops sodden in the flour of
barley and Honney in thy hands, and two halfepence in thy mouth. And
when thou hast passed a good part of that way, thou shalt see a lame
Asse carrying of wood, and a lame fellow driving him, who will desire
thee to give him up the sticks that fall downe, but passe thou on and do
nothing; by and by thou shalt come unto a river of hell, whereas Charon
is ferriman, who will first have his fare paied him, before he will
carry the soules over the river in his boat, whereby you may see that
avarice raigneth amongst the dead, neither Charon nor Pluto will do any
thing for nought: for if it be a poore man that would passe over and
lacketh money, he shal be compelled to die in his journey before they
will shew him any reliefe, wherefore deliver to carraine Charon one of
the halfpence (which thou bearest for thy passage) and let him receive
it out of thy mouth. And it shall come to passe as thou sittest in the
boat thou shalt see an old man swimming on the top of the river, holding
up his deadly hands, and desiring thee to receive him into the barke,
but have no regard to his piteous cry; when thou art passed over the
floud, thou shalt espie old women spinning, who will desire thee to
helpe them, but beware thou do not consent unto them in any case, for
these and like baits and traps will Venus set to make thee let fall
one of thy sops, and thinke not that the keeping of thy sops is a light
matter, for if thou leese one of them thou shalt be assured never to
returne againe to this world. Then shalt thou see a great and marvailous
dogge, with three heads, barking continually at the soules of such as
enter in, but he can do them no other harme, he lieth day and night
before the gate of Proserpina, and keepeth the house of Pluto with great
diligence, to whom if thou cast one of thy sops, thou maist have accesse
to Proserpina without all danger: shee will make thee good cheere, and
entertaine thee with delicate meate and drinke, but sit thou upon the
ground, and desire browne bread, and then declare thy message unto her,
and when thou hast received such beauty as she giveth, in thy returne
appease the rage of the dogge with thy other sop, and give thy other
halfe penny to covetous Charon, and come the same way againe into the
world as thou wentest: but above all things have a regard that thou
looke not in the boxe, neither be not too curious about the treasure
of the divine beauty. In this manner tire tower spake unto Psyches, and
advertised her what she should do: and immediately she tooke two halfe
pence, two sops, and all things necessary, and went to the mountaine
Tenarus to go towards hell. After that Psyches had passed by the lame
Asse, paid her halfe pennie for passage, neglected the old man in the
river, denyed to helpe the woman spinning, and filled the ravenous month
of the dogge with a sop, shee came to the chamber of Proserpina. There
Psyches would not sit in any royall seate, nor eate any delicate meates,
but kneeled at the feete of Proserpina, onely contented with course
bread, declared her message, and after she had received a mysticall
secret in a boxe, she departed, and stopped the mouth of the dogge with
the other sop, and paied the boatman the other halfe penny. When Psyches
was returned from hell, to the light of the world, shee was ravished
with great desire, saying, Am not I a foole, that knowing that I carrie
here the divine beauty, will not take a little thereof to garnish my
face, to please my love withall? And by and by shee opened the boxe
where she could perceive no beauty nor any thing else, save onely an
infernall and deadly sleepe, which immediatly invaded all her members as
soone as the boxe was uncovered, in such sort that she fell downe upon
the ground, and lay there as a sleeping corps.

But Cupid being now healed of his wound and Maladie, not able to endure
the absence of Psyches, got him secretly out at a window of the chamber
where hee was enclosed, and (receiving his wings,) tooke his flight
towards his loving wife, whom when he had found, hee wiped away the
sleepe from her face, and put it againe into the boxe, and awaked her
with the tip of one of his arrows, saying: O wretched Caitife, behold
thou wert well-nigh perished againe, with the overmuch curiositie: well,
goe thou, and do thy message to my Mother, and in the meane season,
I will provide for all things accordingly: wherewithall he tooke his
flight into the aire, and Psyches brought her present to Venus.

Cupid being more and more in love with Psyches, and fearing the
displeasure of his Mother, did pearce into the heavens, and arrived
before Jupiter to declare his cause: then Jupiter after that hee had
eftsoone embraced him, gan say in this manner: O my well beloved sonne,
although thou haste not given due reverence and honour unto me as thou
oughtest to doe, but haste rather spoiled and wounded this my brest
(whereby the laws and order of the Elements and Planets be disposed)
with continuall assaults, of Terren luxury and against all laws, and the
discipline Julia, and the utility of the publike weale, in transforming
my divine beauty into serpents, fire, savage beasts, birds, and into
Bulles: howbeit remembring my modesty, and that I have nourished thee
with mine owne proper hands, I will doe and accomplish all thy desire,
so that thou canst beware of spitefull and envious persons. And if there
be any excellent Maiden of comely beauty in the world, remember yet the
benefit which I shall shew unto thee by recompence of her love towards
me againe. When lie had spoken these words he commanded Mercury to call
all the gods to counsell, and if any of the celestiall powers did
faile of appearance he would be condemned in ten thousand pounds: which
sentence was such a terrour to all the goddesses, that the high Theatre
was replenished, and Jupiter began to speake in this sort: O yee gods,
registred in the bookes of the Muses, you all know this young man Cupid
whom I have nourished with mine owne hands, whose raging flames of his
first youth, I thought best to bridle and restraine. It sufficeth that
hee is defamed in every place for his adulterous living, wherefore all
occasion ought to bee taken away by meane of marriage: he hath chosen a
Maiden that fancieth him well, and hath bereaved her of her virginity,
let him have her still, and possesse her according to his owne pleasure:
then he returned to Venus, and said, And you my daughter, take you no
care, neither feare the dishonour of your progeny and estate, neither
have regard in that it is a mortall marriage, for it seemeth unto me
just, lawfull, and legitimate by the law civill. Incontinently after
Jupiter commanded Mercury to bring up Psyches, the spouse of Cupid, into
the Pallace of heaven. And then he tooke a pot of immortality, and said,
Hold Psyches, and drinke, to the end thou maist be immortall, and that
Cupid may be thine everlasting husband. By and by the great banket and
marriage feast was sumptuously prepared, Cupid sate downe with his deare
spouse between his armes: Juno likewise with Jupiter, and all the other
gods in order, Ganimedes filled the pot of Jupiter, and Bacchus served
the rest. Their drinke was Nectar the wine of the gods, Vulcanus
prepared supper, the howers decked up the house with roses and other
sweet smells, the graces threw about blame, the Muses sang with sweet
harmony, Apollo tuned pleasantly to the Harpe, Venus danced finely:
Satirus and Paniscus plaid on their pipes; and thus Psyches was married
to Cupid, and after she was delivered of a child whom we call Pleasure.
This the trifling old woman declared unto the captive maiden: but I
poore Asse, not standing farre of, was not a little sorry in that I
lacked pen and inke to write so worthy a tale.





THE SIXTH BOOKE




THE TWENTY-THIRD CHAPTER


How Apuleius carried away the Gentlewoman, and how they were taken
againe by the theeves, and what a kind of death was invented for them.

By and by the theeves came home laden with treasure, and many of them
which were of strongest courage (leaving behind such as were lame and
wounded, to heale and aire themselves) said they would returne backe
againe to fetch the rest of their pillage, which they had hidden in
a certaine cave, and so they snatched up their dinner greedily, and
brought us forth into the way and beate us before them with staves.
About night (after that we had passed over many hilles and dales) we
came to a great cave, where they laded us with mighty burthens, and
would not suffer us to refresh our selves any season but brought us
againe in our way, and hied so fast homeward, that what with their haste
and their cruell stripes, I fell downe upon a stone by the way side,
then they beate me pittifully in lifting me up, and hurt my right thigh
and my left hoofe, and one of them said, What shall we do with this lame
Ill favoured Asse, that is not worth the meate he eats? And other said,
Since the time that we had him first he never did any good, and I thinke
he came unto our house with evill lucke, for we have had great wounds
since, and losse of our valiant captaines, and other said, As soone as
he hath brought home his burthen, I will surely throw him out upon the
mountaine to be a pray for wild beasts: While these gentlemen reasoned
together of my death, we fortuned to come home, for the feare that I was
in, caused my feet to turne into wings: after that we were discharged
of our burthens, they went to their fellowes that were wounded, and
told them of our great tardity and slownesse by the way, neither was I
brought into small anguish, when I perceived my death prepared before
my face: Why standest thou still Lucius? Why dost thou not looke for
thy death? Knowst thou not that the theeves have ordained to slay thee?
seest thou not these sharpe and pointed flints which shall bruise and
teare thee in peeces, if by adventure thou happen upon them? Thy gentle
Magitian hath not onely given thee the shape and travell of an Asse, but
also a skinne so soft and tender as it were a swallow: why dost thou not
take courage and runne away to save thy selfe? Art thou afraid of the
old woman more then halfe dead, whom with a stripe of thy heele thou
maist easily dispatch? But whither shall I fly? What lodging shall I
seek? See my Assy cogitation. Who is he that passeth by the way and
will not take me up? While I devised these things, I brake the halter
wherewith I was tyed and ran away with all my force, howbeit I could not
escape the kitish eyes of the old woman, for shee ran after me, and with
more audacity then becommeth her kind age, caught me by the halter and
thought to pull me home: but I not forgetting the cruell purpose of the
theeves, was mooved with small pity, for I kicked her with my hinder
heeles to the ground and had welnigh slaine her, who (although shee was
throwne and hurled downe) yet shee held still the halter, and would not
let me goe; then shee cryed with a loud voyce and called for succour,
but she little prevayled, because there was no person that heard her,
save onely the captive gentlewoman, who hearing the voice of the old
woman, came out to see what the matter was, and perceiving her hanging
at the halter, tooke a good courage and wrested it out of her hand, and
(entreating me with gentle words) got upon my backe. Then I began
to runne, and shee gently kicked mee forward, whereof I was nothing
displeased, for I had as great a desire to escape as shee: insomuch
that I seemed to scowre away like a horse. And when the Gentlewoman
did speake, I would answere her with my neighing, and oftentimes (under
colour to rub my backe) I would sweetly kisse her tender feet. Then shee
fetching a sigh from the bottome of her heart, lifted up her eyes to the
heavens, saying: O soveraigne Gods, deliver mee if it be your pleasure,
from these present dangers: and thou cruell fortune cease thy wrath, let
the sorrow suffice thee which I have already sustained. And thou little
Asse, that art the occasion of my safety and liberty, if thou canst
once render me safe and sound to my parents, and to him that so greatly
desireth to have me to his wife, thou shalt see what thankes I will
give: with what honour I will reward thee, and how I will use thee.
First, I will bravely dresse the haires of thy forehead, and then will
I finely combe thy maine, I will tye up thy rugged tayle trimly, I will
decke thee round about with golden trappes, in such sort that thou shalt
glitter like the starres of the skie, I will bring thee daily in my
apron the kirnels of nuts, and will pamper thee up with delicates; I
will set store by thee, as by one that is the preserver of my life:
Finally, thou shalt lack no manner of thing. Moreover amongst thy
glorious fare, thy great ease, and the blisse of thy life, thou shalt
not be destitute of dignity, for thou shalt be chronicled perpetually in
memory of my present fortune, and the providence divine. All the whole
history shall be painted upon the wall of our house, thou shalt he
renowned throughout all the world. And it shall be registred in the
bookes of Doctours, that an Asse saved the life of a young maiden that
was captive amongst Theeves: Thou shalt be numbred amongst the ancient
miracles: wee beleeve that by like example of truth Phryxus saved
himselfe from drowning upon the Ram, Arion escaped upon a Dolphin, and
that Europa was delivered by the Bull. If Jupiter transformed himselfe
into a Bull, why may it not be that under the shape of this Asse, is
hidden the figure of a man, or some power divine? While that the Virgin
did thus sorrowfully unfold her desires, we fortuned to come to a place
where three wayes did meet, and shee tooke me by the halter, and would
have me to turne on the right hand to her fathers house: but I (knowing
that the theeves were gone that way to fetch the residue of their
pillage) resisted with my head as much as I might, saying within my
selfe: What wilt thou doe unhappy maiden? Why wouldst thou goe so
willingly to hell? Why wilt thou runne into destruction by meane of my
feet? Why dost thou seek thine own harme, and mine likewise? And while
we strived together whether way we might take, the theeves returned,
laiden with their pray, and perceived us a farre off by the light of the
Moon: and after they had known us, one of them gan say, Whither goe you
so hastely? Be you not afraid of spirits? And you (you harlot) doe you
not goe to see your parents? Come on, we will beare you company? And
therewithall they tooke me by the hatter, and drave me backe againe,
beating me cruelly with a great staffe (that they had) full of knobs:
then I returning againe to my ready destruction, and remembering the
griefe of my hoofe, began to shake my head, and to waxe lame, but he
that led me by the halter said, What, dost thou stumble? Canst thou not
goe? These rotten feet of thine ran well enough, but they cannot walke:
thou couldest mince it finely even now with the gentlewoman, that thou
seemedst to passe the horse Pegasus in swiftnesse. In saying of these
words they beat mee againe, that they broke a great staffe upon mee. And
when we were come almost home, we saw the old woman hanging upon a bow
of a Cipresse tree; then one of them cut downe the bowe whereon shee
hanged, and cast her into the bottome of a great ditch: after this
they bound the maiden and fell greedily to their victuals, which the
miserable old woman had prepared for them. At which time they began to
devise with themselves of our death, and how they might be revenged;
divers was the opinions of this divers number: the first said, that hee
thought best the Mayd should be burned alive: the second said she should
be throwne out to wild beasts: the third said, she should be hanged upon
a gibbet: the fourth said she should be flead alive: thus was the death
of the poore Maiden scanned betweene them foure. But one of the theeves
after every man had declared his judgement, did speake in this manner:
it is not convenient unto the oath of our company, to suffer you to waxe
more cruell then the quality of the offence doth merit, for I would that
shee should not be hanged nor burned, nor throwne to beasts, nor dye any
sodaine death, but by my council I would have her punished according to
her desert. You know well what you have determined already of this dull
Asse, that eateth more then he is worth, that faineth lamenesse, and
that was the cause of the flying away of the Maid: my mind is that he
shall be slaine to morrow, and when all the guts and entrailes of his
body is taken out, let the Maide be sowne into his belly, then let us
lay them upon a great stone against the broiling heate of the Sunne, so
they shall both sustaine all the punishments which you have ordained:
for first the Asse shall be slaine as you have determined, and she shall
have her members torne and gnawn with wild beasts, when as she is bitten
and rent with wormes, shee shall endure the paine of the fire, when as
the broyling heat of the Sunne shall scortch and parch the belly of the
Asse, shee shall abide the gallows when the Dogs and Vultures shall
have the guts of her body hanging in their ravenous mouthes. I pray you
number all the torments which she shall suffer: First shee shall dwell
within the paunch of an Asse: secondly her nosethrilles shall receive a
carraine stinke of the beast: thirdly shee shall dye for hunger: last of
all, shee shall finde no meane to ridde her selfe from her paines, for
her hand shalt be sowen up within the skinne of the Asse: This being
said, all the Theeves consented, and when I (poore Asse) heard and
understood all their device, I did nothing else but lament and bewayle
my dead carkasse, which should be handled in such sort on the next
morrow.





THE SEVENTH BOOKE




THE TWENTY-FOURTH CHAPTER


How hee that was left behinde at Hippata did bring newes concerning the
robbery of Miloes house, came home and declared to his Company, that all
the fault was laid to one Apuleius his charge.

A soone as night was past, and the cleare Chariot of the Sunne had
spred his bright beames on every coast, came one of the company of the
theeves, (for so his and their greeting together did declare) who at the
first entry into the Cave (after hee had breathed himselfe, and was able
to speake) told these tydings unto his companions in this sort. Sirs,
as touching the house of Milo of Hippata, which we forcibly entred and
ransackt the last day, we may put away all feare and doubt nothing at
all. For after that ye by force of armes, had spoyled and taken away all
things in the house, and returned hither into our Cave; I (thrusting my
selfe amongst the presse of the people, and shewing my selfe as though
I were sad and sorrowful for the mischance) consulted with them for the
boulting out of the matter, and devising what meanes might be wrought
for the apprehension of the theeves, to the intent I might learne and
see all that was done to make relation thereof unto you as you willed
me, insomuch that the whole fact at length by manifest and evident
proofes as also by the common opinion and judgement of the people, was
laid to one Lucius Apuleius charge as manifest author of this common
robbery, who a few dayse before by false and forged letters and colored
honesty, fell so farre in favour with this Milo, that he entertained him
into his house, and received him as a chiefe of his familiar friends,
which Lucius after that he had sojourned there a good space, and won the
heart of Miloes Maid, by fained love, did thoroughly learne the waies
and doores of all the house, and curiously viewed the cofers and chests,
wherein was laid the whole substance of Milo: neither was there small
cause given to judge him culpable, since as the very same night that
this robbery was done he fled away, and could not be found in no place:
and to the intent hee might cleane escape, and better prevent such as
made hew and crie after him, he tooke his white horse and galloped away,
and after this, his servant was found in the house, who (accused as
accessary to the fellony and escape of his Master) was committed to
the common gaole, and the next day following was cruelly scourged and
tormented till hee was welnigh dead, to the intent hee should confesse
the matter, but when they could wreast or learne no such thing of him,
yet sent they many persons after, towardes Lucius Countrey to enquire
him out, and so to take him prisoner. As he declared these things, I did
greatly lament with my selfe, to thinke of mine old and pristine estate,
and what felicity I was sometimes in, in comparison to the misery that I
presently susteined, being changed into a miserable Asse, then had I no
small occasion to remember, how the old and ancient Writers did
affirme, that fortune was starke blind without eies, because she alwaies
bestoweth her riches upon evil persons, and fooles, and chooseth or
favoureth no mortall person by judgement, but is alwaies conversent,
especially with much as if she could see, she should most shunne, and
forsake, yea and that which is more worse, she sheweth such evill or
contrary opinions in men, that the wicked doe glory with the name of
good, and contrary the good and innocent be detracted and slandred as
evill. Furthermore I, who by her great cruelty, was turned into a foure
footed Asse, in most vile and abject manner: yea, and whose estate
seemed worthily to be lamented and pittied of the most hard and stonie
hearts, was accused of theft and robbing of my deare host Milo, which
villany might rather be called parricide then theft, yet might not I
defend mine owne cause or denie the fact any way, by reason I could not
speake; howbeit least my conscience should seeme to accuse me by reason
of silence, and againe being enforced by impatience I endevored to
speake, and faine would have said, Never did I that fact, and verely the
first word, never, I cried out once or twise, somewhat handsome, but the
residue I could in no wise pronounce, but still remaining in one voice,
cried, Never, never, never, howbeit I settled my hanging lips as round
as I could to speake the residue: but why should I further complaine of
the crueltie of my fortune, since as I was not much ashamed, by reason
that my servant and my horse, was likewise accused with me of the
robbery.

While I pondered with my selfe all these things, a great care [came] to
my remembrance, touching the death, which the theeves provised for me
and the maiden, and still as I looked downe to my belly, I thought of my
poore gentlewoman that should be closed within me. And the theefe which
a little before had brought the false newes against me, drew out of the
skirt of his coate, a thousand crowns, which he had rifled from such
as hee met, and brought it into the common treasury. Then hee carefully
enquired how the residue of his companions did. To whom it was declared
that the most valiant was murdred and slaine in divers manners,
whereupon he perswaded them to remit all their affaires a certaine
season, and to seeke for other fellowes to be in their places, that by
the exercise of new lads, the terror of their martiall band might be
reduced to the old number, assuring them that such as were unwilling,
might be compelled by menaces and threatnings, and such as were willing
might be incouraged forward with reward. Further be said, that there
were some, which (seeing the profite which they had) would forsake their
base and servile estate, and rather bee contented to live like tyrants
amongst them. Moreover he declared, that for his part he had spoken with
a certaine tall man, a valiant companion, but of young age, stout in
body, and couragious in fight, whom he had fully perswaded to exercise
his idle hands, dull with slothfullnesse, to his greater profit, and
(while he might) to receive the blisse of better Fortune, and not to
hold out his sturdy arme to begge for a penny, but rather to take as
much gold and silver as hee would. Then everyone consented, that hee
that seemed so worthy to be their companion, should be one of their
company, and that they would search for others to make up the residue
of the number, whereupon he went out, and by and by (returning againe)
brought in a tall young man (as he promised) to whom none of the residue
might bee compared, for hee was higher then they by the head, and of
more bignesse in body, his beard began to burgen, but hee was poorely
apparelled, insomuch that you might see all his belly naked. As soone
as he was entred in he said, God speed yee souldiers of Mars and my
faithfull companions, I pray you make me one of your band, and I will
ensure you, that you shall have a man of singular courage and lively
audacity: for I had rather receive stripes upon my backe, then money or
gold in my hands. And as for death (which every man doth feare) I passe
nothing at all, yet thinke you not that I am an abject or a begger,
neither judge you my vertue and prowesse by ragged clothes, for I have
beene a Captaine of a great company, and subdued all the countrey of
Macedonia. I am the renowned theefe Hemes the Thracian, whose name all
countreys and nations do so greatly feare: I am the sonne of Theron
the noble theefe, nourished with humane bloud, entertained amongst
the stoutest; finally I am inheritour and follower of all my fathers
vertues, yet I lost in a short time all my company and all my riches,
by one assault, which I made upon a Factor of the Prince, which sometime
had beene Captaine of two hundred men, for fortune was cleane against
me; harken and I will tell you the whole matter. There was a certaine
man in the court of the Emperour, which had many offices, and in great
favour, who at last by the envy of divers persons, was banished away and
compelled to forsake the court: his wife Platina, a woman of rare faith
and singular shamefastnes having borne ten children to her husband,
despised all worldly Pompe and delicacy, and determined to follow her
husband, and to be partaker of his perils and danger, wherefore shee cut
off her haire, disguised her selfe like a man, and tooke with her all
her treasure, passing through the hands of the souldiers, and the naked
swords without any feare, whereby she endured many miseries, and was
partaker of much affliction, to save the life of her husband, such
was her love which she bare unto him. And when they had escaped many
perillous dangers, as well by land as by sea, they went together towards
Zacynthe, to continue there according as fortune had appointed. But when
they were arived on the sea coast of Actium (where we in our returne
from Macedony were roving about) when night came, they returned into a
house not far distant from their ship, where they lay all night. Then
we entred in and tooke away all their substance, but verely we were in
great danger: for the good matron perceiving us incontinently by the
noise of the gate, went into the chamber, and called up every man by his
name, and likewise the neighbors that dwelled round about, insomuch that
by reason of the feare that every one was in, we hardly escaped away,
but this most holy woman, faithfull and true to her husband (as the
truth must be declared) returned to Caesar, desiring his aid and
puissance, and demanding vengeance of the injury done to her husband,
who granted all her desire: then went my company to wracke, insomuch
that every man was slaine, so great was the authority and word of the
Prince. Howbeit, when all my band was lost, and taken by search of
the Emperours army, I onely stole away and delivered my selfe from the
violence of the souldiers, for I clothed my selfe in a womans attire,
and mounted upon an Asse, that carryed barly sheafes, and (passing
through the middle of them all) I escaped away, because every one deemed
that I was a woman by reason I lacked a beard. Howbeit I left not off
for all this, nor did degenerate from the glory of my father, or mine
own vertue, but freshly comming from the bloody skirmish, and disguised
like a woman, I invaded townes and castles alone to get some pray. And
therewithall he pulled out two thousand crownes, which he had under his
coate, saying: Hold here the dowry which I present unto you, hold eke
my person, which you shall alwayes find trusty and faithfull, if you
willingly receive me: and I will ensure you that in so doing, within
short space I wilt make and turne this stony house of yours into gold.
Then by and by every one consented to make him their Captaine, and so
they gave him better garments, and threw away his old. When they had
changed his attire, hee imbraced them one after another, then placed
they him in the highest roome of the table, and drunk unto him in token
of good lucke.




THE TWENTY-FIFTH CHAPTER


How the death of the Asse, and the Gentlewoman was stayed.

After supper they began to talke, and declare unto him the going away
of the Gentlewoman, and how I bare her upon my backe, and what death
was ordained for us two. Then he desired to see her, whereupon the
Gentlewoman was brought forth fast bound, whom as soone as he beheld, he
turned himselfe wringing his nose, and blamed them saying: I am not so
much a beast, or so rash a fellow to drive you quite from your purpose,
but my conscience will not suffer me to conceale any thing that toucheth
your profit, since I am as carefull for you, howbeit if my counsell doe
displease you, you may at your liberty proceed in your enterprise.
I doubt not but all theeves, and such as have a good judgement, will
preferre their owne lucre and gain above all things in the world,
and above their vengeance, which purchaseth damage to divers persons.
Therefore if you put this virgin in the Asses belly, you shall but
execute your indignation against her, without all manner of profit; But
I would advise you to carry the virgin to some towne and to sell her:
and such a brave girle as she is, may be sold for a great quantity
of money. And I my selfe know certaine bawdy Marchants, amongst whom
peradventure one will give us summes of gold for her. This is my opinion
touching this affaire: but advise you what you intend to do, for you
may rule me in this case. In this manner the good theefe pleaded and
defended our cause, being a good Patron to the silly virgin, and to
me poore Asse. But they staied hereupon a good space, with long
deliberation, which made my heart (God wot) and spirit greatly to
quaile. Howbeit in the end they consented to his opinion, and by and
by the Maiden was unloosed of her bonds, who seeing the young man, and
hearing the name of brothels and bawdy Merchants, began to wax joyfull,
and smiled with herself. Then began I to deeme evill of the generation
of women, when as I saw the Maiden (who was appointed to be married to a
young Gentleman, and who so greatly desired the same) was now delighted
with the talke of a wicked brothel house, and other things dishonest. In
this sort the consent and manners of women depended in the judgement of
an Asse.




THE TWENTY-SIXTH CHAPTER

How all the Theeves were brought asleepe by their new companion.

Then the young man spake againe, saying, Masters, why goe wee not about
to make our prayers unto Mars, touching this selling of the Maiden, and
to seeke for other companions. But as farre as I see, here is no other
manner of beast to make sacrifice withall, nor wine sufficient for us to
drinke. Let me have (quoth hee) tenne more with me, and wee will goe to
the next Castle, to provide for meat and other things necessary. So
he and tenne more with him, went their way: In the meane season, the
residue made a great fire and an Alter with greene turfes in the honour
of Mars. By and by after they came againe, bringing with them bottles
of wine, and a great number of beasts, amongst which there was a big Ram
Goat, fat, old, and hairy, which they killed and offered unto Mars. Then
supper was prepared sumptuously, and the new companion said unto the
other, You ought to accompt me not onely your Captaine in robbery
and fight, but also in pleasures and jolity, whereupon by and by with
pleasant cheere he prepared meat, and trimming up the house he set all
things in order, and brought the pottage and dainty dishes to the
Table: but above all he plyed them wel with great pots and jugs of wine.
Sometimes (seeming to fetch somewhat) hee would goe to the Maiden and
give her pieces of meate, which he privily tooke away, and would drinke
unto her, which she willingly tooke in good part. Moreover, hee kissed
her twice or thrice whereof she was well pleased but I (not well
contented thereat) thought in my selfe: O wretched Maid, thou hast
forgotten thy marriage, and doest esteeme this stranger and bloudy
theefe above thy husband which thy Parents ordained for thee, now
perceive I well thou hast no remorse of conscience, but more delight to
tarry and play the harlot heere amongst so many swords. What? knowest
thou not how the other theeves if they knew thy demeanour would put
thee to death as they had once appointed, and so worke my destruction
likewise? Well now I perceive thou hast a pleasure in the dammage
and hurt of other. While I did angerly devise with my selfe all these
things, I perceived by certaine signes and tokens (not ignorant to
so wise an Asse) that he was not the notable theefe Hemus, but rather
Lepolemus her husband, for after much communication he beganne to speake
more franckly, not fearing at all my presence, and said, Be of good
cheere my sweete friend Charites, for thou shalt have by and by all
these thy enemies captive unto thee. Then hee filled wine to the theeves
more and more, and never ceased, till as they were all overcome with
abundance of meat and drinke, when as hee himselfe abstained and bridled
his owne appetite. And truely I did greatly suspect, least hee had
mingled in their cups some deadly poyson, for incontinently they all
fell downe asleepe on the ground one after an other, and lay as though
they had beene dead.




THE TWENTY-SEVENTH CHAPTER

How the Gentlewoman was carried home by her husband while the theeves
were asleepe, and how much Apuleius was made of.

When the theeves were all asleepe by their great and immoderate
drinking, the young man Lepolemus took the Maiden and set her upon my
backe, and went homeward. When we were come home, all the people of the
Citie, especially her Parents, friends, and family, came running forth
joyfully, and the children and Maidens of the towne gathered together to
see this virgin in great triumph sitting upon an Asse. Then I (willing
to shew as much joy as I might, as present occasion served) I set and
pricked up my long eares, ratled my nosethrils, and cryed stoutly, nay
rather I made the towne to ring againe with my shrilling sound: when
wee were come to her fathers house, shee was received in a chamber
honourably: as for me, Lepolemus (accompanied with a great number of
Citizens) did presently after drive me backe againe with other horses to
the cave of the theeves, where wee found them all asleepe lying on the
ground as wee left them; then they first brought out all the gold, and
silver, and other treasure of the house, and laded us withall, which
when they had done, they threw many of the theeves downe into the
bottome of deepe ditches, and the residue they slew with their swords:
after this wee returned home glad and merry of so great vengeance upon
them, and the riches which wee carried was commited to the publike
treasurie. This done, the Maid was married to Lepolemus, according to
the law, whom by so much travell he had valiantly recovered: then my
good Mistresse looked about for me, and asking for me commanded the very
same day of her marriage, that my manger should be filled with barly,
and that I should have hay and oats aboundantly, and she would call
me her little Camell. But how greatly did I curse Fotis, in that shee
transformed me into an Asse, and not into a dogge, because I saw the
dogges had filled their paunches with the reliks and bones of so worthy
a supper. The next day this new wedded woman (my Mistresse) did greatly
commend me before her Parents and husband, for the kindnesse which I had
shewed unto her, and never leaved off untill such time as they promised
to reward me with great honours. Then they called together all their
friends, and thus it was concluded: one said, that I should be closed
in a stable and never worke, but continually to be fedde and fatted
with fine and chosen barly and beanes and good littour, howbeit another
prevailed, who wishing my liberty, perswaded them that it was better
for me to runne in the fields amongst the lascivious horses and mares,
whereby I might engender some mules for my Mistresse: then he that had
in charge to keepe the horse, was called for, and I was delivered unto
him with great care, insomuch that I was right pleasant and joyous,
because I hoped that I should carry no more fardels nor burthens,
moreover I thought that when I should thus be at liberty, in the spring
time of the yeere when the meddows and fields were greene, I should
find some roses in some place, whereby I was fully perswaded that if my
Master and Mistresse did render to me so many thanks and honours being
an Asse, they would much more reward me being turned into a man: but
when he (to whom the charge of me was so straightly committed) had
brought me a good way distant from the City, I perceived no delicate
meates nor no liberty which I should have, but by and by his covetous
wife and most cursed queane made me a mill Asse, and (beating me with a
cudgill full of knots) would wring bread for her selfe and her husband
out of my skinne. Yet was she not contented to weary me and make me a
drudge with carriage and grinding of her owne corne, but I was hired of
her neighbours to beare their sackes likewise, howbeit shee would not
give me such meate as I should have, nor sufficient to sustaine my life
withall, for the barly which I ground for mine owne dinner she would
sell to the Inhabitants by. And after that I had laboured all day, she
would set before me at night a little filthy branne, nothing cleane
but full of stones. Being in this calamity, yet fortune worked me other
torments, for on a day I was let loose into the fields to pasture, by
the commandement of my master. O how I leaped for joy, how I neighed
to see my selfe in such liberty, but especially since I beheld so many
Mares, which I thought should be my wives and concubines; and I espied
out and chose the fairest before I came nigh them; but this my joyfull
hope turned into otter destruction, for incontinently all the stone
Horses which were well fedde and made strong by ease of pasture, and
thereby much more puissant then a poore Asse, were jealous over me, and
(having no regard to the law and order of God Jupiter) ranne fiercely
and terribly against me; one lifted up his forefeete and kicked me
spitefully, another turned himselfe, and with his hinder heeles spurned
me cruelly, the third threatning with a malicious neighing, dressed his
eares and shewing his sharpe and white teeth bit me on every side. In
like sort have I read in Histories how the King of Thrace would throw
his miserable ghests to be torne in peeces and devoured of his wild
Horses, so niggish was that Tyrant of his provender, that he nourished
them with the bodies of men.




THE TWENTY-EIGHTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was made a common Asse to fetch home wood, and how he was
handled by a boy.

After that I was thus handled by horses, I was brought home againe to
the Mill, but behold fortune (insatiable of my torments) had devised a
new paine for me. I was appointed to bring home wood every day from a
high hill, and who should drive me thither and home again, but a boy
that was the veriest hangman in all the world, who was not contented
with the great travell that I tooke in climbing up the hill, neither
pleased when he saw my hoofe torne and worne away by sharpe flintes, but
he beat me cruelly with a great staffe, insomuch that the marrow of my
bones did ake for woe, for he would strike me continually on the right
hip, and still in one place, whereby he tore my skinne and made of my
wide sore a great hole or trench, or rather a window to looke out at,
and although it runne downe of blood, yet would he not cease beating
me in that place: moreover he laded me with such great burthens of wood
that you would thinke they had been rather prepared for Elephants then
for me, and when he perceived that my wood hanged more on one side then
another, (when he should rather take away the heavy sides, and so ease
me, or else lift them up to make them equall with the other) he laid
great stones upon the weaker side to remedy the matter, yet could be not
be contented with this my great misery and immoderate burthens of wood,
but when hee came to any river (as there were many by the way) he to
save his feete from water, would leape upon my loynes likewise, which
was no small loade upon loade. And if by adversity I had fell downe in
any dirty or myrie place, when he should have pulled me out either with
ropes, or lifted me up by the taile, he would never helpe me, but lay
me on from top to toe with a mighty staffe, till he had left no haire on
all my body, no not so much as on mine eares, whereby I was compelled
by force of blowes to stand up. The same hangman boy did invent another
torment for me: he gathered a great many sharp thornes as sharp as
needles and bound them together like a fagot, and tyed them at my
tayle to pricke me, then was I afflicted on every side, for if I had
indeavoured to runne away, the thornes would have pricked me, if I had
stood still, the boy would have beaten mee, and yet the boy beate mee to
make me runne, whereby I perceived that the hangman did devise nothing
else save only to kill me by some manner of meanes, and he would sweare
and threaten to do me worse harme, and because hee might have some
occasion to execute his malicious minde, upon a day (after that I had
endeavoured too much by my patience) I lifted up my heeles and spurned
him welfavouredly. Then he invented this vengeance against me, after
that he had well laded me with shrubs and rubble, and trussed it round
upon my backe, hee brought me out into the way: then hee stole a burning
coale out of a mans house of the next village, and put it into the
middle of the rubbell; the rubbell and shrubs being very dry, did fall
on a light fire and burned me on every side. I could see no remedy how I
might save my selfe, and in such a case it was not best for me to stand
still but fortune was favourable towards me, perhaps to reserve me for
more dangers, for I espyed a great hole full of raine water that fell
the day before, thither I ranne hastily and plunged my selfe therein, in
such sort that I quenched the fire, and was delivered from that
present perill, but the vile boy to excuse himselfe declared to all the
neighbours and shepheards about, that I willingly tumbled in the fire as
I passed through the village. Then he laughed upon me saying: How long
shall we nourish and keepe this fiery Asse in vaine?




THE TWENTY-NINTH CHAPTER

How Apuleius was accused of Lechery by the boy.

A few dayes after, the boy invented another mischiefe: For when he had
sold all the wood which I bare, to certaine men dwelling in a village
by, he lead me homeward unladen: And then he cryed that he was not able
to rule me, and that hee would not drive mee any longer to the hill for
wood, saying: Doe you not see this slow and dulle Asse, who besides all
the mischiefes that he hath wrought already, inventeth daily more and
more. For he espyeth any woman passing by the way, whether she be old or
marryed, or if it be a young child, hee will throw his burthen from his
backe, and runneth fiercely upon them. And after that he hath thrown
them downe, he will stride over them to commit his buggery and beastly
pleasure, moreover hee will faine as though hee would kisse them, but
he will bite their faces cruelly, which thing may worke us great
displeasure, or rather to be imputed unto us as a crime: and even now
when he espyed an honest maiden passing by die high way, he by and by
threw downe his wood and runne after her: And when he had throwne her
down upon the ground, he would have ravished her before the face of all
the world, had it not beene that by reason of her crying out, she was
succored and pulled from his heeles, and so delivered. And if it had
so come to passe that this fearefull maid had beene slaine by him,
what danger had we beene in? By these and like lies, he provoked the
shepheards earnestly against me, which grieved mee (God wot) full sore
that said nothing. Then one of the shepheards said: Why doe we not make
sacrifice of this common adulterous Asse? My sonne (quoth he) let us
kill him and throw his guts to the dogges, and reserve his flesh for the
labourers supper. Then let us cast dust upon his skinne, and carry it
home to our master, and say that the Woolves have devoured him. The
boy that was my evill accuser made no delay, but prepared himselfe to
execute the sentence of the shepheard, rejoycing at my present danger,
but O how greatly did I then repent that the stripe which I gave him
with my heele had not killed him. Then he drew out his sword and made it
sharp upon the whetstone to slay me, but another of the shepheards gan
say, Verely it is a great offence to kill so faire an Asse, and so (by
accusation of luxurie and lascivious wantonnesse) to lack so necessarie
his labour and service, where otherwise if ye would cut off his stones,
he might not onely be deprived of his courage but also become gentle,
that we should be delivered from all feare and danger. Moreover he would
be thereby more fat and better in flesh. For I know my selfe as
well many Asses, as also most fierce horses, that by reason of their
wantonnesse have beene most mad and terrible, but (when they were gelded
and cut) they have become gentle and tame, and tractable to all use.
Wherefore I would counsell you to geld him. And if you consent thereto,
I will by and by, when I go to the next market fetch mine irons and
tooles for the purpose: And I ensure you after that I have gelded and
cut off his stones, I will deliver him unto you as tame as a lambe.
When I did perceive that I was delivered from death, and reserved to
be gelded, I was greatly sorrie, insomuch that I thought all the hinder
part of my body and my stones did ake for woe, but I sought about to
kill my selfe by some manner of meanes, to the end if I should die, I
would die with unperished members.




THE THIRTIETH CHAPTER


How the boy that lead Apuleius to the field, was slaine in the wood.

While I devised with my selfe in what manner I might end my life, the
roperipe boy on the next morrow lead me to the same hill againe, and
tied me to a bow of a great Oke, and in the meane season he tooke his
hatchet and cut wood to load me withall, but behold there crept out of
a cave by, a marvailous great Beare, holding out his mighty head, whom
when I saw, I was sodainly stroken in feare, and (throwing all the
strength of my body into my hinder heeles) lifted up my strained head
and brake the halter, wherewith I was tied. Then there was no need to
bid me runne away, for I scoured not only on foot, but tumbled over the
stones and rocks with my body till I came into the open fields, to the
intent I would escape from the terrible Beare, but especially from the
boy that was worse than the Beare. Then a certaine stranger that passed
by the way (espying me alone as a stray Asse) tooke me up and roade upon
my backe, beating me with a staffe (which he bare in his hand) through a
wide and unknowne lane, whereat I was nothing displeased, but willingly
went forward to avoid the cruell paine of gelding, which the shepherds
had ordained for me, but as for the stripes I was nothing moved, since
I was accustomed to be beaten so every day. But evill fortune would not
suffer me to continue in so good estate long: For the shepheards looking
about for a Cow that they had lost (after they had sought in divers
places) fortuned to come upon us unwares, who when they espied and knew
me, they would have taken me by the halter, but he that rode upon my
backe resisted them saying, O Lord masters, what intend you to do? Will
you rob me? Then said the shepheards, What? thinkest thou we handle thee
otherwise then thou deservest, which hast stollen away our Asse? Why
dost thou not rather tell us where thou hast hidden the boy whom thou
hast slaine? And therewithall they pulled him downe to the ground,
beating him with their fists, and spurning him with their feete. Then he
answered unto them saying, titathat he saw no manner of boy, but onely
found the Asse loose and straying abroad, which he tooke up to the
intent to have some reward for the finding of him and to restore him
againe to his Master. And I would to God (quoth he) that this Asse
(which verely was never seene) could speake as a man to give witnesse of
mine innocency: Then would you be ashamed of the injury which you have
done to me. Thus (reasoning for Himselfe) he nothing prevailed, for they
tied the halter about my necke, and (maugre his face) pulled me quite
away, and lead me backe againe through the woods of the hill to the
place where the boy accustomed to resort. And after they could find him
in no place, at length they found his body rent and torne in peeces, and
his members dispersed in sundry places, which I well knew was done
by the cruell Beare: and verely I would have told it if I might have
spoken, but (which I could onely do) I greatly rejoiced at his death,
although it came too late. Then they gathered together the peeces of his
body and buried them. By and by they laid the fault to my new Master,
that tooke me up by the way, and (bringing him home fast bound to their
houses) purposed on the next morrow to accuse him of murther, and to
lead him before the Justices to have judgement of death.




THE THIRTY-FIRST CHAPTER

How Apuleius was cruelly beaten by the Mother of the boy that was
slaine.

In the meane season, while the Parents of the boy did lament and weepe
for the death of their sonne, the shepheard (according to his promise)
came with his instruments and tooles to geld me. Then one of them said,
Tush we little esteeme the mischiefe he did yesterday, but now we are
contented that to morrow his stones shall not onely be cut off, but also
his head. So was it brought to passe, that my death was delayed till the
next morrow, but what thanks did I give to that good boy, who (being so
slaine) was the cause of my pardon for one short day. Howbeit I had
no time then to rest my selfe, for the Mother of the boy, weeping and
lamenting for his death, attired in mourning vesture, tare her haire
and beat her breast, and came presently into the stable, saying, Is it
reason that this carelesse beast should do nothing all day but hold
his head in the manger, filling and belling his guts with meat without
compassion of my great miserie, or remembrance of the pittiful death of
his slaine Master: and contemning my age and infirmity, thinketh that I
am unable to revenge his mischiefs, moreover he would perswade me, that
he were not culpable. Indeed, it is a convenient thing to looke and
plead for safety, when as the conscience doeth confesse the offence, as
theeves and malefactors accustome to do. But O good Lord, thou cursed
beast, if thou couldest utter the contents of thine owne mind, whom
(though it were the veriest foole in all the world) mightest thou
perswade that this murther was voide or without thy fault, when as it
lay in thy power, either to keepe off the theeves with thy heeles, or
else to bite and teare them with thy teeth? Couldest not thou (that so
often in his life time diddest spurne and kicke him) defend him now at
the point of death by the like meane? Yet at least, thou shouldest have
taken him upon thy backe, and so brought him from the cruell hands of
the theeves: where contrary thou runnest away alone, forsaking thy good
Master, thy pastor and conductor. Knowest thou not, that such as denie
their wholsome help and aid to them which lie in danger of death, ought
to be punished, because they have offended against good manners, and
the law naturall? But I promise thee, thou shalt not long rejoyce at my
harmes, thou shalt feele the smart of thy homicide and offence, I will
see what I can doe. And therewithall she unclosed her apron, and bound
all my feete together, to the end I might not help my selfe, then she
tooke a great barre, which accustomed to bar the stable doore, and never
ceased beating me till she was so weary that the bar fell out of her
hands, whereupon she (complaining of the soone faintnesse of her armes)
ran to her fire and brought a firebrand and thrust it under my taile,
burning me continually, till such time as (having but one remedy) I
arayed her face and eies with my durty dunge, whereby (what with the
stinke thereof, and what with the filthinesse that fell in her eies) she
was welnigh blinded: so I enforced the queane to leave off, otherwise I
had died as Meleager did by the sticke, which his mad mother Althea cast
into the fire.





THE EIGHTH BOOKE




THE THIRTY-SECOND CHAPTER


How a young man came and declared the miserable death of Lepolemus and
his wife Charites.

About midnight came a young man, which seemed to be one of the family
of the good woman Charites, who sometimes endured so much misery and
calamity with mee amongst the theeves, who after that hee had taken
a stoole, and sate downe before the fireside, in the company of the
servants, began to declare many terrible things that had happened unto
the house of Charites, saying: O yee house-keepers, shepheards and
cowheards, you shall understand that wee have lost our good mistris
Charites miserably and by evill adventure: and to the end you may learne
and know all the whole matter, I purpose to tell you the circumstances
of every point, whereby such as are more learned then I (to whom fortune
hath ministred more copious stile) may painte it out in paper in forme
of an History. There was a young Gentleman dwelling in the next City,
borne of good parentage, valiant in prowesse, and riche in substance,
but very much given and adicted to whorehunting, and continuall
revelling. Whereby he fell in company with Theeves, and had his hand
ready to the effusion of humane blood; his name was Thrasillus. The
matter was this according to the report of every man. Hee demanded
Charites in marriage, who although he were a man more comely then the
residue that wooed her, and also had riches abundantly, yet because he
was of evill fame, and a man of wicked manners and conversation, he
had the repulse and was put off by Charites, and so she married with
Lepolemus. Howbeit this young man secretly loved her, yet moved somewhat
at her refusall, hee busily searched some meanes to worke his damnable
intent. And (having found occasion and opportunity to accomplish his
purpose, which he had long time concealed) brought to passe, that the
same day that Charites was delivered by the subtill meane and valiant
audacity of her husband, from the puissance of the Theeves, he mingled
himselfe among the assembly, faining that he was glad of the new
marriage, and comming home againe of the maiden, Whereby (by reason that
he came of so noble parents) he was received and entertained into the
house as one of their chiefe and principall friends: Howbeit under
cloake of a faithfull welwiller, hee dissimuled his mischievous mind
and intent: in continuance of time by much familiarity and often
conversation and banketting together, he fell more and more in favour,
like as we see it fortuneth to Lovers, who first doe little delight
themselves in love: till as by continuall acquaintance they kisse and
imbrace each other. Thrasillus perceiving that it was a hard matter to
breake his minde secretly to Charites, whereby he was wholly barred
from the accomplishment of his luxurious appetite, and on the other side
perceiving that the love of her and her husband was so strongly lincked
together, that the bond betweene them might in no wise be dissevered,
moreover, it was a thing impossible to ravish her, although he had
consented thereto, yet was hee still provoked forward by vehement lust,
when as hee saw himselfe unable to bring his purpose to passe. Howbeit
at length the thing which seemed so hard and difficill, thorough hope of
his fortified love, did now appeare easie and facill: but marke I pray
you diligently to what end the furious force of his inordinate desire
came. On a day Lepolemus went to the chase with Thrasillus, to hunt for
Goates, for his wife Charites desired him earnestly to meddle with no
other beasts, which were of more fierce and wilde nature. When they were
come within the chase to a great thicket fortressed about with bryers
and thornes, they compassed round with their Dogs and beset every place
with nets: by and by warning was given to let loose. The Dogs rushed in
with such a cry, that all the Forrest rang againe with the noyse, but
behold there leaped out no Goat, nor Deere, nor gentle Hinde, but an
horrible and dangerous wild Boare, hard and thicke skinned, bristeled
terribly with thornes, foming at the mouth, grinding his teeth, and
looking direfully with fiery eyes. The Dogs that first set upon him, he
tare and rent with his tuskes, and then he ranne quite through the nets,
and escaped away. When wee saw the fury of this beast, wee were greatly
striken with feare, and because wee never accustomed to chase such
dreadfull Boares, and further because we were unarmed and without
weapons, we got and hid our selves under bushes and trees. Then
Thrasillus having found opportunity to worke his treason, said to
Lepolemus: What stand we here amazed? Why show we our selves like
dastards? Why leese we so worthy a prey with our feminine hearts? Let us
mount upon our Horses, and pursue him incontinently: take you a hunting
staffe, and I will take a chasing speare. By and by they leaped upon
their Horses, and followed the beast. But hee returning against them
with furious force, pryed with his eyes, on whom hee might first assayle
with his tuskes: Lepolemus strooke the beast first on the backe with his
hunting staffe. Thrasillus faining to ayde and assist him, came behind,
and cut off the hinder legges of Lepolemus Horse, in such sort that hee
fell downe to the ground with his master: and sodainely the Boare came
upon Lepolemus and furiously tare and rent him with his teeth. Howbeit,
Thrasillus was not sufficed to see him thus wounded, but when he desired
his friendly help, he thrust Lepolemus through the right thigh with his
speare, the more because he thought the wound of the speare would be
taken for a wound of the Boars teeth, then he killed the beast likewise,
And when he was thus miserably slaine, every one of us came out of our
holes, and went towards our slaine master. But although that Thrasillus
was joyfull of the death of Lepolemus, whom he did greatly hate, yet he
cloked the matter with a sorrowfull countenance, he fained a dolorous
face, he often imbraced the body which himselfe slew, he played all the
parts of a mourning person, saving there fell no teares from his eyes.
Thus hee resembled us in each point, who verily and not without occasion
had cause to lament for our master, laying all the blame of this
homicide unto the Boare. Incontinently after the sorrowfull newes of the
death of Lepolemus, came to the eares of all the family, but especially
to Charites, who after she had heard such pitifull tydings, as a mad
and raging woman, ran up and down the streets, crying and howling
lamentably. All the Citizens gathered together, and such as they met
bare them company running towards the chasse. When they came to the
slaine body of Lepolemus, Charites threw her selfe upon him weeping and
lamenting grievously for his death, in such sort, that she would have
presently ended her life, upon the corps of her slaine husband, whom
shee so entirely loved, had it not beene that her parents and friends
did comfort her, and pulled her away. The body was taken up, and in
funerall pompe brought to the City and buried. In the meane season,
Thrasillus fained much sorrow for the death of Lepolemus, but in his
heart he was well pleased and joyfull. And to counterfeit the matter, he
would come to Charites and say: O what a losse have I had of my friend,
my fellow, my companion Lepolemus? O Charites comfort your selfe,
pacifie your dolour, refraine your weeping, beat not your breasts: and
with such other and like words and divers examples he endeavoured to
suppresse her great sorrow, but he spake not this for any other intent
but to win the heart of the woman, and to nourish his odious love with
filthy delight. Howbeit Charites after the buriall of her husband sought
the meanes to follow him, and (not sustaining the sorrows wherein she
was Wrapped) got her secretly into a chamber and purposed to finish
her life there with dolour and tribulation. But Thrasillus was very
importunate, and at length brought to passe, that at the intercession of
the Parents and friends of Charites, she somewhat refreshed her fallen
members with refection of meate and baine. Howbeit, she did it more at
the commandement of her Parents, then for any thing else: for she could
in no wise be merry, nor receive any comfort, but tormented her selfe
day and night before the Image of her husband which she made like unto
Bacchus, and rendred unto him divine honours and services. In the meane
season Thrasillus not able to refraine any longer, before Charites had
asswaged her dolor, before her troubled mind had pacified her fury, even
in the middle of all her griefes, while she tare her haire and rent her
garments, demanded her in marriage, and so without shame, he detected
the secrets and unspeakeable deceipts of his heart. But Charites
detested and abhorred his demand, and as she had beene stroken with some
clap of thunder, with some storme, or with the lightning of Jupiter, she
presently fell downe to the ground all amazed. Howbeit when her spirits
were revived and that she returned to her selfe, perceiving that
Thrasillus was so importunate, she demanded respite to deliberate and to
take advise on the matter. In the meane season, the shape of Lepolemus
that was slaine so miserably, appeared to Charites saying, O my sweet
wife (which no other person can say but I) I pray thee for the love
which is betweene us two, if there he any memorie of me in thy heart, or
remembrance of my pittifull death, marry with any other person, so that
thou marry not with the traitour Thrasillus, have no conference with
him, eate not with him, lie not with him, avoid the bloudie hand of
mine enemie, couple not thy selfe with a paricide, for those wounds (the
bloud whereof thy teares did wash away) were not the wounds of the teeth
of the Boare, but the speare of Thrasillus, that deprived me from thee.
Thus spake Lepolemus, unto his loving wife, and declared the residue of
the damnable fact. Then Charites, awaking from sleepe, began to renew
her dolour, to teare her garments, and to beate her armes with her
comely hands, howbeit she revealed the vision which she saw to no manner
of person, but dissimuling that she knew no part of the mischiefe,
devised with her selfe how she might be revenged on the traitor, and
finish her owne life to end and knit up all sorrow. Incontinently came
Thrasillus, the detestable demander of sodaine pleasure, and wearied the
closed eares of Charites with talke of marriage, but she gently refused
his communication, and coloring the matter, with passing craft in the
middest of his earnest desires gan say, Thrasillus you shall understand
that yet the face of your brother and my husband, is alwayes before mine
eies, I smell yet the Cinamon sent of his pretious body, I yet feele
Lepolemus alive in my heart: wherefore you shall do well if you grant to
me miserable woman, necessarie time to bewaile his death, that after the
residue of a few months, the whole yeare may be expired, which thing
toucheth as well my shame as your wholsome profit, lest peradventure by
your speed and quicke marriage we should justly raise and provoke the
spirit of my husband to worke our destruction. Howbeit, Thrasillus
was not contented with this promise, but more and more came upon her:
Insomuch, that she was enforced to speake to him in this manner: My
friend Thrasillus, if thou be so contented untill the whole yeare be
compleate and finished, behold here is my bodie, take thy pleasure, but
in such sort and so secret that no servant of the house may perceive
it. Then Thrasillus trusting to the false promises of the woman, and
preferring his inordinate pleasure above all things in the world, was
joyfull in his heart and looked for night, when as he might have his
purpose. But come thou about midnight (quoth Charites) disguised without
companie, and doe but hisse at my chamber doore, and my nourse shall
attend and let thee in. This counsell pleased Thrasillus marveilously,
who (suspecting no harme) did alwaies looke for night, and the houre
assigned by Charites. The time was scarce come, when as (according
to her commandement) he disguised himselfe, and went straight to the
chamber, where he found the nourse attending for him, who (by the
appointment of her Mistresse) fed him with flattering talke, and gave
him mingled and doled drinke in a cup, excusing the absence of her
Mistresse Charites, by reason that she attended on her Father being
sick, untill such time, that with sweet talke and operation of the
wine, he fell in a sound sleepe: Now when he lay prostrate on the ground
readie to all adventure, Charites (being called for) came in, and with
manly courage and bold force stood over the sleeping murderer, saying:
Behold the faithfull companion of my husband, behold this valiant
hunter; behold me deere spouse, this is the hand which shed my bloud,
this is the heart which hath devised so many subtill meanes to worke my
destruction, these be the eies whom I have ill pleased, behold now they
foreshew their owne destinie: sleepe carelesse, dreame that thou art in
the hands of the mercifull, for I will not hurt thee with thy sword or
any other weapon: God forbid that I should slay thee as thou slewest my
husband, but thy eies shall faile thee, and thou shalt see no more, then
that whereof thou dreamest: Thou shalt thinke the death of thine enemie
more sweet then thy life: Thou shalt see no light, thou shalt lacke the
aide of a leader, thou shalt not have me as thou hopest, thou shalt have
no delight of my marriage, thou shalt not die, and yet living thou shalt
have no joy, but wander betweene light and darknesse as an unsure Image:
thou shalt seeke for the hand that pricked out thine eies, yet shalt
thou not know of whom thou shouldest complaine: I will make sacrifice
with the bloud of thine eies upon the grave of my husband. But what
gainest thou through my delay? Perhaps thou dreamest that thou embracest
me in thy armes: leave off the darknesse of sleepe and awake thou to
receive a penall deprivation of thy sight, lift up thy face, regard thy
vengeance and evill fortune, reckon thy miserie; so pleaseth thine eies
to a chast woman, that thou shall have blindnesse to thy companion, and
an everlasting remorse of thy miserable conscience. When she had spoken
these words, she tooke a great needle from her head and pricked out both
his eies: which done, she by and by caught the naked sword which her
husband Lepolemus accustomed to weare, and ranne throughout all the
Citie like a mad woman towards the Sepulchre of her husband. Then all
we of the house, with all the Citizens, ranne incontinently after her
to take the sword out of her hand, but she clasping about the tombe of
Lepolemus, kept us off with her naked weapon, and when she perceived
that every one of us wept and lamented, she spake in this sort: I pray
you my friends weepe not, nor lament for me, for I have revenged the
death of my husband, I have punished deservedly the wicked breaker
of our marriage; now is it time to seeke out my sweet Lepolemus, and
presently with this sword to finish my life. And therewithall after she
had made relation of the whole matter, declared the vision which she
saw and told by what meane she deceived Thrasillus, thrusting her sword
under her right brest, and wallowing in her owne bloud, at length with
manly courage yeelded up the Ghost. Then immediately the friends
of miserable Charites did bury her body within the same Sepulchre.
Thrasillus hearing all the matter, and knowing not by what meanes he
might end his life, for he thought his sword was not sufficient to
revenge so great a crime, at length went to the same Sepulchre, and
cryed with a lowd voice, saying: o yee dead spirites whom I have so
highly and greatly offended, vouchsafe to receive me, behold I make
Sacrifice unto you with my whole body: which said, hee closed the
Sepulchre, purposing to famish himselfe, and to finish his life there
in sorrow. These things the young man with pitifull sighes and teares,
declared unto the Cowheards and Shepheards, which caused them all to
weepe: but they fearing to become subject unto new masters, prepared
themselves to depart away.




THE THIRTY-THIRD CHAPTER


How Apuleius was lead away by the Horsekeeper: and what danger he was
in.

By and by the Horsekeeper, to whom the charge of me was committed,
brought forth all his substance, and laded me and other Horses withall,
and so departed thence: we bare women, children, pullets, sparrowes,
kiddes, whelpes, and other things which were not able to keepe pace
with us, and that which I bare upon my backe, although it was a mighty
burthen, yet seemed it very light because I was driven away from him
that most terribly had appointed to kill me. When we had passed over
a great mountaine full of trees, and were come againe into the open
fields, behold we approached nigh to a faire and rich Castell, where
it was told unto us that we were not able to passe in our journey that
night, by reason of the great number of terrible Wolves which were
in the Country about, so fierce and cruell that they put every man
in feare, in such sort that they would invade and set upon such
which passed by like theeves, and devoure both them and their beasts.
Moreover, we were advertised that there lay in the way where we should
passe, many dead bodies eaten and torne with wolves. Wherefore we were
willed to stay there all night, and on the next morning, to goe close
and round together, whereby we might passe and escape all dangers.
But (notwithstanding this good counsell) our caitife drivers were so
covetous to goe forward, and so fearefull of pursuite, that they never
stayed till the morning: But being welnigh midnight, they made us trudge
in our way apace. Then I fearing the great danger which might happen,
ran amongst the middle of the other Horses, to the end I might defend
and save my poore buttocks from the Wolves, whereat every man much
marvelled to see, that I scowred away swifter then the other Horses. But
such was my agility, not to get me any prayse, but rather for feare: at
that time I remembered with my selfe, that the valiant Horse Pegasus did
fly in the ayre more to avoyd the danger of dreadful Chimera, then for
any thing else. The shepheards which drave us before them were well
armed like warriours: one had a speare, another had a sheepehooke, some
had darts, some clubbes, some gathered up great stones, some held up
their sharp Javelings, and some feared away the Woolves with light
firebrands. Finally wee lacked nothing to make up an Army, but onely
Drummes and Trumpets. But when we had passed these dangers, not without
small feare, wee fortuned to fall into worse, for the Woolves came not
upon us, either because of the great multitude of our company, or else
because [of] our firebrands, or peradventure they were gone to some
other place, for wee could see none, but the Inhabitants of the next
villages (supposing that wee were Theeves by reason of the great
multitude) for the defence of their owne substance, and for the feare
that they were in, set great and mighty masties upon us, which they had
kept and nourished for the safety of their houses, who compassing us
round about leaped on every side, tearing us with their teeth, in
such sort that they pulled many of us to the ground: verily it was a
pittifull sight to see so many Dogs, some following such as flyed, some
invading such as stood still, some tearing those which lay prostrate,
but generally there were none which escaped cleare: Behold upon this
another danger ensued, the Inhabitants of the Towne stood in their
garrets and windowes, throwing great stones upon our heads, that wee
could not tell whether it were best for us to avoyd the gaping mouthes
of the Dogges at hand or the perill of the stones afarre, amongst whome
there was one that hurled a great flint upon a woman, which sate upon my
backe, who cryed out pitiously, desiring her husband to helpe her. Then
he (comming to succour and ayd his wife) beganne to speake in this
sort: Alas masters, what mean you to trouble us poore labouring men so
cruelly? What meane you to revenge your selves upon us, that doe you no
harme? What thinke you to gaine by us? You dwell not in Caves or Dennes:
you are no people barbarous, that you should delight in effusion of
humane blood. At these words the tempest of stones did cease, and the
storme of the Dogges vanished away. Then one (standing on the toppe of
a great Cypresse tree) spake unto us saying: Thinke you not masters that
we doe this to the intent to rifle or take away any of your goods, but
for the safeguard of our selves and family: now a Gods name you may
depart away. So we went forward, some wounded with stones, some bitten
with Dogs, but generally there was none which escaped free.




THE THIRTY-FOURTH CHAPTER


How the shepheards determined to abide in a certaine wood to cure their
wounds.

When we had gone a good part of our way, we came to a certaine wood
invironed with great trees and compassed about with pleasant meddowes,
whereas the Shepheards appointed to continue a certaine space to cure
their wounds and sores; then they sate downe on the ground to refresh
their wearie minds, and afterwards they sought for medicines, to heale
their bodies: some washed away their blood with the water of the running
River: some stopped their wounds with Spunges and cloutes, in this
manner every one provided for his owne safety. In the meane season wee
perceived an old man, who seemed to be a Shepheard, by reason of the
Goates and Sheep that fed round about him. Then one of our company
demanded whether he had any milke, butter, or cheese to sell. To whom he
made answere saying: Doe you looke for any meate or drinke, or any other
refection here? Know you not in what place you be?

And therewithall he tooke his sheepe and drave them away as fast as he
might possible. This answere made our shepheards greatly to feare, that
they thought of nothing else, but to enquire what Country they were
in: Howbeit they saw no manner of person of whom they might demand. At
length as they were thus in doubt, they perceived another old man with a
staffe in his hand very weary with travell, who approaching nigh to our
company, began to weepe and complaine saying: Alas masters I pray you
succour me miserable caitife, and restore my nephew to me againe, that
by following a sparrow that flew before him, is fallen into a ditch
hereby, and verily I thinke he is in danger of death. As for me, I am
not able to helpe him out by reason of mine old age, but you that are so
valiant and lusty may easily helpe me herein, and deliver me my boy,
my heire and guide of my life. These words made us all to pity him. And
then the youngest and stoutest of our company, who alone escaped best
the late skirmish of Dogges and stones, rose up and demanded in what
ditch the boy was fallen: Mary (quod he) yonder, and pointed with his
finger, and brought him to a great thicket of bushes and thornes where
they both entred in. In the meane season, after we cured our wounds, we
tooke up our packs, purposing to depart away. And because we would not
goe away without the young man our fellow: The shepheards whistled and
called for him, but when he gave no answer, they sent one out of their
company to seeke him out, who after a while returned againe with a pale
face and sorrowfull newes, saying that he saw a terrible Dragon eating
and devouring their companion: and as for the old man, hee could see him
in no place. When they heard this, (remembring likewise the words of the
first old man that shaked his head, and drave away his sheep) they
ran away beating us before them, to fly from this desart and pestilent
Country.




THE THIRTY-FIFTH CHAPTER

How a woman killed her selfe and her child, because her husband haunted
harlots.

After that we had passed a great part of our journey, we came to a
village where we lay all night, but harken, and I will tell you what
mischiefe happened there: you shall understand there was a servant to
whom his Master had committed the whole government of his house, and was
Master of the lodging where we lay: this servant had married a Maiden
of the same house, howbeit he was greatly in love with a harlot of the
towne, and accustomed to resort unto her, wherewith his wife was so
highly displeased and became so jealous, that she gathered together all
her husbands substance, with his tales and books of account, and threw
them into a light fire: she was not contented with this, but she tooke
a cord and bound her child which she had by her husband, about her
middle and cast her selfe headlong into a deepe pit. The Master taking
in evill part the death of these twaine, tooke his servant which was the
cause of this murther by his luxurie, and first after that he had put
off all his apparell, he annointed his body with honey, and then bound
him sure to a fig-tree, where in a rotten stocke a great number of
Pismares had builded their neasts, the Pismares after they had felt the
sweetnesse of the honey came upon his body, and by little and little (in
continuance of time) devoured all his flesh, in such sort, that there
remained on the tree but his bare bones: this was declared unto us by
the inhabitants of the village there, who greatly sorrowed for the death
of this servant: then we avoiding likewise from this dreadfull lodging
incontinently departed away.




THE THIRTY-SIXTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was cheapned by divers persons, and how they looked in his
mouth to know his age.

After this we came to a faire Citie very populous, where our shepheards
determined to continue, by reason that it seemed a place where they
might live unknowne, far from such as should pursue them, and because it
was a countrey very plentifull of corne and other victuals, where when
we had remained the space of three dayes, and that I poore Asse and
the other horses were fed and kept in the stable to the intent we might
seeme more saleable, we were brought out at length to the market, and
by and by a crier sounded with his horne to notifie that we were to be
sold: all my companion horses were bought up by Gentlemen, but as for
me I stood still forsaken of all men. And when many buiers came by and
looked in my mouth to know mine age, I was so weary with opening my
jawes that at length (unable to endure any longer) when one came with a
stinking paire of hands and grated my gummes with his filthy fingers, I
bit them cleane off, which thing caused the standers by to forsake me as
being a fierce and cruell beast: the crier when he had gotten a hoarse
voice with crying, and saw that no man would buy me, began to mocke
me saying, To what end stand we here with this wilde Asse, this feeble
beast, this slow jade with worne hooves, good for nothing but to make
sives of his skin? Why do we not give him to some body for he earneth
not his hay? In this manner he made all the standers by to laugh
exceedingly, but my evill fortune which was ever so cruell against me,
whom I by travell of so many countreys could in no wise escape, did more
and more envie me, with invention of new meanes to afflict my poore body
in giving me a new Master as spitefull as the rest. There was an old man
somewhat bald, with long and gray haire, one of the number of those that
go from door to door, throughout all the villages, bearing the Image of
the goddesse Syria, and playing with Cimbals to get the almes of good
and charitable folks, this old man came hastely towards the cryer, and
demanded where I was bred: Marry (quoth he) in Cappadocia: Then he
enquired what age I was of, the cryer answered as a Mathematician, which
disposed to me my Planets, that I was five yeares old, and willed the
old man to looke in my mouth: For I would not willingly (quoth he) incur
the penalty of the law Cornelia, in selling a free Citizen for a servile
slave, buy a Gods name this faire beast to ride home on, and about in
the countrey: But this curious buier did never stint to question of my
qualities, and at length he demanded whether I were gentle or no: Gentle
(quoth the crier) as gentle as a Lambe, tractable to all use, he will
never bite, he will never kicke, but you would rather thinke that under
the shape of an Asse there were some well advised man, which verely you
may easily conject, for if you would thrust your nose in his taile you
shall perceive how patient he is: Thus the cryer mocked the old man, but
he perceiving his taunts and jests, waxed very angry saying, Away doting
cryer, I pray the omnipotent and omniparent goddesse Syria, Saint Sabod,
Bellona, with her mother Idea, and Venus, with Adonis, to strike out
both thine eies, that with taunting mocks hast scoffed me in this sort:
Dost thou thinke that I will put a goddesse upon the backe of any fierce
beast, whereby her divine Image should be throwne downe on the ground,
and so I poore miser should be compelled (tearing my haire) to looke
for some Physition to helpe her? When I heard him speake thus, I thought
with my selfe sodainly to leap upon him like a mad Asse, to the intent
he should not buy me, but incontinently there came another Marchant that
prevented my thought, and offered 17 Pence for me, then my Master was
glad and received the money, and delivered me to my new Master who was
called Phelibus, and he caried his new servant home, and before he came
to his house, he called out his daughters saying, Behold my daughters,
what a gentle servant I have bought for you: then they were marvailous
glad, and comming out pratling and shouting for joy, thought verely that
he had brought home a fit and conveniable servant for their purpose,
but when they perceived that it was an Asse, they began to provoke him,
saying that he had not bought a servant for his Maidens, but rather an
Asse for himselfe. Howbeit (quoth they) keepe him not wholly for your
owne riding, but let us likewise have him at commandement. Therewithall
they led me into the stable, and tied me to the manger: there was
a certaine yong man with a mighty body, wel skilled in playing on
instruments before the gods to get money, who (as soone as he had espied
me) entertained me verie well, for he filled my racke and maunger full
of meat, and spake merrily saying, O master Asse, you are very welcome,
now you shall take my office in hand, you are come to supply my roome,
and to ease me of my miserable labour: but I pray God thou maist
long live and please my Master well, to the end thou maist continually
deliver me from so great paine. When I heard these words I did
prognosticate my miserie to come.

The day following I saw there a great number of persons apparelled in
divers colours, having painted faces, mitres on their heads, vestiments
coloured like saffron, Surplesses of silke, and on their feet yellow
shooes, who attired the goddesse in a robe of Purple, and put her
upon my backe. Then they went forth with their armes naked to their
shoulders, bearing with them great swords and mightie axes, and dancing
like mad persons. After that we had passed many small villages, we
fortuned to come to one Britunis house, where at our first entrie they
began to hurle themselves hither and thither, as though they were mad.
They made a thousand gestures with their feete and their hands, they
would bite themselves, finally, every one tooke his weapon and wounded
his armes in divers places.

Amongst whom there was one more mad then the rest, that let many deepe
sighes from the bottome of his heart, as though he had beene ravished in
spirite, or replenished with divine power. And after that, he somewhat
returning to himselfe, invented and forged a great lye, saying, that
he had displeased the divine majesty of the goddesse, by doing of some
thing which was not convenable to the order of their holy religion,
wherefore he would doe vengeance of himselfe: and therewithall he
tooke a whip, and scourged his owne body, that the bloud issued out
aboundantly, which thing caused me greatly to feare, to see such wounds
and effusion of bloud, least the same goddesse desiring so much the
bloud of men, should likewise desire the bloud of an Asse. After they
were wearie with hurling and beating themselves, they sate downe, and
behold, the inhabitants came in, and offered gold, silver, vessels of
wine, milke, cheese, flower, wheate and other things: amongst whom there
was one, that brought barly to the Asse that carried the goddesse, but
the greedie whoresons thrust all into their sacke, which they brought
for the purpose and put it upon my backe, to the end I might serve for
two purposes, that is to say, for the barne by reason of my corne, and
for the Temple by reason of the goddesse. In this sort, they went from
place to place, robbing all the Countrey over. At length they came to a
certaine Castle where under colour of divination, they brought to passe
that they obtained a fat sheepe of a poore husbandman for the goddesse
supper and to make sacrifice withall. After that the banket was
prepared, they washed their bodies, and brought in a tall young man of
the village, to sup with them, who had scarce tasted a few pottage, when
hee began to discover their beastly customes and inordinate desire of
luxury. For they compassed him round about, sitting at the table, and
abused the young man, contrary to all nature and reason. When I beheld
this horrible fact, I could not but attempt to utter my mind and say, O
masters, but I could pronounce no more but the first letter O, which I
roared out so valiantly, that the young men of the towne seeking for a
straie Asse, that they had lost the same night, and hearing my voice,
whereby they judged that I had beene theirs, entred into the house
unwares, and found these persons committing their vile abhomination,
which when they saw, they declared to all the inhabitants by, their
unnatural villany, mocking and laughing at this the pure and cleane
chastity of their religion. In the meane season, Phelibus and his
company, (by reason of the bruit which was dispersed throughout all the
region there of their beastly wickednesse) put all their trumpery upon
my backe, and departed away about midnight. When we had passed a great
part of our journey, before the rising of the Sun, we came into a wild
desart, where they conspired together to slay me. For after they had
taken the goddesse from my backe and set her gingerly upon the ground,
they likewise tooke off my harnesse, and bound me surely to an Oake,
beating me with their whip, in such sort that all my body was mortified.
Amongst whom there was one that threatened to cut off my legs with his
hatchet, because by my noyse I diffamed his chastity, but the other
regarding more their owne profit than my utility, thought best to spare
my life, because I might carry home the goddesse. So they laded me
againe, driving me before them with their naked swords, till they came
to a noble City: where the principall Patrone bearing high reverence
unto the goddesse, Came in great devotion before us with Tympany,
Cymbals, and other instruments, and received her, and all our company
with much sacrifice and veneration. But there I remember, I thought my
selfe in most danger, for there was one that brought to the Master
of the house, a side of a fat Bucke for a present, which being hanged
behind the kitchin doore, not far from the ground, was cleane eaten
up by a gray hound, that came in. The Cooke when he saw the Venison
devoured, lamented and wept pitifully. And because supper time
approached nigh, when as he should be reproved of too much negligence,
he tooke a halter to hang himselfe: but his wife perceiving whereabout
he went, ran incontinently to him, and taking the halter in both her
hands, stopped him of his purpose, saying, O husband, are you out of
your writs? pray husband follow my counsel, cary this strange Asse out
into some secret place and kill him, which done, cut off one of his
sides, and sawce it well like the side of the Bucke, and set it before
your Master. Then the Cooke hearing the counsell of his wife, was well
pleased to slay me to save himselfe: and so he went to the whetstone, to
sharpe his tooles accordingly.





THE NINTH BOOKE




THE THIRTY-SEVENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius saved himselfe from the Cooke, breaking his halter, and of
other things that happened.

In this manner the traiterous Cooke prepared himselfe to slay me: and
when he was ready with his knives to doe his feat, I devised with my
selfe how I might escape the present perill, and I did not long delay:
for incontinently I brake the halter wherewith I was tied, and flinging
my heeles hither and thither to save my selfe, at length I ran hastily
into a Parlour, where the Master of the house was feasting with the
Priests of the goddesse Syria, and disquieted all the company, throwing
downe their meats and drinks from the table. The Master of the house
dismayed at my great disorder, commanded one of his servants to take me
up, and locke me in some strong place, to the end I might disturb them
no more. But I little regarded my imprisonment, considering that I
was happily delivered from the hands of the traiterous Cooke. Howbeit
fortune, or the fatall disposition of the divine providence, which
neither can be avoided by wise counsell, neither yet by any wholesome
remedie, invented a new torment, for by and by a young ladde came
running into the Parlour all trembling, and declared to the Master of
the house, that there was a madde Dog running about in the streetes,
which had done much harme, for he had bitten many grey hounds and horses
in the Inne by: And he spared neither man nor beast. For there was one
Mitilius a Mulettour, Epheseus, a Cooke, Hyppanius a chamberlaine, and
Appolonius a Physition, who (thinking to chase away the madde Dogge)
were cruelly wounded by him, insomuch that many Horses and other beasts
infected with the venyme of his poysonous teeth became madde likewise.
Which thing caused them all at the table greatly to feare, and thinking
that I had beene bitten in like sort, came out with speares, Clubs, and
Pitchforks purposing to slay me, and I had undoubtedly beene slaine,
had I not by and by crept into the Chamber, where my Master intended to
lodge all night. Then they closed and locked fast the doores about me,
and kept the chamber round, till such time as they thought that the
pestilent rage of madnesse had killed me. When I was thus shutte in the
chamber alone, I laid me downe upon the bed to sleepe, considering it
was long time past, since I lay and tooke my rest as a man doth. When
morning was come, and that I was well reposed, I rose up lustily. In the
meane season, they which were appointed to watch about the chamber all
night, reasoned with themselves in this sort, Verely (quoth one) I
think that this rude Asse be dead. So think I (quoth another) for the
outragious poyson of madness hath killed him, but being thus in divers
opinions of a poore Ass, they looked through a crevis, and espied me
standing still, sober and quiet in the middle of the chamber; then they
opened the doores, and came towards me, to prove whether I were gentle
or no. Amongst whom there was one, which in my opinion, was sent from
Heaven to save my life, that willed the other to set a bason of faire
water before me, and thereby they would know whether I were mad or no,
for if I did drinke without feare as I accustomed to do, it was a signe
that I was whole, and in mine Assie wits, where contrary if I did flie
and abhorre the tast of the water, it was evident proofe of my madness,
which thing he said that he had read in ancient and credible books,
whereupon they tooke a bason of cleere water, and presented it before
me: but I as soone as I perceived the wholesome water of my life, ran
incontinently, thrusting my head into the bason, drank as though I had
beene greatly athirst; then they stroked me with their hands, and bowed
mine eares, and tooke me by the halter, to prove my patience, but I
taking each thing in good part, disproved their mad presumption, by my
meeke and gentle behaviour: when I was thus delivered from this double
danger, the next day I was laded againe with the goddesse Siria, and
other trumpery, and was brought into the way with Trumpets and Cymbals
to beg in the villages which we passed by according to our custome. And
after that we had gone through a few towns and Castles, we fortuned to
come to a certaine village, which was builded (as the inhabitants there
affirme) upon the foundation of a famous ancient Citie. And after that
we had turned into the next Inne, we heard of a prettie jest committed
in the towne there, which I would that you should know likewise.




THE THIRTY-EIGHTH CHAPTER


Of the deceipt of a Woman which made her husband Cuckold.

There was a man dwelling in the towne very poore, that had nothing but
that which he got by the labour and travell of his hands: his wife was
a faire young woman, but very lascivious, and given to the appetite and
desire of the flesh. It fortuned on a day, that while this poore man was
gone betimes in the morning to the field about his businesse, according
as he accustomed to doe, his wives lover secretly came into his house to
have his pleasure with her. And so it chanced that during the time
that shee and he were basking together, her husband suspecting no such
matter, returned home praising the chast continency of his wife, in
that hee found his doores fast closed, wherefore as his custome was, he
whistled to declare his comming. Then his crafty wife ready with shifts,
caught her lover and covered him under a great tub standing in a corner,
and therewithall she opened the doore, blaming her husband in this sort:
Commest thou home every day with empty hands, and bringest nothing
to maintaine our house? thou hast no regard for our profit, neither
providest for any meate or drinke, whereas I poore wretch doe nothing
day and night but occupie my selfe with spinning, and yet my travell
will scarce find the Candels which we spend. O how much more happy is my
neighbour Daphne, that eateth and drinketh at her pleasure and passeth
the time with her amorous lovers according to her desire. What is the
matter (quoth her husband) though Our Master hath made holiday at the
fields, yet thinke not but I have made provision for our supper; doest
thou not see this tub that keepeth a place here in our house in vaine,
and doth us no service? Behold I have sold it to a good fellow (that is
here present) for five pence, wherefore I pray thee lend me thy hand,
that I may deliver him the tub. His wife (having invented a present
shift) laughed on her husband, saying: What marchant I pray you have you
brought home hither, to fetch away my tub for five pence, for which I
poore woman that sit all day alone in my house have beene proffered so
often seaven: her husband being well apayed of her words demanded what
he was that had bought the tub: Looke (quoth she) he is gone under, to
see where it be sound or no: then her lover which was under the tub,
began to stirre and rustle himselfe, and because his words might agree
to the words of the woman, he sayd: Dame will you have me tell the
truth, this tub is rotten and crackt as me seemeth on every side. And
then turning to her husband sayd: I pray you honest man light a Candle,
that I may make cleane the tub within, to see if it be for my purpose
or no, for I doe not mind to cast away my money wilfully: he by and
by (being made a very Oxe) lighted a candle, saying, I pray you good
brother put not your selfe to so much paine, let me make the tub cleane
and ready for you. Whereupon he put off his coate, and crept under
the tub to rub away the filth from the sides. In the meane season
this minion lover cast his wife on the bottome of the tub and had his
pleasure with her over his head, and as he was in the middest of his
pastime, hee turned his head on this side and that side, finding fault
with this and with that, till as they had both ended their businesse,
when as he delivered seaven pence for the tub, and caused the good man
himselfe to carry it on his backe againe to his Inne.




THE THIRTY-NINTH CHAPTER


How the Priests of the goddesse Siria were taken and put in prison, and
how Apuleius was sold to a Baker.

After that we had tarried there a few dayes at the cost and charges
of the whole Village, and had gotten much mony by our divination and
prognostication of things to come: The priests of the goddesse Siria
invented a new meanes to picke mens purses, for they had certaine lotts,
whereon were written:

Coniuncti terram proscindunt boves ut in futurum loeta germinent sata

That is to say: The Oxen tied and yoked together, doe till the ground to
the intent it may bring forth his increase: and by these kind of lottes
they deceive many of the simple sort, for if one had demanded whether he
should have a good wife or no, they would say that his lot did testifie
the same, that he should be tyed and yoked to a good woman and have
increase of children. If one demanded whether he should buy lands and
possession, they said that he should have much ground that should
yeeld his increase. If one demanded whether he should have a good and
prosperous voyage, they said he should have good successe, and it should
be for the increase of his profit. If one demanded whether hee should
vanquish his enemies, and prevaile in pursuite of theeves, they said
that this enemy should be tyed and yoked to him: and his pursuits after
theeves should be prosperous. Thus by the telling of fortunes, they
gathered a great quantity of money, but when they were weary with giving
of answers, they drave me away before them next night, through a lane
which was more dangerous and stony then the way which we went the night
before, for on the one side were quagmires and foggy marshes, on the
other side were falling trenches and ditches, whereby my legges failed
me, in such sort that I could scarce come to the plaine field pathes.
And behold by and by a great company of inhabitants of the towne armed
with weapons and on horsebacke overtooke us, and incontinently arresting
Philebus and his Priests, tied them by the necks and beate them cruelly,
calling them theeves and robbers, and after they had manacled their
hands: Shew us (quoth they) the cup of gold, which (under the colour of
your solemne religion) ye have taken away, and now ye thinke to escape
in the night without punishment for your fact. By and by one came
towards me, and thrusting his hand into the bosome of the goddesse
Siria, brought out the cup which they had stole. Howbeit for all they
appeared evident and plaine they would not be confounded nor abashed,
but jesting and laughing out the matter, gan say: Is it reason masters
that you should thus rigorously intreat us, and threaten for a small
trifling cup, which the mother of the Goddesse determined to give to her
sister for a present? Howbeit for all their lyes and cavellations, they
were carryed backe unto the towne, and put in prison by the Inhabitants,
who taking the cup of gold, and the goddesse which I bare, did put and
consecrate them amongst the treasure of the temple. The next day I was
carryed to the market to be sold, and my price was set at seaven pence
more then Philebus gave for me. There fortuned to passe by a Baker of
the next village, who after that he had bought a great deale of corne,
bought me likewise to carry it home, and when he had well laded me
therewith, be drave me through a thorny and dangerous way to his bake
house; there I saw a great company of horses that went in the mill day
and night grinding of corne, but lest I should be discouraged at the
first, my master entertained me well, for the first day I did nothing
but fare daintily, howbeit such mine ease and felicity did not long
endure, for the next day following I was tyed to the mill betimes in
the morning with my face covered, to the end in turning amid winding so
often one way, I should not become giddy, but keepe a certaine course,
but although when I was a man I had seen many such horsemills and knew
well enough how they should be turned, yet feining my selfe ignorant of
such kind of toile, I stood still and would not goe, whereby I thought
I should be taken from the mill as an Asse unapt, and put to some other
light thing, or else to be driven into the fields to pasture, but my
subtility did me small good, for by and by when the mill stood still,
the servants came about me, crying and beating me forward, in such
sort that I could not stay to advise my selfe, whereby all the company
laughed to see so suddaine a change. When a good part of the day was
past, that I was not able to endure any longer, they tooke off my
harnesse, and tied me to the manger, but although my bones were weary,
and that I needed to refresh my selfe with rest and provender, yet I was
so curious that I did greatly delight to behold the bakers art, insomuch
that I could not eate nor drinke while I looked on.

O good Lord what a sort of poore slaves were there; some had their
skinne blacke and blew, some had their backes striped with lashes, some
were covered with rugged sackes, some had their members onely hidden:
some wore such ragged clouts, that you might perceive all their naked
bodies, some were marked and burned in the heads with hot yrons, some
had their haire halfe clipped, some had lockes of their legges, some
very ugly and evill favoured, that they could scarce see, their eyes and
face were so blacke and dimme with smoake, like those that fight in the
sands, and know not where they strike by reason of dust: And some
had their faces all mealy. But how should I speake of the horses my
companions, how they being old and weake, thrust their heads into the
manger: they had their neckes all wounded and worne away: they rated
their nosethrilles with a continuall cough, their sides were bare with
their harnesse and great travell, their ribs were broken with beating,
their hooves were battered broad with incessant labour, and their skinne
rugged by reason of their lancknesse. When I saw this dreadfull sight,
I began to feare, least I should come to the like state: and considering
with my selfe the good fortune which I was sometime in when I was a man,
I greatly lamented, holding downe my head, and would eate no meate, but
I saw no comfort or consolation of my evill fortune, saving that my mind
was somewhat recreated to heare and understand what every man said, for
they neither feared nor doubted my presence. At that time I remembred
how Homer the divine author of ancient Poetry, described him to be a
wise man, which had travelled divers countries and nations, wherefore I
gave great thanks to my Asse for me, in that by this meanes I had seene
the experience of many things, and was become more wise (notwithstanding
the great misery and labour which I daily sustained): but I will tell
you a pretty jest, which commeth now to my remembrance, to the intent
your eares may be delighted in hearing the same.




THE FORTIETH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was handled by the Bakers wife, which was a harlot.

The Baker which bought me was an honest and sober man; but his wife was
the most pestilent woman in all the world, insomuch that he endured many
miseries and afflictions with her, so that I my selfe did secretly pitty
his estate, and bewaile his evill fortune: for she had not one fault
alone, but all the mischiefes that could be devised: shee was crabbed,
cruell, lascivious, drunken, obstinate, niggish, covetous, riotous in
filthy expenses, and an enemy to faith and chastity, a despise of all
the Gods, whom other did honour, one that affirmed that she had a God
by her selfe, wherby she deceived all men, but especially her poore
husband, one that abandoned her body with continuall whoredome. This
mischievous queane hated me in such sort, that shee commanded every day
before she was up, that I should he put into the mill to grind: and the
first thing which she would doe in the morning, was to see me cruelly
beaten, and that I should grind when the other beasts did feed and take
rest. When I saw that I was so cruelly handled, she gave me occasion to
learne her conversation and life, for I saw oftentimes a yong man which
would privily goe into her chamber whose face I did greatly desire to
see, but I could not by reason mine eyes were covered every day. And
verily if I had beene free and at liberty, I would have discovered all
her abhomination. She had an old woman, a bawd, a messenger of mischiefe
that daily haunted to her house, and made good cheere with her to the
utter undoing and impoverishment of her husband, but I that was greatly
offended with the negligence of Fotis, who made me an Asse, in stead
of a Bird, did yet comfort my selfe by this onely meane, in that to the
miserable deformity of my shape, I had long eares, whereby I might
heare all things that was done: On a day I heard the old bawd say to the
Bakers wife:

Dame you have chosen (without my counsell) a young man to your
lover, who as me seemeth, is dull, fearefull, without any grace, and
dastard-like coucheth at the frowning looke of your odious husband,
whereby you have no delight nor pleasure with him: how farre better is
the young man Philesiterus who is comely, beautifull, in the flower of
his youth, liberall, courteous, valiant and stout against the diligent
pries and watches of your husband, whereby to embrace the worthiest
dames of this country, and worthy to weare a crowne of gold, for one
part that he played to one that was jealous over his wife. Hearken how
it was and then judge the diversity of these two Lovers: Know you
not one Barbarus a Senator of our towne, whom the vulgar people call
likewise Scorpion for his severity of manners? This Barbarus had a
gentlewoman to his wife, whom he caused daily to be enclosed within his
house, with diligent custody. Then the Bakers wife said, I know her very
well, for we two dwelleth together in one house: Then you know (quoth
the old woman) the whole tale of Philesiterus? No verily (said she) but
I greatly desire to know it: therefore I pray you mother tell me the
whole story. By and by the old woman which knew well to babble, began to
tell as followeth.




THE FORTY-FIRST CHAPTER


How Barbarus being jealous over his wife, commanded that shee should be
kept close in his house, and what happened.

You shall understand that on a day this Barbarus preparing himselfe to
ride abroad, and willing to keepe the chastity of his wife (whom he so
well loved) alone to himselfe, called his man Myrmex (whose faith he
had tryed and proved in many things) and secretly committed to him the
custody of his wife, willing him that he should threaten, that if any
man did but touch her with his finger as he passed by, he would not
onely put him in prison, and bind him hand and foote, but also cause
him to be put to death, or else to be famished for lacke of sustenance,
which words he confirmed by an oath of all the Gods in heaven, and so
departed away: When Barbarus was gone, Myrmex being greatly astonied of
his masters threatnings, would not suffer his mistresse to goe abroad,
but as she sate all day a Spinning, he was so carefull that he sate by
her; when night came he went with her to the baines, holding her by the
garment, so faithfull he was to fulfill the commandement of his master:
Howbeit the beauty of this matron could not be hidden from the burning
eyes of Philesiterus, who considering her great chastity and how she was
diligently kept by Myrmex, thought it impossible to have his purpose,
yet (indeavouring by all kind of meanes to enterprise the matter, and
remembring the fragility of man, that might be intised and corrupted
with money, since as by gold the adamant gates may be opened) on a day,
when he found Myrmex alone, he discovered his love, desiring him to shew
his favour, (otherwise he should certainly dye) with assurance that
he need not to feare when as he might privily be let in and out in the
night, without knowledge of any person. When he thought, with these and
other gentle words to allure and prick forward the obstinate mind of
Myrmex he shewed him glittering gold in his hand, saying that he would
give his mistresse twenty crowns and him ten, but Myrmex hearing these
words, was greatly troubled, abhorring in his mind to commit such a
mischiefe: wherfore he stopped his eares, and turning his head departed
away: howbeit the glittering view of these crownes could never be out of
his mind, but being at home he seemed to see the money before his eyes,
which was so worthy a prey, wherefore poore Myrmex being in divers
opinions could not tell what to doe, for on the one side lie considered
the promise which he made to his master, and the punishment that should
ensue if he did contrary. On the other side he thought of the gaine, and
the passing pleasure of the crownes of gold; in the end the desire of
the money did more prevaile then the feare of death, for the beauty
of the flowrishing crownes did so sticke in his mind, that where the
menaces of his master compelled him to tarry at home, the pestilent
avarice of gold egged him out a doores, wherefore putting all shame
aside, without further delay, he declared all the whole matter to his
Mistresse, who according to the nature of a woman, when she heard him
speake of so great a summe she bound chastity in a string, and gave
authority to Myrmex to rule her in that case. Myrmex seeing the intent
of his Mistresse, was very glad, and for great desire of the gold, he
ran hastily to Philesiterus, declaring that his Mistresse was consented
to his mind, wherefore he demanded the gold which he promised. Then
incontinently Philesiterus delivered him tenne Crownes, and when night
came, Myrmex brought him disguised into his mistresses Chamber. About
Midnight when he and she were naked together, making sacrifice unto the
Goddesse Venus, behold her husband (contrary to their expectation)
came and knocked at the doore, calling with a loud voice to his Servant
Myrmex: whose long tarrying increased the suspition of his Master,
in such sort that he threatned to beat Myrmex cruelly: but he being
troubled with feare, and driven to his latter shifts, excused the matter
saying: that he could not find the key: by reason it was so darke. In
the meane season Philesiterus hearing the noise at the doore, slipt on
his coat and privily ran out of the Chamber. When Myrmex had opened the
doore to his Master that threatned terribly, and had let him in, he
went into the Chamber to his wife: In the mean while Myrmex let out
Philesiterus, and barred the doores fast, and went againe to bed. The
next morning when Barbarus awaked, he perceived two unknown slippers
lying under his bed, which Philesiterus had forgotten when he went away.
Then he conceived a great suspition and jealousie in mind, howbeit he
would not discover it to his wife, neither to any other person, but
putting secretly the slippers into his bosome, commanded his other
Servants to bind Myrmex incontinently, and to bring him bound to the
Justice after him, thinking verily that by the meane of the slippers he
might boult out the matter. It fortuned that while Barbarus went towards
the Justice in a fury and rage, and Myrmex fast bound, followed him
weeping, not because he was accused before his master, but by reason he
knew his owne conscience guilty: behold by adventure Philesiterus (going
about earnest businesse) fortuned to meet with them by the way, who
fearing the matter which he committed the night before, and doubting
lest it should be knowne, did suddainly invent a meane to excuse Myrmex,
for he ran upon him and beate him about the head with his fists, saying:
Ah mischievous varlet that thou art, and perjured knave. It were a good
deed if the Goddesse and thy master here, would put thee to death, for
thou art worthy to be imprisoned and to weare out these yrons, that
stalest my slippers away when thou werest at my baines yester night.
Barbarus hearing this returned incontinently home, and called his
servant Myrmex, commanding him to deliver the slippers againe to the
right owner.

The old woman had scant finished her tale when the Bakers wife gan say:
Verily she is blessed and most blessed, that hath the fruition of so
worthy a lover, but as for me poore miser, I am fallen into the hands of
a coward, who is not onely afraid of my husband but also of every clap
of the mill, and dares not doe nothing, before the blind face of yonder
scabbed Asse. Then the old woman answered, I promise you certainly
if you will, you shall have this young man at your pleasure, and
therewithall when night came, she departed out of her chamber. In the
meane season, the Bakers wife made ready a supper with abundance of wine
and exquisite fare: so that there lacked nothing, but the comming of the
young man, for her husband supped at one of her neighbours houses. When
time came that my harnesse should be taken off and that I should rest my
selfe, I was not so joyfull of my liberty, as when the vaile was taken
from mine eyes, I should see all the abhomination of this mischievous
queane. When night was come and the Sunne gone downe, behold the old
bawd and the young man, who seemed to be but a child, by reason he had
no beard, came to the doore. Then the Bakers wife kissed him a thousand
times and received him courteously, placed him downe at the table: but
he had scarce eaten the first morsell, when the good man (contrary to
his wives expectation) returned home, for she thought he would not have
come so soone: but Lord how she cursed him, praying God that he might
breake his necke at the first entry in. In the meane season, she caught
her lover and thrust him into the bin where she bolted her flower, and
dissembling the matter, finely came to her husband demanding why he came
home so soone. I could not abide (quoth he) to see so great a mischiefe
and wicked fact, which my neighbours wife committed, but I must run
away: O harlot as she is, how hath she dishonoured her husband, I sweare
by the goddesse Ceres, that if I had [not] seene it with mine eyes, I
would never I have beleeved it. His wife desirous to know the matter,
desired him to tell what she had done: then hee accorded to the request
of his wife, and ignorant of the estate of his own house, declared the
mischance of another. You shall understand (quoth he) that the wife
of the Fuller my companion, who seemed to me a wise and chast woman,
regarding her own honesty and profit of her house, was found this night
with her knave. For while we went to wash our hands, hee and she were
together: who being troubled with our presence ran into a corner, and
she thrust him into a mow made with twigs, appoynted to lay on clothes
to make them white with the smoake of fume and brymstone. Then she sate
down with us at the table to colour the matter: in the meant season the
young man covered in the mow, could not forbeare sneesing, by reason of
the smoake of the brymstone. The good man thinking it had beene his
wife that sneesed, cryed, Christ helpe. But when he sneesed more, he
suspected the matter, and willing to know who it was, rose from the
table, and went to the mow, where hee found a young man welnigh dead
with smoke. When hee understood the whole matter, he was so inflamed
with anger that he called for a sword to kill him, and undoubtedly he
had killed him, had I not restrained his violent hands from his purpose,
assuring him, that his enemy would dye with the force of his brimstone,
without the harme which he should doe. Howbeit my words would not
appease his fury, but as necessity required he tooke the young man well
nigh choked, and carried him out at the doores. In the meane season,
I counsailed his wife to absent her selfe at some of her Neighbours
houses, till the choller of her husband was pacified, lest he should be
moved against her, as he was against the young man. And so being weary
of their supper, I forthwith returned home. When the Baker had told
his tale, his impudent wife began to curse and abhorre the wife of the
Fuller, and generally all other wives, which abandon their bodies with
any other then with their owne Husbands, breaking the faith and bond
of marriage, whereby she said, they were worthy to be burned alive. But
knowing her owne guilty conscience and proper whoredome, lest her lover
should be hurt lying in the bin, she willed her husband to goe to bed,
but he having eaten nothing, said that he would sup before he went to
rest: whereby shee was compelled to maugre her eies, to set such things
on the Table as she had prepared for her lover.

But I, considering the great mischiefe of this wicked queane, devised
with my selfe how I might reveale the matter to my Master, and by
kicking away the cover of the binne (where like a Snaile the young-man
was couched) to make her whoredome apparent and knowne. At length I was
ayded by the providence of God, for there was an old man to whom the
custody of us was committed, that drave me poore Asse, and the other
Horses the same time to the water to drinke; then had I good occasion
ministred, to revenge the injury of my master, for as I passed by, I
perceived the fingers of the young-man upon the side of the binne,
and lifting up my heeles, I spurned off the flesh with the force of
my hoofes, whereby he was compelled to cry out, and to throw downe the
binne on the ground, and so the whoredome of the Bakers wife was knowne
and revealed. The Baker seeing this was not a little moved at the
dishonesty of his wife, but hee tooke the young-man trembling for feare
by the hand, and with cold and courteous words spake in this sort: Feare
not my Sonne, nor thinke that I am so barbarous or cruell a person,
that I would stiffle thee up with the smoke of Sulphur as our neighbour
accustometh, nor I will not punish thee according to the rigour of the
law of Julia, which commandeth the Adulterers should be put to death:
No no, I will not execute my cruelty against so faire and comely a young
man as you be, but we will devide our pleasure betweene us, by lying
all three in one bed, to the end there may be no debate nor dissention
betweene us, but that either of us may be contented, for I have alwayes
lived with my wife in such tranquillity, that according to the saying
of the wisemen, whatsoever I say, she holdeth for law, and indeed equity
will not suffer, but that the husband should beare more authority then
the wife: with these and like words he led the young-man to his Chamber,
and closed his wife in another Chamber. On the next morrow, he called
two of the most sturdiest Servants of his house, who held up the young
man, while he scourged his buttockes welfavouredly with rods like a
child. When he had well beaten him, he said: Art not thou ashamed, thou
that art so tender and delicate a child, to desire the violation of
honest marriages, and to defame thy selfe with wicked living, whereby
thou hast gotten the name of an Adulterer? After he had spoken these and
like words, he whipped him againe, and chased him out of his house. The
young-man who was the comeliest of all the adulterers, ran away, and
did nothing else that night save onely bewaile his striped and painted
buttockes. Soone after the Baker sent one to his wife, who divorced her
away in his name, but she beside her owne naturall mischiefe, (offended
at this great contumely, though she had worthily deserved the same) had
recourse to wicked arts and trumpery, never ceasing untill she had found
out an Enchantresse, who (as it was thought) could doe what she would
with her Sorcery and conjuration. The Bakers wife began to intreate her,
promising that she would largely recompence her, if shee could bring
one of these things to passe, eyther to make that her husband may be
reconciled to her againe, or else if hee would not agree thereto, to
send an ill spirit into him, to dispossesse the spirit of her husband.
Then the witch with her abhominable science, began to conjure and to
make her Ceremonies, to turne the heart of the Baker to his wife, but
all was in vaine, wherefore considering on the one side that she could
not bring her purpose to passe, and on the other side the losse of her
gaine, she ran hastily to the Baker, threatning to send an evill
spirit to kill him, by meane of her conjurations. But peradventure some
scrupulous reader may demand me a question, how I, being an Asse, and
tyed alwayes in the mill house, could know the secrets of these women:
Verily I answer, notwithstanding my shape of an Asse, I had the sence
and knowledge of a man, and curiously endeavoured to know out such
injuries as were done to my master. About noone there came a woman
into the Milhouse, very sorrowfull, raggedly attired, with bare feete,
meigre, ill-favoured, and her hayre scattering upon her face: This woman
tooke the Baker by the hand, and faining that she had some secret matter
to tell him, went into a chamber, where they remained a good space, till
all the corne was ground, when as the servants were compelled to call
their master to give them more corne, but when they had called very
often, and no person gave answer, they began to mistrust, insomuch that
they brake open the doore: when they were come in, they could not find
the woman, but onely their master hanging dead upon a rafter of the
chamber, whereupon they cryed and lamented greatly, and according to the
custome, when they had washed themselves, they tooke the body and buried
it. The next day morrow, the daughter of the Baker, which was married
but a little before to one of the next Village, came crying and beating
her breast, not because she heard of the death of her father by any
man, but because his lamentable spirit, with a halter about his necke
appeared to her in the night, declaring the whole circumstance of his
death, and how by inchantment he was descended into hell, which caused
her to thinke that her father was dead. After that she had lamented a
good space, and was somewhat comforted by the servants of the house, and
when nine dayes were expired, as inheretrix to her father, she sold away
all the substance of the house, whereby the goods chanced into divers
mens hands.




THE FORTY-SECOND CHAPTER


How Apuleius after the Baker was hanged, was sold to a Gardener, and
what dreadfull things happened.

There was a poore Gardener amongst the rest, which bought me for the
summe of fifty pence, which seemed to him a great price, but he thought
to gayne it againe by the continuall travell of my body. The matter
requireth to tell likewise, how I was handled in his service. This
Gardener accustomed to drive me, every morning laded with hearbes to the
next Village, and when he had sold his hearbes, hee would mount upon
my backe and returne to the Garden, and while he digged the ground and
watered the hearbes, and went about other businesse, I did nothing but
repose my selfe with great ease, but when Winter approached with sharpe
haile, raine and frosts, and I standing under a hedge side, was welnigh
killed up with cold, and my master was so poore that he had no lodging
for himselfe, much lesse had he any littor or place to cover me withall,
for he himselfe alwayes lay under a little roofe shadowed with boughes.
In the morning when I arose, I found my hoofes shriveled together with
cold, and unable to passe upon the sharpe ice, and frosty mire, neither
could I fill my belly with meate, as I accustomed to doe, for my master
and I supped together, and had both one fare: howbeit it was very
slender since as wee had nothing else saving old and unsavoury sallets
which were suffered to grow for seed, like long broomes, and that had
lost all their sweet sappe and juice.

It fortuned on a day that an honest man of the next village was
benighted and constrained by reason of the rain to lodge (very lagged
and weary).in our Garden, where although he was but meanely received,
yet it served well enough considering time and necessity. This honest
man to recompence our entertainment, promised to give my master some
corne, oyle, and two bottels of wine: wherefore my master not delaying
the matter, laded me with sackes and bottels, and rode to the Towne
which was seaven miles off.

When we came to the honest mans house, he entertained and feasted my
master exceedingly. And it fortuned while they eate and dranke together
as signe of great amity there chanced a strange and dreadfull case: for
there was a Hen which ran kackling about the yard, as though she would
have layed an Egge. The good man of the house perceiving her, said: O
good and profitable pullet that feedest us every day with thy fruit,
thou seemest as though thou wouldest give us some pittance for our
dinner: Ho boy put the Pannier in the corner that the Hen may lay. Then
the boy did as his master commanded, but the Hen forsaking the Pannier,
came toward her master and laid at his feet not an Egge, which every
man knoweth, but a Chickin with feathers, clawes, and eyes, which
incontinently ran peeping after his damme. By and by happened a more
strange thing, which would cause any man to abhorre: under the Table
where they sate, the ground opened, and there appeared a great well and
fountain of bloud, insomuch that the drops thereof sparckled about the
Table. At the same time while they wondred at this dreadfull sight one
of the Servants came running out of the Seller, and told that all the
wine was boyled out of the vessels, as though there had beene some great
fire under. By and by a Weasel was scene that drew into the house a dead
Serpent, and out of the mouth of a Shepheards dog leaped a live frog,
and immediately after one brought word that a Ram had strangled the same
dog at one bit. All these things that happened, astonied the good man of
the house, and the residue that were present, insomuch that they could
not tell what to doe, or with what sacrifice to appease the anger of
the gods. While every man was thus stroken in feare, behold, one brought
word to the good man of the house, that his three sonnes who had been
brought up in good literature, and endued with good manners were dead,
for they three had great acquaintance and ancient amity with a poore man
which was their neighbour, and dwelled hard by them: and next unto him
dwelled another young man very rich both in lands and goods, but bending
from the race of his progenies dissentions, and ruling himselfe in the
towne according to his owne will. This young royster did mortally hate
this poore man, insomuch that he would kill his sheepe, steale his oxen,
and spoyle his corne and other fruits before the time of ripenesse, yet
was he not contented with this, but he would encroch upon the poore mans
ground, and clayme all the heritage as his owne. The poore man which
was very simple and fearefull, seeing all his goods taken away by the
avarice of the rich man, called together and assembled many of his
friends to shew them all his land, to the end he might have but so much
ground of his fathers heritage, as might bury him. Amongst whom, he
found these three brethren, as friends to helpe and ayd him in his
adversity and tribulation.

Howbeit, the presence of these honest Citizens, could in no wise
perswade him to leave his extort power, no nor yet to cause any
temperance of his tongue, but the more they went about with gentle
words to tell him his faults, the more would he fret and likewise fume,
swearing all the oathes under God, that he little regarded the presence
of the whole City, whereupon incontinently he commanded his servants to
take the poore man by the eares, and carry him out of his ground, which
greatly offended all the standers by. Then one of the brethren spake
unto him somewhat boldly, saying: It is but a folly to have such
affiance in your riches, whereby you should use your tyranny against the
poore, when as the law is common for all men, and a redresse may be
had to suppresse your insolency. These words chafed him more then the
burning oile, or flaming brimstone, or scourge of whipps, saying: that
they should be hanged and their law too, before he would be subject
unto any person: and therewithall he called out his bandogges and great
masties, which accustomed to eate the carrion and carkases of dead
beasts in the fields, and to set upon such as passed by the way: then
he commanded they should be put upon all the assistance to teare them
in peeces: who as soone as they heard the hisse of their master, ran
fiercely upon them invading them on every side, insomuch that the more
they flied to escape away, the more cruell and terrible were the dogges.
It fortuned amongst all this fearefull company, that in running, the
youngest of the three brethren stombled at a stone, and fell down to the
ground: Then the dogs came upon him and tare him in peeces with their
teeth, whereby he was compelled to cry for succour: His other two
brethren hearing his lamentable voice ran towards him to helpe him,
casting their cloakes about their left armes, tooke up stones to chase
away the dogs, but all was in vaine, for they might see their brother
dismembred in every part of his body: Who lying at the very point of
death, desired his brethren to revenge his death against that cruell
tyrant: And therewithall lie gave up the ghost. The other two brethren
perceiving so great a murther, and neglecting their owne lives, like
desperate persons dressed themselves against the tyrant, and threw a
great number of stones at him, but the bloudy theefe exercised in such
and like mischiefes, tooke a speare and thrust it cleane through the
body: howbeit he fell not downe to the ground. For the speare that came
out at his backe ran into the earth, and sustained him up. By and by
came one of these tyrants servants the most sturdiest of the rest to
helpe his master, who at the first comming tooke up a stone and threw at
the third brother, but by reason the stone ran along his arme it did not
hurt him, which chanced otherwise then all mens expectation was: by and
by the young man feigning that his arme was greatly wounded, spake these
words unto the cruell bloud sucker: Now maist thou, thou wretch, triumph
upon the destruction of all our family, now hast thou fed thy insatiable
cruelty with the bloud of three brethren, now maist thou rejoyce at the
fall of us Citizens, yet thinke not but that how farre thou dost remove
and extend the bounds of thy land, thou shalt have some neighbor, but
how greatly am I sorry in that I have lost mine arme wherewithall I
minded to cut off thy head. When he had spoken these words, the furious
theefe drew out his dagger, and running upon the young man thought
verily to have slaine him, but it chanced otherwise: For the young man
resisted him stoutly, and in buckling together by violence wrested the
dagger out of his hand: which done, he killed the rich theefe with his
owne weapon, and to the intent the young man would escape the hands of
the servants which came running to assist their master, with the same
dagger he cut his owne throat. These things were signified by the
strange and dreadfull wondres which fortuned in the house of the good
man, who after he had heard these sorrowfull tydings could in no wise
weepe, so farre was he stroken with dolour, but presently taking his
knife wherewith he cut his cheese and other meate before, he cut his
owne throat likewise, in such sort that he fell upon the bord and
imbraced the table with the streames of his blond, in most miserable
manner. Hereby was my master the Gardener deprived of his hope, and
paying for his dinner the watry teares of his eyes, mounted upon my
backe and so we went homeward the same way as wee came.




THE FORTY-THIRD CHAPTER


How Apuleius was found by his shadow.

As wee passed by the way wee met with a tall souldier (for so his habite
and countenance declared) who with proud and arrogant words spake to my
master in this sort:

Quorsum vacuum ducis Asinum?

My master somewhat astonied at the strange sights which he saw before,
and ignorant of the Latine tongue, roade on and spake never a word: The
souldier unable to refraine his insolence, and offended at his silence,
strake him on the shoulders as he sate on my backe; then my master
gently made answer that he understood not what he said, whereat the
souldier angerly demanded againe, whither he roade with his Asse? Marry
(quoth he) to the next City: But I (quoth the souldier) have need of
his helpe, to carry the trusses of our Captaine from yonder Castle, and
therewithall he tooke me by the halter and would violently have taken me
away: but my master wiping away the blood of the blow which he received
of the souldier, desired him gently and civilly to take some pitty upon
him, and to let him depart with his owne, swearing and affirming that
his slow Asse, welnigh dead with sicknesse, could scarce carry a few
handfuls of hearbs to the next towne, much lesse he was able to beare
any greater trusses: but when he saw the souldier would in no wise
be intreated, but ready with his staffe to cleave my masters head, my
master fell down at his feete, under colour to move him to some pitty,
but when he saw his time, he tooke the souldier by the legs and cast him
upon the ground: Then he buffetted him, thumped him, bit him, and tooke
a stone and beat his face and his sides, that he could not turne and
defend himselfe, but onely threaten that if ever he rose, he would
choppe him in pieces. The Gardener when he heard him say so, drew out
his javelin which hee had by his side, and when he had throwne it away,
he knockt and beate him more cruelly then he did before, insomuch that
the souldier could not tell by what meanes to save himselfe, but by
feining that he was dead, Then my master tooke the javelin and mounted
upon my backe, riding in all hast to the next village, having no regard
to goe to his Garden, and when he came thither, he turned into one of
his friends house and declared all the whole matter, desiring him to
save his life and to hide himselfe and his Asse in some secret
place, untill such time as all danger were past. Then his friends not
forgetting the ancient amity betweene them, entertained him willingly
and drew me up a paire of staires into a chamber, my master crept into
a chest, and lay there with the cover closed fast: The souldier (as I
afterwards learned) rose up as one awaked from a drunken sleepe, but he
could scarce goe by reason of his wounds: howbeit at length by little
and little through ayd of his staffe he came to the towne, but hee would
not declare the matter to any person nor complaine to any justice, lest
he should be accused of cowardise or dastardnesse, yet in the end he
told some of his companions of all the matter that happened: then they
tooke him and caused him to be closed in some secret place, thinking
that beside the injury which he had received, he should be accused of
the breach of his faith, by reason of the losse of his speare, and when
they had learned the signes of my master, they went to search him out:
at last there was an unfaithfull neighbour that told them where he was,
then incontinently the souldiers went to the Justice declaring that
they had lost by the way a silver goblet of their Captaines, and that a
Gardener had found it, who refusing to deliver the goblet, was hidden in
one of his friends houses: by and by the Magistrates understanding the
losse of the Captaine, came to the doores where we were, commanded our
host to deliver my master upon paine of death: howbeit these threatnings
could not enforce him to confesse that he was within his doores, but by
reason of his faithfull promise and for the safeguard of his friend, he
said, that hee saw not the Gardener a great while, neither knew where
he was: the souldiers said contrary, whereby to know the verity of
the matter, the Magistrates commanded their Seargants and ministers
to search every corner of the house, but when they could find neither
Gardener nor Asse, there was a great contention betweene the souldiers
and our Host, for they sayd we were within the house: and he said no,
but I that was very curious to know the matter, when I heard so great
a noyse, put my head out of the window to learne what the stirre and
tumult did signifie. It fortuned that one of the souldiers perceived my
shadow, whereupon he began to cry, saying: that hee had certainly seene
me; then they were all glad and came up into the chamber, and pulled me
downe like a prisoner. When they had found mee, they doubted nothing of
the Gardener, but seeking about more narrowly, at length they found him
couched in a chest. And so they brought out the poore gardener to the
Justices, who was committed immediately to prison, but they could never
forbeare laughing from the time they found me by my shadow, wherefore is
risen a common Proverbe: 'The shadow of the Asse.'





THE TENTH BOOKE




THE FORTY-FOURTH CHAPTER


How the souldier drave Apuleius away, and how he came to a Captaines
house, and what happened there.

The next day how my master the Gardener sped, I knew not, but the gentle
souldier, who was well beaten for his cowardise, lead me to his lodging
without the contradiction of any man: Where hee laded me well, and
garnished my body (as seemed to me) like an Asse of armes. For on the
one side I bare an helmet that shined exceedingly: On the other side
a Target that glistered more a thousand folde. And on the top of my
burthen he put a long speare, which things he placed thus gallantly, not
because he was so expert in warre (for the Gardener proved the contrary)
but to the end he might feare those which passed by, when they saw such
a similitude of warre. When we had gone a good part of our journey,
over the plaine and easie fields, we fortuned to come to a little towne,
where we lodged at a certaine Captaines house. And there the souldier
tooke me to one of the servants, while he himselfe went towards his
captaine; who had the charge of a thousand men. And when we had remained
there a few dayes, I understood of a wicked and mischievous fact
committed there, which I have put in writing to the end you may know the
same. The master of the house had a sonne instructed in good literature,
and endued with vertuous manners, such a one as you would desire to have
the like. Long time before his mother dyed, and when his father married
a new wife, and had another child of the age of xii. yeares. The
stepdame was more excellent in beauty then honesty: for she loved this
young man her sonne in law, either because she was unchast by nature,
or because she was enforced by fate of stepmother, to commit so great a
mischiefe. Gentle reader, thou shalt not read of a fable, but rather a
tragedy: This woman when her love began first to kindle in her heart,
could easily resist her desire and inordinate appetite by reason
of shame and feare, lest her intent should be knowne: But after it
compassed and burned every part of her brest, she was compelled to yeeld
unto the raging flame of Cupid, and under colour of the disease and
infirmity of her body, to conceale the wound of her restlesse mind.
Every man knoweth well the signes and tokens of love, and the malady
convenient to the same: Her countenance was pale, her eyes sorrowfull,
her knees weake, and there was no comfort in her, but continuall weeping
and sobbing, insomuch that you would have thought that she had some
spice of an ague, saving that she wept unmeasurably: the Phisitians
knew not her disease, when they felt the beating of her veines, the
intemperance of her heart, the sobbing sighes, and her often tossing of
every side: No, no, the cunning Phisitian knew it not, but a scholler of
Venus Court might easily conjecture the whole. After that she had beene
long time tormented in her affliction, and was no more able to conceale
her ardent desire, shee caused her sonne to be called for, (which word
son she would faine put away if it were not for shame:) Then he nothing
disobedient to the commandement of his mother, with a sad and modest
countenance, came into the chamber of his stepdame, the mother of his
brother, but she speaking never a word was in great doubt what she might
doe, and could not tell what to say first, by reason of shame. The young
man suspecting no ill, with humble courtesie demanded the cause of her
present disease. Then she having found an occasion to utter her intent,
with weeping eyes and covered face, began boldly to speake unto him in
this manner: Thou, thou, art the originall cause of all my dolour:
Thou art my comfort and onely health, for those thy comely eyes are
so enfastned within my brest, that unlesse they succour me, I shall
certainly die: Have pitty therefore upon me, be not the occasion of my
destruction, neither let my conscience reclaime to offend thy father,
when as thou shalt save the life of thy mother. Moreover since thou dost
resemble thy fathers shape in every point, it giveth me cause the more
to fancy thee: Now is ministred unto thee time and place: Now hast thou
occasion to worke thy will, seeing that we are alone. And it is a common
saying:

Never knowne, never done.

This young man troubled in mind at so suddaine an ill, although hee
abhorred to commit so beastly a crime, yet hee would not cast her off
with a present deniall, but warily pacified her mind with delay of
promise. Wherefore he promised to doe all according to her desire:
And in the meane season, he willed his mother to be of good cheere, and
comfort her selfe till as he might find some convenient time to come
unto her, when his father was ridden forth: Wherewithall hee got him
away from the pestilent sight of his stepdame. And knowing that this
matter touching the ruine of all the whole house needed the counsell
of wise and grave persons, he went incontinently to a sage old man and
declared the whole circumstance of the matter. The old man after long
deliberation, thought there was no better way to avoyd the storme of
cruell fortune to come, then to run away. In the meane season this
wicked woman impatient of her love, and the long delay of her sonne,
egged her husband to ride abroad into farre countreyes. And then she
asked the young-man the accomplishment of his promise, but he to rid
himselfe entirely from her hands, would find alwayes excuses, till in
the end she understood by the messengers that came in and out, that he
nothing regarded her. Then she by how much she loved him before, by so
much and more she hated him now. And by and by she called one of her
servants, ready to all mischiefes: To whom she declared all her secrets.
And there it was concluded betweene them two, that the surest way was
to kill the young man: Whereupon this varlet went incontinently to buy
poyson, which he mingled with wine, to the intent he would give it to
the young man to drinke, and thereby presently to kill him. But while
they were in deliberation how they might offer it unto him, behold here
happened a strange adventure. For the young sonne of the woman that came
from schoole at noone (being very thirsty) tooke the pot wherein the
poyson was mingled, and ignorant of the venim, dranke a good draught
thereof, which was prepared to kill his brother: whereby he presently
fell downe to the ground dead. His schoolemaster seeing his suddaine
change, called his mother, and all the servants of the house with a lowd
voyce. Incontinently every man declared his opinion, touching the death
of the child: but the cruell woman the onely example of stepmothers
malice, was nothing moved by the bitter death of her sonne, or by her
owne conscience of paracide, or by the misfortune of her house, or by
the dolour of her husband, but rather devised the destruction of all her
family. For by and by shee sent a messenger after her husband to tell
him the great misfortune which happened after his departure. And when
lie came home, the wicked woman declared that his sonne had empoysoned
his brother, because he would not consent to his will, and told him
divers other leasings, adding in the end that hee threatned to kill her
likewise, because she discovered the fact: Then the unhappy father was
stroken with double dolour of the death of his two children, for on the
one side he saw his younger sonne slaine before his eyes, on the other
side, he seemed to see the elder condemned to dye for his offence:
Againe, where he beheld his wife lament in such sort, it gave him
further occasion to hate his sonne more deadly; but the funerals of his
younger sonne were scarce finished, when the old man the father with
weeping eyes even at the returne from the grave, went to the Justice and
accused his sonne of the slaughter of his brother, and how he threatned
to slay his wife, whereby the rather at his weeping and lamentation, he
moved all the Magistrates and people to pitty, insomuch that without any
delay, or further inquisition they cryed all that hee should be stoned
to death, but the Justices fearing a farther inconvenience to arise by
the particular vengeance, and to the end there might fortune no sedition
amongst the people, prayed the decurions and other Officers of the City,
that they might proceed by examination of witnesses, and with order of
justice according to the ancient custome before the judging of any hasty
sentence or judgment, without the hearing of the contrary part, like as
the barbarous and cruell tyrants accustome to use: otherwise they should
give an ill example to their successours. This opinion pleased every
man, wherefore the Senatours and counsellors were called, who being
placed in order according to their dignity, caused the accuser and
defender to be brought forth, and by the example of the Athenian law,
and judgement materiall, their Advocates were commanded to plead their
causes briefly without preambles or motions of the people to pitty,
which were too long a processe. And if you demand how I understood all
this matter, you shall understand that I heard many declare the same,
but to recite what words the accuser used in his invective, what answer
the defender made, the orations and pleadings of each party, verily I
am not able to doe: for I was fast bound at the manger. But as I learned
and knew by others, I will God willing declare unto you. So it was
ordered, that after the pleadings of both sides was ended, they thought
best to try and boult out the verity by witnesses, all presumptions and
likelihood set apart, and to call in the servant, who onely was reported
to know all the matter: by and by the servant came in, who nothing
abashed, at the feare of so great a judgment, or at the presence of the
Judges, or at his owne guilty conscience, which hee so finely fained,
but with a bold countenance presented himselfe before the justices and
confirmed the accusation against the young man, saying: O yee judges, on
a day when this young man loathed and hated his stepmother, hee called
mee, desiring mee to poyson his brother, whereby hee might revenge
himselfe, and if I would doe it and keepe the matter secret, hee
promised to give me a good reward for my paines: but when the young man
perceived that I would not accord to his will, he threatned to slay mee,
whereupon hee went himselfe and bought poyson, and after tempered it
with wine, and then gave it me to give the child, which when I refused
he offered it to his brother with his own hands. When the varlet with a
trembling countenance had ended these words which seemed a likelihood
of truth, the judgement was ended: neither was there found any judge or
counsellor, so mercifull to the young man accused, as would not judge
him culpable, but that he should be put and sowne in a skin, with
a dogge, a Cocke, a Snake, and an Ape, according to the law against
parricides: wherefore they wanted nothing but (as the ancient custome
was) to put white stones and black into a pot, and to take them out
againe, to see whether the young-man accused should be acquitted by
judgment or condemned, which was a thing irrevocable.

In the mean season he was delivered to the hands of the executioner. But
there arose a sage and ancient Physitian, a man of a good conscience
and credit throughout all the City, that stopped the mouth of the
pot wherein the stones were cast, saying: I am right glad ye reverend
judges, that I am a man of name and estimation amongst you, whereby I am
accompted such a one as will not suffer any person to be put to death by
false and untrue accusations, considering there hath bin no homicide
or murther committed by this yong man in this case, neither you (being
sworn to judge uprightly) to be misinformed and abused by invented lyes
and tales. For I cannot but declare and open my conscience, least I
should be found to beare small honour and faith to the Gods, wherefore
I pray you give eare, and I will shew you the whole truth of the matter.
You shall understand that this servant which hath merited to be hanged,
came one of these dayes to speake with me, promising to give me a
hundred crownes, if I would give him present poyson, which would cause
a man to dye suddenly, saying, that he would have it for one that was
sicke of an incurable disease, to the end he might be delivered from all
torment, but I smelling his crafty and subtill fetch, and fearing least
he would worke some mischiefe withall, gave him a drinke; but to the
intent I might cleare my selfe from all danger that might happen, I
would not presently take the money which he offered. But least any of
the crownes should lacke weight or be found counterfeit, I willed him to
scale the purse wherein they were put, with his manuell signe, whereby
the next day we might goe together to the Goldsmith to try them, which
he did; wherefore understanding that he was brought present before you
this day, I hastily commanded one of my servants to fetch the purse
which he had sealed, and here I bring it unto you to see whether he will
deny his owne signe or no: and you may easily conject that his words are
untrue, which he alleadged against the young man, touching the buying
of the poyson, considering hee bought the poyson himselfe. When the
Physitian had spoken these words you might perceive how the trayterous
knave changed his colour, how hee sweat for feare, how he trembled in
every part of his body: and how he set one leg upon another, scratching
Ibis head and grinding his teeth, whereby there was no person but would
judge him culpable. In the end, when he was somewhat returned to his
former subtility, he began to deny all that was said, and stoutly
affirmed, that the Physitian did lye. But the Physitian perceiving that
he was rayled at and his words denyed, did never cease to confirme his
sayings, and to disprove the varlet, till such time as the Officers
by the commandment of the Judges, bound his hands and brought out the
seale, wherewith he had sealed the purse which augmented suspition which
was conceived of him first. Howbeit, neither the feare of the wheele or
any other torment according to the use of the Grecians, which were ready
prepared, no, nor yet the fire could enforce him to confesse the matter,
so obstinate and grounded was he in his mischievous mind. But the
Physitian perceiving that the menaces of these torments did nothing
prevaile, gan say: I cannot suffer or abide that this young man who
is innocent, should against all law and conscience, be punished and
condemned to die, and the other which is culpable, should escape so
easily, and after mocke and flowte at your judgement: for I will give
you an evident proofe and argument of this present crime. You shall
understand, that when this caytiffe demanded of me a present and strong
poyson, considering that it was not my part to give occasion of any
others death, but rather to cure and save sicke persons by meane of
medicines: and on the other side, fearing least if I should deny his
request, I might minister a further cause of his mischiefe, either that
he would buy poyson of some other, or else returne and worke his wicked
intent, with a sword or some dangerous weapon, I gave him no poyson,
but a doling drinke of Mandragora, which is of such force, that it
will cause any man to sleepe as though he were dead. Neither is it any
marvaile if this most desperate man, who is certainly assured to be put
to death, ordained by an ancient custome, can suffer and abide these
facill and easie torments, but if it be so that the child hath received
the drinke as I tempered it with mine owne hands, he is yet alive and
doth but sleepe, and after his sleepe he shall returne to life againe,
but if he be dead indeed, then may you further enquire of the causes
of his death. The opinion of this ancient Physitian was found good, and
every man had a desire to goe to the Sepulchre where the child was layd;
there was none of the Justices, none of any reputation of the towne, nor
any of the common people, but went to see this strange sight. Amongst
them all the father of the child remooved with his owne hands the stone
of the Sepulchre, and found his Sonne rising up after his dead and
soporiferous sleepe, whom when he beheld, he imbraced him in his armes,
and presented him before the people, with great joy and consolation, and
as he was wrapped and bound in his grave, so he brought him before the
Judges, whereupon the wickednesse of the Servant, and, the treason
of the stepdame was plainely discovered, and the verity of the matter
revealed, whereby the woman was perpetually exiled, the Servant hanged
on a Gallowes, and the Physitian had the Crownes, which was prepared to
buy the poyson. Behold how the fortune of the old man was changed, who
thinking to be deprived of all his race and posterity, was in one moment
made the Father of two Children. But as for me, I was ruled and handled
by fortune, according to her pleasure.





THE FORTY-FIFTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius was sold to two brethren, whereof one was a Baker, and the
other a Cooke, and how finely and daintily he fared.

THE Souldier that payed never a peny for me, by the commandement of his
Captaine was sent unto Rome, to cary Letters to the great Prince, and
Generall of the Campe. Before he went, he sold me for eleven pence to
two of his Companions, being Servants to a man of worship, whereof one
was a Baker that baked sweet bread and delicates, the other a Cooke,
which dressed fine and excellent meats for his Master. These two lived
in common, and would drive me from place to place, to carry such things
as was necessary, insomuch that I was received by these two, as a third
Brother, and Companion, and I thought I was never better placed, then
with them: for when night came that Supper was done, and their businesse
ended, they would bring many good morsels into their Chamber for
themselves. One would bring Pigs, Chickens, fish, and other good meates,
the other fine bread, pasties, tarts, custards and other delicate
Junkets dipped in hony. And when they had shut their chamber doore, and
went to the bains: (O Lord) how I would fill my guts with these goodly
dishes: neither was I so much a foole, or so very an Asse, to leave
the dainty meats, and to grind my teeth upon hard hay. In this sort
I continued a great space, for I played the honest Asse, taking but a
little of one dish, and a little of another, wherby no man distrusted
me. In the end, I was more hardier and began to devoure the whole messes
of the sweet delicates, which caused the Baker and the Cooke to suspect,
howbeit they nothing mistrusted me, but searched about to apprehend the
theefe. At length they began to accuse one another of theft, and to set
the dishes and morsels of meat in order, one by another, because they
would learne what was taken away, whereby one of them was compelled to
say thus to his fellow: Is it reason to breake promise and faith in
this sort, by stealing away the best meat, and to sell it to augment
thy good, and yet neverthelesse to have thy part in the residue that
is left: if our partnership doe mislike thee, we will be partners and
brothers in other things, but in this we will breake of: for I perceive
that the great losse which I sustain, will at length be a cause of great
discord betweene us. Then answered the other, Verily I praise thy great
constancy and subtilnesse, in that (when thou hast secretly taken away
the meat) [thou] dost begin to complaine first, whereas I by long space
of time have suffered thee, because I would not seeme to accuse my
brother of theft, but I am right glad in that wee are fallen into
communication of the matter, least by our silence, like contention might
arise betweene us, as fortuned betweene Eteocles and his Brother. When
they had reasoned together in this sort, they swore both earnestly, that
neither of them stale or tooke away any jote of the meate, wherefore
they concluded to search out the Theefe by all kind of meanes. For they
could not imagin or thinke, the Asse who stood alone there, would eate
any such meates, neither could they thinke that Mice or Flyes, were so
ravenous, as to devouer whole dishes of meat, like the Birds Harpies
which carried away the meates of Phineus the King of Archadia. In the
Meane season while I was fed with dainty morsels, I gathered together my
flesh, my skin waxed soft, my haire began to shine, and was gallant on
every part, but such faire and comely shape of my body, was cause of
my dishonour, for the Baker and Cooke marvelled to see me so slick and
fine, considering I did eate no hay at all. Wherefore on a time at their
accustomed houre, they went to the baines, and locked their chamber
doore. It fortuned that ere they departed away, they espyed me through
a hole, how I fell roundly to my victuals: then they marvelled greatly,
and little esteemed the losse of their meate, laughed exceedingly,
calling the servants of the house, to shew them the greedy gorge and
appetite of the Asse. Their laughing was so immoderate that the master
of the house heard them, and demanded the cause of their laughter,
and when hee understood all the matter, hee looked through the hole
likewise, wherewith he took such a delectation that hee commanded the
doore to be opened, that hee might see mee at his pleasure. Then I
perceiving every man laugh, was nothing abashed, but rather more bold,
whereby I never rested eating, till such time as the master of the
house commanded me to be brought into his parler as a novelty, and there
caused all kinds of meates which were never touched to be set on the
table, which (although I had eaten sufficiently before, yet to win the
further favour of the master of the house) I did greedily devoure and
made a cleane riddance of all the delicate meates. And to prove my
nature wholly, they gave met such meates as every Asse doth abhorre:
for they put before mee beefe and vinegar, birds and pepper, fish and
verjuice: in the meane season they that beheld met at the table did
nothing but laugh. Then one of the servants of the house sayd to his
master, I pray you sir give him some drinke to his supper: Marry (quoth
hee) I thinke thou saist true, for it may be, that to his meate hee
would drinke likewise a cup of wine. Hoe boy, wash yonder pot, and fill
it with wine, which done, carry it to the Asse, and say that I have
drunke to him. Then all the standers by looked on, to see what would
come to passe: but I (as soone as I beheld the cup) staied not long, but
gathering my lips together, supped up all the wine at one draught. The
master being right joyfull hereat caused the Baker and Cooke which had
bought me, to come before him, to whom he delivered foure times as much
for me, as they paid, which done he committed me to one of his rich
Libertines, and charged him to looke well to me, and that I should lacke
nothing, who obeied his masters commandement in every point: and to the
end he would creepe further into his favour, he taught me a thousand
qualities. First he instructed me to sit at the table upon my taile, and
how I should leape and dance, holding up my former feete: moreover hee
taught me how I should answer when any body spake unto me, with nodding
my head, which was a strange and marvailous thing, and if I did lacke
drinke, I should looke still upon the pot. All which things I did
willingly bring to passe, and obeyed his doctrine: howbeit, I could have
done all these things without his teaching, but I feared greatly lest in
shewing my selfe cunning without a master, I should pretend some great
and strange wonder, and thereby be throwne out to wild beasts. But my
fame was spred about in every place, and the qualities which I could
doe, insomuch that my master was renowned throughout all the Country by
reason of mee. For every man would say: Behold the Gentleman that
hath an Asse, that will eate and drinke with him, that will dance, and
understand what is said to him, will shew his fantasie by signes. But
first I will tell you (which I should have done before) who my master
was, and of what country. His name was Thiasus, hee was borne at
Corinth, which is a principall towne of Achaia, and he had passed many
offices of honor, till hee had taken upon him the degree Quinquenuall,
according as his birth and dignity required, who to shew his
worthinesse, and to purchase the benevolence of every person, appointed
publike joyes and triumphs, to endure the space of three dayes, and to
bring his endeavour to passe, he came into Thessaly to buy excellent
Beasts, and valiant fighters for the purpose.




THE FORTY-SIXTH CHAPTER


How a certaine Matron fell in love with Apuleius, how hee had his
pleasure with her, and what other things happened.

When he had bought such things as was necessary, he would not returne
home into his Countrey in Chariots, or waggon, neither would he ride
upon Thessalian Horses, or Jenets of France, or Spanish Mules, which
be most excellent as can be found, but caused me to be garnished and
trimmed with trappers and barbs of Gold, with brave harnesse, with
purple coverings, with a bridle of silver, with pictured cloths, and
with shrilling bells, and in this manner he rode upon me lovingly,
speaking and intreating me with gentle words, but above all things
he did greatly rejoyce in that I was his Servant to beare him upon my
backe, and his Companion to feed with him at the Table: After long time
when we had travelled as well by Sea as Land, and fortuned to arrive
at Corinth, the people of the Towne came about us on every side, not so
much to doe honour to Thiasus, as to see me: For my fame was so greatly
spread there, that I gained my master much money, and when the people
was desirous to see me play prankes, they caused the Gates to be shut,
and such as entered in should pay money, by meanes whereof I was a
profitable companion to them every day: There fortuned to be amongst the
Assembly a noble and rich Matron that conceived much delight to behold
me, and could find no remedy to her passions and disordinate appetite,
but continually desired to have her pleasure with me, as Pasiphae had
with a Bull. In the end she promised a great reward to my keeper for the
custody of me one night, who for gaine of a little money accorded to her
desire, and when I had supped in a Parler with my Master, we departed
away and went into our Chamber, where we found the faire Matron, who had
tarried a great space for our comming: I am not able to recite unto you
how all things were prepared: there were foure Eunuches that lay on a
bed of downe on the ground with Boulsters accordingly for us to lye on,
the Coverlet was of cloth of Gold, and the pillowes soft and tender,
whereon the delicate Matron had accustomed to lay her head. Then the
Eunuches not minding to delay any longer the pleasure of their Mistresse
closed the doores of the Chamber and departed away: within the Chamber
were Lamps that gave a cleare light all the place over: Then she put off
all her Garments to her naked skinne, and taking the Lampe that
stood next to her, began to annoint all her body with balme, and mine
likewise, but especially my nose, which done, she kissed me, not as they
accustome to doe at the stews, or in brothel houses, or in the Curtain
Schools for gaine of money, but purely, sincerely, and with great
affection, casting out these and like loving words: Thou art he whom I
love, thou art he whom I onely desire, without thee I cannot live, and
other like preamble of talke as women can use well enough, when as they
mind to shew or declare their burning passions and great affection of
love: Then she tooke me by the halter and cast me downe upon the
bed, which was nothing strange unto me, considering that she was so
beautifull a Matron and I so wel bolded out with wine, and perfumed
with balme, whereby I was readily prepared for the purpose: But nothing
grieved me so much as to think, how I should with my huge and great legs
imbrace so faire a Matron, or how I should touch her fine, dainty, and
silken skinne, with my hard hoofes, or how it was possible to kisse her
soft, pretty and ruddy lips, with my monstrous mouth and stony teeth, or
how she, who was young and tender, could be able to receive me.

And I verily thought, if I should hurt the woman by any kind of meane, I
should be throwne to the wild Beasts: But in the meane season she kissed
me, and looked in my mouth with burning eyes, saying: I hold thee my
canny, I hold thee my noose, my sparrow, and therewithall she eftsoones
imbraced my body round about, and had her pleasure with me, whereby I
thought the mother of Miniatures did not ceaseless quench her inordinate
desire with a Bull. When night was passed, with much joy and small
sleepe, the Matron went before day to my keeper to bargain with him
another night, which he willingly granted, partly for gaine of money,
and partly to finde new pastime for my master. Who after he was informed
of all the history of my luxury, was right glad, and rewarded my keeper
well for his paine, minding to shew before the face of all the people,
what I could doe: but because they would not suffer the Matron to abide
such shame, by reason of her dignity, and because they could finde no
other that would endeavour so great a reproach, at length they obtained
for money a poore woman, which was condemned to be eaten of wilde
beasts, with whom I should openly have to doe: But first I will tell you
what tale I heard concerning this woman. This woman had a husband, whose
father minding to ride forth, commanded his wife which he left at home
great with child, that if she were delivered of a daughter, it should
incontinently be killed. When the time of her delivery came, it fortuned
that she had a daughter, whom she would not suffer to be slaine, by
reason of the naturall affection which she have unto her child, but
secretly committed her to one of her neighbours to nurse. And when her
husband returned home, shee declared unto him that shee was delivered of
a daughter, whom (as hee commanded), shee had caused to be put to death.
But when this child came to age, and ready to be married, the mother
knew not by what meanes shee should endow her daughter, but that her
husband should understand and perceive it. Wherefore shee discovered the
matter to her sonne, who was the husband of this woman, condemned to be
eaten of wild beasts: For shee greatly feared least hee should unawares
fancie or fall in love with his owne sister. The young man understanding
the whole matter (to please and gratify his mother) went immediately to
the young maiden, keeping the matter secret in his heart, for feare of
inconvenience, and (lamenting to see his sister forsaken both of mother
and father) incontinently after endowed her with part of his owne goods,
and would have married her to one of his especial and trusty friends:
But although hee brought this to passe very secretly and sagely, yet in
the end cruell fortune sowed great sedition in his house. For his wife
who was now condemned to beasts, waxed jealous of her husband and began
to suspect the young woman as a harlot and common queane, insomuch that
shee invented all manner of meanes to dispatch her out of the way. And
in the end shee invented this kind of mischiefe: She privily stale away
her husbands ring, and went into the country, whereas she commanded one
of her trusty servants to take the ring and carry it to the mayden. To
whom he should declare that her brother did pray her to come into the
country to him, and that she should come alone without any person.
And to the end shee should not delay but come with all speed he should
deliver her the ring, which should be a sufficient testimony of the
message. This mayden as soone as she had received the ring of her
brother, being very willing and desirous to obey his commandement: (For
she knew no otherwise but that he had sent for her) went in all hast as
the messenger willed her to doe. But when she was come to the snare and
engine which was prepared for her, the mischievous woman, like one that
were mad, and possessed with some ill spirit, when the poore maiden
called for helpe with a loud voyce to her brother, the wicked harlot
(weening that she had invented and feined the matter) tooke a burning
firebrand and thrust it into her secret place, whereby she died
miserably. The husband of this maiden but especially her brother,
advertised of her death, came to the place where she was slain, and
after great lamentation and weeping, they caused her to be buried
honourably. This yong man her brother taking in ill part the miserable
death of his sister, as it was convenient he should, conceived so great
dolour within his mind and was strucken with so pestilent fury of bitter
anguish, that he fell into the burning passions of a dangerous ague,
whereby he seemed in such necessity, that he needed to have some speedy
remedy to save his life. The woman that slew the Maiden having lost the
name of wife together with her faith, went to a traiterous Physician,
who had killed a great many persons in his dayes and promised him
fifty peeces of Gold, if he would give her a present poyson to kill her
husband out of hand, but in presence of her Husband, she feined that
it was necessary for him to receive a certaine kind of drink, which
the Maisters and Doctours of Physicke doe call a sacred Potion, to the
intent he might purge Choller and scoure the interiour parts of his
body. But the Physitian in stead of that drinke prepared a mortall and
deadly poyson, and when he had tempered it accordingly, he tooke the pot
in the presence of the family, and other neighbours and friends of the
sick yong man, and offered it to his patient. But the bold and hardy
woman, to the end she might accomplish her wicked intent, and also gaine
the money which she had promised the Physitian, staid the pot with her
hand, saying: I pray you master Physitian, minister not this drinke unto
my deare Husband, untill such time as you have drunke some part thereof
your selfe: For what know I, whether you have mingled any poyson in the
drinke or no, wherein I would have you not to be offended: For I know
that you are a man of wisedome and learning, but this I do to the intent
the conscience and love that I beare to the health and safeguard of my
husband, may be apparent. The Physitian being greatly troubled at the
wickednesse of this mischievous woman, as voyd of all counsell and
leysure to consider of the matter, and least he might give any cause
of suspition to the standers by, or shew any scruple of his guilty
conscience, by reason of long delay, tooke the pot in his hand, and
presently drunke a good draught thereof, which done, the young man
having no mistrust, drunke up the residue. The Physitian would have gone
immediately home to receive a counterpoyson, to expeth and drive out the
first poyson: But the wicked woman persevering in her mischiefe, would
not suffer him to depart a foot, untill such time as the poyson began to
worke in him, and then by much prayer and intercession she licensed him
to goe home: By the way the poyson invaded the intrailes and bowels of
the whole body of the Physitian, in such sort that with great paine he
came to his owne house, where he had scarce time to speake to his wife,
and to will her to receive the promised salitary of the death of two
persons, but he yeelded up the ghost: And the other young man lived not
long after, but likewise dyed, amongst the feined and deceitfull teares
of his cursed wife. A few dayes after, when the young man was buried and
the funerall ended, the Physitians wife demanded of her the fifty peeces
of gold which she promised her husband for the drinke, whereat the ill
disposed woman, with resemblance of honesty, answered her with gentle
words, and promised to give her the fifty peeces of gold, if she would
fetch her a little of that same drinke, to proceed and make an end of
all her enterprise. The Physitians wife partly to winne the further
favour of this rich woman, and partly to gaine the money, ranne
incontinently home, and brought her a whole roote of poyson, which
when she saw, having now occasion to execute her further malice, and
to finish the damnable plot, began to stretch out her bloody hands
to murther. She had a daughter by her husband (that was poysoned) who
according to order of law, was appointed heire of all the lands and
goods of her father: but this woman knowing that the mothers succoured
their children, and received all their goods after their death, purposed
to shew her selfe a like parent to her child, as she was a wife to
her husband, whereupon she prepared a dinner with her owne hands, and
empoysoned both the wife of the Physitian and her owne daughter: The
child being young and tender dyed incontinently by force of the drinke,
but the Physitians wife being stout and strong of complexion, feeling
the poison to trill down into her body, doubted the matter, and
thereupon knowing of certainty that she had received her bane,
ran forthwith to the judges house, that what with her cryes, and
exclamations, she raised up the people of the towne, and promising them
to shew divers wicked and mischievous acts, caused that the doores and
gates were opened. When she came in she declared from the beginning to
the end the abhomination of this woman: but shee had scarce ended her
tale, when opening her falling lips, and grinding her teeth together,
she fell downe dead before the face of the Judge, who incontinently to
try the truth of the matter, caused the cursed woman, and her servants
to be pulled out of the house, and enforced by paine of torment to
confesse the verity, which being knowne, this mischievous woman farre
lesse then she deserved, but because there could be no more cruell a
death invented for the quality of her offence, was condemned to be eaten
with wild beasts. Behold with this woman was I appointed to have to doe
before the face of the people, but I being wrapped in great anguish, and
envying the day of the triumph, when we two should so abandon our selves
together, devised rather to sley my selfe, then to pollute my body with
this mischievous harlot, and so for ever to remaine defamed: but it was
impossible for me so to doe, considering that I lacked hands, and was
not able to hold a knife in my hoofes: howbeit standing in a pretty
cabin, I rejoyced in my selfe to see that spring time was come, and that
all things flourished, and that I was in good hope to find some Roses,
to render me my humane shape. When the day of triumph came, I was led
with great pompe and benevolence to the appointed place, where when I
was brought, I first saw the preamble of that triumph, dedicated with
dancers and merry taunting jests, and in the meane season was placed
before the gate of the Theater, whereas on the one side I saw the greene
and fresh grasse growing before the entry thereof, whereon I greatly
desired to feed: on the other side I conceived a great delectation
to see when the Theater gates were opened, how all things was finely
prepared and set forth: For there I might see young children and
maidens in the flowre of their youth of excellent beauty, and attired
gorgiously, dancing and mooved in comely order, according to the order
of Grecia, for sometime they would dance in length, sometime round
together, sometime divide themselves into foure parts, and sometime
loose hands on every side: but when the trumpet gave warning that every
man should retire to his place, then began the triumph to appeare. First
there was a hill of wood, not much unlike that which the Poet Homer
called Idea, for it was garnished about with all sort of greene verdures
and lively trees, from the top whereof ran downe a cleare and fresh
fountaine, nourishing the waters below, about which wood were many young
and tender Goates, plucking and feeding daintily on the budding trees,
then came a young man a shepheard representing Paris, richly arrayed
with vestments of Barbary, having a mitre of gold upon his head, and
seeming as though he kept the goates. After him ensued another young man
all naked, saving that his left shoulder was covered with a rich cloake,
and his head shining with glistering haires, and hanging downe, through
which you might perceive two little wings, whereby you might conjecture
that he was Mercury, with his rod called Caduceus, he bare in his right
hand an Apple of gold, and with a seemely gate went towards him that
represented Paris, and after hee had delivered him the Apple, he made a
signe, signifying that Jupiter had commanded him so to doe: when he had
done his message he departed away. And by and by, there approached a
faire and comely mayden, not much unlike to Juno, for she had a Diademe
of gold upon her head, and in her hand she bare a regall scepter: then
followed another resembling Pallas, for she had on her head a shining
sallet, whereon was bound a garland of Olive branches, having in one
hand a target or shield: and in the other a speare as though she would
fight: then came another which passed the other in beauty, and presented
the Goddesse Venus, with the color of Ambrosia, when she was a maiden,
and to the end she would shew her perfect beauty, shee appeared all
naked, saving that her fine and dainty skin was covered with a thin
smocke, which the wind blew hither and thither to testifie the youth and
flowre of the age of the dame. Her colour was of two sorts, for her
body was white as descended from heaven, and her smocke was blewish,
as arrived from the sea: After every one of the Virgins which seemed
goddesses, followed certaine waiting servants, Castor and Pollus went
behind Juno, having on their heads helmets covered with starres. This
Virgin Juno sounded a Flute, which shee bare in her hand, and mooved her
selfe towards the shepheard Paris, shewing by honest signes and tokens,
and promising that hee should be Lord of all Asia, if hee would judge
her the fairest of the three, and to give her the apple of gold: the
other maiden which seemed by her armour to be Pallas, was accompanied
with two young men armed, and brandishing their naked swords in their
hands, whereof one named Terror, and the other Feare; behind them
approached one sounding his trumpet to provoke and stirre men to
battell; this maiden began to dance and shake her head, throwing her
fierce and terrible eyes upon Paris and promising that if it pleased him
to give her the victory of beauty, shee would make him the most strong
and victorious man alive. Then came Venus and presented her selfe in the
middle of the Theater, with much favour of all the people, for shee was
accompanied with a great many of youth, whereby you would have judged
them all to be Cupidoes, either to have flowne from heaven or else from
the river of the sea, for they had wings, arrowes, and the residue
of their habit according in each point, and they bare in their hands
torches lighted, as though it had beene a day of marriage. Then came in
a great multitude of faire maidens: on the one side were the most comely
Graces: on the other side, the most beautifull Houres carrying garlands
and loose flowers, and making great honor to the goddesse of pleasure;
the flutes and Pipes yeelded out the sweet sound of Lydians, whereby
they pleased the minds of the standers by exceedingly, but the more
pleasing Venus mooved forward more and more, and shaking her head
answered by her motion and gesture, to the sound of the instruments. For
sometimes she would winke gently, sometimes threaten and looke aspishly,
and sometimes dance onely with her eyes: As soone as she was come before
the Judge, she made a signe and token to give him the most fairest
spouse of all the world, if he would prefer her above the residue of the
goddesses. Then the young Phrygian shepheard Paris with a willing mind
delivered the golden Apple to Venus, which was the victory of beauty.

Why doe ye marvell, ye Orators, ye Lawyers, and Advocates, if many of
our judges now a daies sell their judgements for money, when as in the
beginning of the world one onely Grace corrupted the sentence betweene
God and men, and that one rusticall Judge and shepheard appointed by
the counsell of great Jupiter, sold his judgement for a little pleasure,
which was the cause afterward of the ruine of all his progeny? By like
manner of meane, was sentence given between the noble Greekes: For the
noble and valiant personage Palamedes was convicted and attainted of
treason, by false perswasion and accusation, and Ulisses being but of
base condition, was preferred in Martiall prowesse above great Ajax.
What judgement was there likewise amongst the Athenian lawyers, sage and
expert in all sciences? Was not Socrates who was preferred by Apollo,
above all the wise men in the world, by envy and malice of wicked
persons impoysoned with the herbe Cicuta, as one that corrupted the
youth of the countrey, whom alwaies be kept under by correction? For we
see now a dayes many excellent Philosophers greatly desire to follow his
sect, and by perpetual study to value and revolve his workes, but to
the end I may not be reproved of indignation by any one that might say:
What, shall we suffer an Asse to play the Philosopher? I will returne to
my further purpose.

After the judgement of Paris was ended, Juno and Pallas departed away
angerly, shewing by their gesture, that they would revenge themselves
on Paris, but Venus that was right pleased and glad in her heart, danced
about the Theater with much joy. This done from the top of the hill
through a privy spout, ran a floud of the colour of Saffron, which fell
upon the Goates, and changed their white haire into yellow, with a sweet
odour to all them of the Theater. By and by after by certaine engines,
the ground opened, and swallowed up the hill of wood: and then behold
there came a man of armes through the multitude, demanding by the
consent of the people, the woman who was condemned to the beasts, and
appointed for me to have to doe withall: our bed was finely and bravely
prepared, and covered with silke and other things necessary. But I,
beside the shame to commit this horrible fact, and to pollute my body
with this wicked harlot did greatly feare the danger of death: for I
thought in my selfe, that when she and I were together, the savage beast
appointed to devoure the woman, was not so instructed and taught, or
would so temper his greedinesse, as that hee would teare her in
peeces lying under mee, and spare mee with a regard of mine innocency.
Wherefore I was more carefull for the safeguard of my life, then for the
shame that I should abide, but in the meane season while my master made
ready the bed, all the residue did greatly delight to see the hunting
and pleasantnesse of the triumph, I began to thinke and devise for my
selfe. When I perceived that no man had regard to mee, that was so tame
and gentle an Asse, I stole out of the gate that was next me, and then I
ran away with all force, and came to Cenchris, which is the most famous
towne of all the Carthaginians, bordering upon the Seas called Ageum,
and Saronicum, where is a great and mighty Haven, frequented with many a
sundry Nation. There because I would avoyd the multitude of the people,
I went to a secret place of the Sea coast, where I laid me down upon the
sand, to ease and refresh my selfe, for the day was past and the Sunne
gone downe, and lying in this sort on the ground, did fall in a sound
sleepe.





THE ELEVENTH BOOKE




THE FORTY-SEVENTH CHAPTER


How Apuleius by Roses and prayer returned to his humane shape.

When midnight came that I had slept my first sleepe, I awaked with
suddaine feare, and saw the Moone shining bright, as when shee is at the
full, and seeming as though she leaped out of the Sea. Then thought I
with my selfe, that was the most secret time, when the goddesse Ceres
had most puissance and force, considering that all humane things be
governed by her providence: and not onely all beasts private and
tame, but also all wild and savage beasts be under her protection. And
considering that all bodies in the heavens, the earth and the seas,
be by her increasing motions increased, and by her diminishing motions
diminished: as weary of all my cruell fortune and calamity, I found good
hope and soveraigne remedy, though it were very late, to be delivered
from all my misery, by invocation and prayer, to the excellent beauty of
the Goddesse, whom I saw shining before mine eyes, wherefore shaking off
mine Assie and drowsie sleepe, I arose with a joyfull face, and mooved
by a great affection to purifie my selfe, I plunged my selfe seven times
into the water of the Sea, which number of seven is conveniable and
agreeable to holy and divine things, as the worthy and sage Philosopher
Pythagoras hath declared. Then with a weeping countenance, I made this
Orison to the puissant Goddesse, saying: O blessed Queene of heaven,
whether thou be the Dame Ceres which art the originall and motherly
nource of all fruitfull things in earth, who after the finding of thy
daughter Proserpina, through the great joy which thou diddest presently
conceive, madest barraine and unfruitfull ground to be plowed and sowne,
and now thou inhabitest in the land of Eleusie; or whether thou be
the celestiall Venus, who in the beginning of the world diddest couple
together all kind of things with an ingendered love, by an eternall
propagation of humane kind, art now worshipped within the Temples of the
Ile Paphos, thou which art the sister of the God Phoebus, who nourishest
so many people by the generation of beasts, and art now adored at the
sacred places of Ephesus, thou which art horrible Proserpina, by reason
of the deadly howlings which thou yeeldest, that hast power to stoppe
and put away the invasion of the hags and Ghoasts which appeare unto
men, and to keepe them downe in the closures of the earth: thou which
art worshipped in divers manners, and doest illuminate all the borders
of the earth by thy feminine shape, thou which nourishest all the fruits
of the world by thy vigor and force; with whatsoever name or fashion it
is lawfull to call upon thee, I pray thee, to end my great travaile and
misery, and deliver mee from the wretched fortune, which had so
long time pursued me. Grant peace and rest if it please thee to my
adversities, for I have endured too much labour and perill. Remoove from
me my shape of mine Asse, and render to me my pristine estate, and if
I have offended in any point of divine Majesty, let me rather dye then
live, for I am full weary of my life. When I had ended this orison, and
discovered my plaints to the Goddesse, I fortuned to fall asleepe, and
by and by appeared unto me a divine and venerable face, worshipped even
of the Gods themselves. Then by little and little I seemed to see the
whole figure of her body, mounting out of the sea and standing before
mee, wherefore I purpose to describe her divine semblance, if the
poverty of my humane speech will suffer me, or her divine power give me
eloquence thereto. First shee had a great abundance of haire, dispersed
and scattered about her neck, on the crowne of her head she bare many
garlands enterlaced with floures, in the middle of her forehead was a
compasse in fashion of a glasse, or resembling the light of the Moone,
in one of her hands she bare serpents, in the other, blades of corne,
her vestiment was of fine silke yeelding divers colours, sometime
yellow, sometime rosie, sometime flamy, and sometime (which troubled my
spirit sore) darke and obscure, covered with a blacke robe in manner
of a shield, and pleated in most subtill fashion at the skirts of her
garments, the welts appeared comely, whereas here and there the starres
glimpsed, and in the middle of them was placed the Moone, which shone
like a flame of fire, round about the robe was a coronet or garland
made with flowers and fruits. In her right hand shee had a timbrell of
brasse, which gave a pleasant sound, in her left hand shee bare a cup
of gold, out of the mouth whereof the serpent Aspis lifted up his head,
with a swelling throat, her odoriferous feete were covered with shoes
interlaced and wrought with victorious palme. Thus the divine shape
breathing out the pleasant spice of fertill Arabia, disdained not with
her divine voyce to utter these words unto me: Behold Lucius I am come,
thy weeping and prayers hath mooved mee to succour thee. I am she that
is the naturall mother of all things, mistresse and governesse of all
the Elements, the initiall progeny of worlds, chiefe of powers divine,
Queene of heaven! the principall of the Gods celestiall, the light of
the goddesses: at my will the planets of the ayre, the wholesome winds
of the Seas, and the silences of hell be diposed; my name, my divinity
is adored throughout all the world in divers manners, in variable
customes and in many names, for the Phrygians call me the mother of the
Gods: the Athenians, Minerva: the Cyprians, Venus: the Candians,
Diana: the Sicilians Proserpina: the Eleusians, Ceres: some Juno, other
Bellona, other Hecate: and principally the Aethiopians which dwell
in the Orient, and the Aegyptians which are excellent in all kind of
ancient doctrine, and by their proper ceremonies accustome to worship
mee, doe call mee Queene Isis. Behold I am come to take pitty of thy
fortune and tribulation, behold I am present to favour and ayd thee,
leave off thy weeping and lamentation, put away all thy sorrow, for
behold the healthfull day which is ordained by my providence, therefore
be ready to attend to my commandement. This day which shall come after
this night, is dedicated to my service, by an eternall religion, my
Priests and Ministers doe accustome after the tempests of the Sea,
be ceased, to offer in my name a new ship as a first fruit of my
Navigation. I command thee not to prophane or despise the sacrifice
in any wise, for the great Priest shall carry this day following in
procession by my exhortation, a Garland of Roses, next the timbrell of
his right hand: follow thou my procession amongst the people, and when
thou commest to the Priest make as though thou wouldest kisse his hand,
but snatch at the Roses, whereby I will put away the skin and shape of
an Asse, which kind of beast I have long time abhorred and despised, but
above all things beware thou doubt not nor feare any of those things, as
hard and difficill to bee brought to passe, for in the same houre that
I am come to thee, I have commanded the Priest by a vision what he shall
doe, and all the people by my commandement shall be compelled to give
thee place and say nothing! Moreover, thinke not that amongst so faire
and joyfull Ceremonies, and in so good a company that any person shall
abhorre thy ill-favoured and deformed figure, or that any man shall be
so hardy, as to blame and reprove thy suddaine restoration to humane
shape, wherby they should gather or conceive any sinister opinion: and
know thou this of certaine, that the residue of thy life untill the
houre of death shall be bound and subject to me! And think it not an
injury to be alwayes serviceable towards me, since as by my meane and
benefit thou shalt become a man: thou shalt live blessed in this world,
thou shalt live glorious by my guide and protection, and when thou
descendest to Hell, where thou shalt see me shine in that subterene
place, shining (as thou seest me now) in the darkness of Acheron, and
raigning in the deepe profundity of Stix, thou shalt worship me, as
one that hath bin favourable to thee, and if I perceive that thou art
obedient to my commandement, addict to my religion, and merite my divine
grace, know thou, that I will prolong thy dales above the time that the
fates have appointed, and the celestial Planets ordeined.

When the divine Image had spoken these words, she vanished away! By and
by when I awaked, I arose, haveing the members of my bodie mixed with
feare, joy and sweate, and marvailed at the cleare presence of the
puissant goddesse, and being sprinkled with the water of the sea, I
recounted orderly her admonitions and divine commandements. Soone after,
the darknes chased away, and the cleare and golden sunne arose, when as
behold I saw the streets replenished with people going in a religious
sort and in great triumph. All things seemed that day to be joyfull,
as well all manner of beasts and houses, as also the very day it selfe
seemed to rejoyce. For after the hore-frost, ensued the hot and temperat
sun, whereby the little birds weening that the spring time had bin come,
did chirp and sing in their steven melodiously: the mother of stars,
the parent of times, and mistres of all the world: The fruitfull trees
rejoyced at their fertility: The barren and sterill were contented at
their shadow, rendering sweete and pleasant shrills! The seas were quiet
from winds and tempests: the heaven had chaced away the clouds, and
appeared faire and cleare with his proper light. Behold then more and
more appeared the pomps and processions, attired in regall manner and
singing joyfully: One was girded about the middle like a man of armes:
Another bare and spare, and had a cloake and high-shooes like a hunter!
another was attired in a robe of silke, and socks of gold, having his
haire laid out, and dressed in forme of a woman! There was another ware
legge-harnesse, and bare a target, a sallet, and a speare like a martial
souldier: after him marched one attired in purple with vergers before
him like a magistrate! after him followed one with a maurell, a staffe,
a paire of pantofles, and with a gray beard, signifying a philosopher:
after him went one with line, betokening a fowler, another with hookes
declaring a fisher: I saw there a meeke and tame beare, which in matron
habite was carried on a stoole: An Ape with a bonet on his head, and
covered with lawne, resemling a shepheard, and bearing a cup of gold in
his hand: an Asse which had wings glewed to his backe, and went after
an old man, whereby you would judge the one to be Pegasus, and the
other Bellephoron. Amongst the pleasures and popular delectations, which
wandered hither and thither, you might see the pompe of the goddesse
triumphantly march forward: The woman attired in white vestiments, and
rejoicing, in that they bare garlands and flowers upon their heads,
bedspread the waies with hearbes, which they bare in their aprons, where
this regall and devout procession should passe: Other caried glasses
on their backes, to testifie obeisance to the goddess which came after.
Other bare combs of Ivory, and declared by their gesture and motions of
their armes, that they were ordained and readie to dresse the goddesse:
Others dropped in the wayes as they went Balme and other pretious
ointments: Then came a great number, as well of men as women, with
Candels, torches, and other lights, doing honour to the celestiall
goddesse: After that sounded the musical harmony of instruments: then
came a faire companie of youth, apparelled in white vestiments, singing
both meter and verse, with a comely grade which some studious Poet had
made in honour of the Muses: In the meane season, arrived the blowers
of trumpets, which were dedicated unto Serapes, and to the temple before
them were officers and beadles, preparing roome for the goddess to
passe. Then came the great company of men and women, which had taken
divine orders, whose garments glistered all the streets over. The women
had their haire annointed and their heads covered with linnen: but
the men had their crownes shaven, which were the terrene stars of the
goddesse, holding in their hand instruments of brasse, silver and gold,
which rendered a pleasant sound.

The principall Priests which were apparelled with white surplesses
hanging downe to the ground, bare the relikes of the puissant goddesse.
One carried in his hand a light, not unlike to those which we used in
our houses, saving that in the middle thereof appeared a bole which
rendred a more bright flame. The second attired hike the other bare
in his hand an Altar, which the goddesse her selfe named the succor of
nations. The third held a tree of palme with leaves of gold, and the
verge of Mercurie. The fourth shewed out a token of equitie by his left
hand, which was deformed in every place, signifiing thereby more equitie
then by the right hand. The same Priest carried a round vessell of gold,
in forme of a cap. The fifth bare a van, wrought with springs of gold,
and another carried a vessell for wine: By and by after the goddesse
followed a foot as men do, and specially Mercurie, the messenger of
the goddesse infernall and supernall, with his face sometime blacke,
sometime faire, lifting up the head of the dogges Annubis, and bearing
in his left hand, his verge, and in his right hand, the branches of a
palme tree, after whom followed a cow with an upright gate, representing
the figure of the great goddesse, and he that guided her, marched on
with much gravity. Another carried after the secrets of their religion,
closed in a coffer. There was one that bare on his stomacke a figure of
his god, not formed like any beast, bird, savage thing or humane shape,
but made by a new invention, whereby was signified that such a religion
should not be discovered or revealed to any person. There was a vessel
wrought with a round bottome, haveing on the one side, pictures figured
like unto the manner of the Egyptians, and on the other side was an
eare, whereupon stood the Serpent Aspis, holding out his scaly necke.
Finally, came he which was appointed to my good fortun according to the
promise of the goddesse. For the great Priest which bare the restoration
of my human shape, by the commandement of the goddes, Approached more
and more, bearing in his left hand the timbrill, and in the other a
garland of Roses to give me, to the end I might be delivered from cruel
fortune, which was alwaies mine enemie, after the sufferance of so much
calamitie and paine, and after the endurance of so manie perilles:
Then I not returning hastilie, by reason of sodaine joye, lest I should
disturbe the quiet procession with mine importunitie, but going softly
through the prease of the people, which gave me place on every side,
went after the Priest. The priest being admonished the night before, as
I might well perceive stood still and holding out his hand, thrust out
the garland of roses into my mouth, I (trembling) devoured with a great
affection: And as soone as I had eaten them, I was not deceived of the
promise made unto me. For my deforme and Assie face abated, and first
the rugged haire of my body fell off, my thick skin waxed soft and
tender, the hooves of my feet changed into toes, my hands returned
againe, my neck grew short, my head and mouth began round, my long eares
were made little, my great and stonie teeth waxed lesse like the teeth
of men, and my tayle which combred me most, appeared no where: then the
people began to marvaile, and the religious honoured the goddesse, for
so evident a miracle, they wondered at the visions which they saw in
the night, and the facilitie of my reformation, whereby they rendered
testimonie of so great a benefit which I received of the goddesse.
When I saw my selfe in such estate, I stood still a good space and said
nothing, for I could not tell what to say, nor what word I shoulde first
speake, nor what thanks I should render to the goddesse, but the
great Priest understanding all my fortune and miserie, by divine
advertisement, commanded that one should give me garments to cover me:
Howbeit as soone as I was transformed from an asse to my humane shape,
I hid the privitie of my body with my hands as shame and necessity
compelled mee. Then one of the company put off his upper robe and put
it on my backe: which done, the Priest looked upon me, with a sweete
and benigne voice, gan say in this sort: O my friend Lucius, after the
endurance of so many labours, and the escape of so many tempests of
fortune, thou art at length come to the port and haven of rest and
mercy: neither did thy noble linage, thy dignity, thy doctrine, or any
thing prevaile, but that thou hast endured so many servil pleasures,
by a little folly of thy youthfullnes, whereby thou hast had a sinister
reward for thy unprosperous curiositie, but howsoever the blindnes of
fortune tormented thee in divers dangers: so it is, that now unwares to
her, thou art come to this present felicitie: let fortune go, and fume
with fury in another place, let her finde some other matter to execute
her cruelty, for fortune hath no puissance against them which serve and
honour our goddesse. For what availed the theeves: the beasts savage:
thy great servitude: the ill and dangerous waits: the long passages: the
feare of death every day? Know thou, that now thou art safe, and under
the protection of her, who by her cleare light doth lighten the other
gods: wherefore rejoyce and take a convenable countenance to thy white
habit, follow the pomp of this devout and honorable procession, to the
end that such which be not devout to the Goddes, may see and acknowledge
their errour. Behold Lucius, thou art delivered from so great miseries,
by the providence of the goddesse Isis, rejoyce therefore and triumph of
the victory of fortune; to the end thou maist live more safe and sure,
make thy selfe one of this holy order, dedicate thy minde to the Obsequy
of our Religion, and take upon thee a a voluntary yoake of ministrie:
And when thou beginnest to serve and honour the goddes, then thou
shalt feele the fruit of thy liberty: After that the great Priest had
prophesied in this manner, with often breathings, he made a conclusion
of his words: Then I went amongst the company of die rest and followed
the procession: everie one of the people knew me, and pointing at
me with their fingers, said in this sort: Behold him who is this day
transformed into a man by the puissance of the soveraigne goddesse,
verily he is blessed and most blessed that hath merited so great grace
from heaven, as by the innocencie of his former life, and as it were by
a new regeneration is reserved to the obsequie of the goddesse. In the
meane season by little and little we approached nigh unto the sea cost,
even to that place where I lay the night before being an Asse. There
after the images and reliques were orderly disposed, the great Priest
compassed about with divers pictures according to the fashion of the
Aegyptians, did dedicate and consecrate with certaine prayers a fair
ship made very cunningly, and purified the same with a torch, an egge,
and sulphur; the saile was of white linnen cloath, whereon was written
certaine letters, which testified the navigation to be prosperous,
the mast was of a great length, made of a Pine tree, round and very
excellent with a shining top, the cabin was covered over with coverings
of gold, and all the shippe was made of Citron tree very faire; then all
the people as well religious as prophane tooke a great number of Vannes,
replenished with odours and pleasant smells and threw them into the sea
mingled with milke, untill the ship was filled up with large gifts and
prosperous devotions, when as with a pleasant wind it launched out into
the deep. But when they had lost the sight of the ship, every man caried
againe that he brought, and went toward the temple in like pompe and
order as they came to the sea side. When we were come to the temple, the
great priest and those which were deputed to carrie the divine figures,
but especially those which had long time bin worshippers of the
religion, went into the secret chamber of the goddesse, where they put
and placed the images according to their ordor. This done, one of the
company which was a scribe or interpreter of letters, who in forme of a
preacher stood up in a chaire before the place of the holy college, and
began to reade out of a booke, and to interpret to the great prince, the
senate, and to all the noble order of chivalry, and generally to all
the Romane people, and to all such as be under the jurisdiction of Rome,
these words following (Laois Aphesus) which signified the end of their
divin service and that it was lawfull for every man to depart, whereat
all the people gave a great showt, and replenished with much joy, bare
all kind of hearbs and garlands of flowers home to their houses, kissing
and imbracing the steps where the goddesse passed: howbeit I could not
doe as the rest, for my mind would not suffer me to depart one foot
away, so attentiv was I to behold the beauty of the goddesse, with
remembrance of the great miserie I had endured.




THE FORTY-EIGHTH CHAPTER


How the parents and friends of Apuleius heard news that he was alive and
in health.


In the mean season newes was carried into my countrey (as swift as the
flight of birds, or as the blast of windes) of the grace and benefit
which I received of the goddesse, and of my fortune worthy to be had in
memory. Then my parents friends and servants of our house understanding
that I was not dead, as they were falsely informed, came towards me with
great diligence to see me, as a man raised from death to life: and
I which never thought to see them againe, was as joyfull as they,
accepting and taking in good part their honest gifts and oblations that
they gave, to the intent I might buy such things as was necessarie for
my body: for after I had made relation unto them of all my pristine
miserie, and present joyes, I went before the face of the goddesse and
hired me a house within the cloister of the temple to the end I might
continually be ready to the service of the goddesse, and ordinarily
frequent the company of the priests, whereby I would wholy become devout
to the goddesse, and an inseparable worshipper of her divine name:
It fortuned that the goddesse appeared to me oftetimes in the night
perswading and commanding me to take the order of her religion, but I,
though I was indued with a desirous good will, yet the feare of the
same withheld me considering her obeysance was hard and difficile, the
chastitie of the Priests intolerable, and the life fraile and subject to
manie inconveniences. Being thus in doubt, I refrained my selfe from all
those things as seemed impossible.

On a night the great priest appeared unto me, presenting his lap full
of treasure, and when I demanded what it signified, he answered, that
it was sent me from the countrey of Thessaly, and that a servant of
mine named Candidus was arived likewise: when I was awake, I mused in
my selfe what this vision should pretend, considering I had never any
servant called by that name: but what soever it did signifie, this I
verely thought, that it was a foreshew of gaine and prosperous chance:
while I was thus astonied I went to the temple, and taried there till
the opening of the gates, then I went in and began to pray before the
face of the goddesse, the Priest prepared and set the divine things of
every Altar, and pulled out the fountaine and holy vessell with solempne
supplication. Then they began to sing the mattens of the morning,
testifying thereby the houre of the prime. By and by behold arived my
servant which I had left in the country, when Fotis by errour made me
an Asse, bringing with him my horse, recovered by her through certaine
signes and tokens which I had upon my backe. Then I perceived the
interpretation of my dreame, by reason that beside the promise of gaine,
my white horse was restored to me, which was signified by the argument
of my servant Candidus.

This done I retired to the service of the goddesse in hope of greater
benefits, considering I had received a signe and token, whereby my
courage increased every day more and more to take upon me the orders and
sacraments of the temple: insomuch that I oftentimes communed with the
Priest, desiring him greatly to give me the degree of the religion,
but he which was a man of gravitie, and well renowned in the order of
priesthood, deferred my affection from day to day, with comfort and
better hope, as parents commonly bridle the desires of their children,
when they attempt or indeavour any unprofitable thing, saying, that the
day when any one should be admitted into their order is appointed by the
goddesse, the Priest which should minister the sacrifice is chosen by
her providence, and the necessary charges of the ceremonies is alotted
by her commandement, all which things he willed me to attend with
marvailous patience, and that I should beware either of too much
hastinesse, or too great slacknesse, considering that there was like
danger, if being called I should delay: or not called I should be hasty:
moreover he said that there was none of his company either of so
desperate a mind, or so rash and hardy, as to enterprise any thing
without the commandernent of the goddesse, whereby he should commit a
deadly offence, considering that it was in her power to damne and save
all persons, and if any were at the point of death, and in the way
to damnation, so that he were capable to receive the secrets of the
goddesse, it was in her power by divine providence to reduce him to the
path of health, as by a certaine kind of regeneration: Finally he said
that I must attend the celestiall precept, although it was evident and
plaine, that the goddesse had already vouchsafed to call and appoint me
to her ministery, and to will me refraine from prophane and unlawfull
meates, as those Priests which were already received, to the end I might
come more apt and cleane to the knowledge of the secrets of religion.
Then was I obedient unto these words, and attentive with meek
quietnesse, and probable taciturnity, I daily served at the temple: in
the end the wholesome gentlenesse of the goddesse did nothing deceive
me, for in the night she appeared to me in a vision, shewing that the
day was come which I had wished for so long, she told me what provision
and charges I should be at, and how that she had appointed her
principallest Priest Mythra to be minister with me in my sacrifices.

When I heard these divine commandements, I greatly rejoyced: and arose
before day to speake with the great Priest, whom I fortuned to espie
comming out of his chamber: Then I saluted him, and thought with my
selfe to aske and demand his counsell with a bold courage, but as soone
as he perceived me, he began first to say: O Lucius now know I well
that thou art most happy and blessed, whom the divine goddesse doth so
greatly accept with mercy, why dost thou delay? Behold the day which
thou desiredst when as thou shalt receive at my hands the order of
religion, and know the most pure secrets of the gods, whereupon the old
man tooke me by the hand, and lead me to the gate of the great temple,
where at the first entrie he made a solempne celebration, and after
morning sacrifice ended, brought out of the secret place of the temple
books, partly written with unknown characters, and partly painted
with figures of beasts declaring briefly every sentence, with tops
and tailes, turning in fashion of a wheele, which were strange and
impossible to be read of the prophane people: There he interpreted to me
such things as were necessary to the use and preparation of mine order.
This done, I gave charge to certaine of my companions to buy liberally,
whatsoever was needfull and convenient, then he brought me to the next
bains accompanied with all the religious sort, and demanding pardon
of the goddesse, washed me and purified my body, according to custome.
After this, when noone approached, he brought me backe againe to the
temple, presented me before the face of the goddesse, giving a charge of
certaine secret things unlawfull to be uttered, and commanding me, and
generally all the rest, to fast by the space of ten continuall daies,
without eating of any beast, or drinking any wine, which thing I
observed with a marvellous continencie. Then behold the day approached,
when as the sacrifice should be done, and when night came there arrived
on every coast, a great multitude of Priests, who according to their
order offered me many presents and gifts: then was all the Laity and
prophane people commanded to depart, and when they had put on my back a
linnen robe, they brought me to the most secret and sacred place of all
the temple. You would peradventure demand (you studious reader) what was
said and done there, verely I would tell you if it were lawfull for me
to tell, you should know if it were convenient for you to heare,
but both thy eares, and my tongue shall incur the like paine of rash
curiositie: Howbeit, I will content thy mind for this present time,
which peradventure is somewhat religious and given to some devotion,
listen therefore and beleeve it to be true: Thou shalt understand that
I approached neere unto Hell, even to the gates of Proserpina, and after
that, I was ravished throughout all the Element, I returned to my proper
place: About midnight I saw the Sun shine, I saw likewise the gods
celestiall and gods infernall, before whom I presented my selfe, and
worshipped them: Behold now have I told thee, which although thou hast
heard, yet it is necessarie thou conceale it; this have I declared
without offence, for the understanding of the prophane.

When morning came, and that the solemnities were finished, I came forth
sanctified with xii. Stoles and in a religious habit, whereof I am not
forbidden to speake, considering that many persons saw me at that time:
there I was commanded to stand upon a seate of wood, which stood in the
middle of the temple, before the figure and remembrance of the goddesse;
my vestiment was of fine linnen, covered and embroidered with flowers.
I had a pretious Cope upon my shoulders hanging downe to the ground,
whereon were beasts wrought of divers colours as Indian dragons, and
Hiperborian Griphons, whom in forme of birds, the other world doth
ingender; the Priests commonly call such a habit, a celestiall Stole: in
my right hand I carried a light torch, and a garland of flowers upon my
head, with Palme leaves sprouting out on every side: I was adorned like
unto the Sun, and made in fashion of an Image, in such sort that all the
people compassed about to behold me: then they began to solemnize the
feast of the nativitie, and the new procession with sumptuous bankets
and delicate meates: the third day was likewise celebrated with like
ceremonies with a religious dinner, and with all the consummation of the
order: when I had continued there a good space, I conceived a marvailous
great pleasure and consolation in beholding ordinarily the Image of the
goddesse, who at length admonished me to depart homeward, not without
rendring of thanks, which although it were not sufficient, yet they were
according to my power. Howbeit I could unneth be perswaded to depart,
before I had fallen prostrate before the face of the goddesse, and wiped
her steps with my face, whereby I began so greatly to weepe and sigh
that my words were interrupted, and as devouring my prayer, I began to
say in this sort: O holy and blessed dame, the perpetuall comfort of
humane kind, who by thy bounty and grace nourishest all the world, and
hearest a great affection to the adversities of the miserable, as a
loving mother thou takest no rest, neither art thou idle at any time in
giving thy benefits, and succoring all men, as well on land as sea; thou
art she that puttest away all stormes and dangers from mans life by thy
right hand, whereby likewise thou restrainest the fatall dispositions,
appeasest the great tempests of fortune and keepest backe the course of
the stars: the gods supernall doe honour thee: the gods infernall have
thee in reverence: thou environest all the world, thou givest light to
the Sunne, thou governest the world, thou treadest downe the power of
hell: By thy meane the times returne, the Planets rejoyce, the Elements
serve: at thy commandment the winds do blow, the clouds increase, the
seeds prosper, and the fruits prevaile, the birds of the aire, the
beasts of the hill, the serpents of the den, and the fishes of the
sea, do tremble at thy majesty, but my spirit is not able to give thee
sufficient praise, my patrimonie is unable to satisfie thy sacrifice, my
voice hath no power to utter that which I thinke, no if I had a thousand
mouths and so many tongues: Howbeit as a good religious person, and
according to my estate, I will alwaies keepe thee in remembrance and
close thee within my breast. When I had ended mine orison, I went to
embrace the great Priest Mythra my spirituall father, and to demand his
pardon, considering I was unable to recompence the good which he had
done to me: after great greeting and thanks I departed from him to visit
my parents and friends; and within a while after by the exhortation of
the goddesse. I made up my packet, and tooke shipping toward the Citie
of Rome, where with a prosperous winde I arrived about the xii. day of
December. And the greatest desire that I had there, was daily to make
my praiers to the soveraigne goddesse Isis, who by reason of the place
where her temple was builded, was called Campensis, and continually
adored of the people of Rome. Her minister and worshipper was I, howbeit
I was a stranger to her Church, and unknowne to her religion there.

When the yeare was ended, and the goddesse warned me againe to receive
this new order and consecration, I marvailed greatly what it should
signifie, and what should happen, considering that I was a sacred.
person already, but it fortuned that while I partly reasoned with my
selfe, and partly examining the thing with the Priests and Bishops,
there came a new and marvailous thought in my mind, that is to say, I
was onely religious to the goddesse Isis, but not sacred to the religion
of great Osiris the soveraigne father of all the goddesses, between
whom, although there was a religious unitie and concord, yet there was
a great difference of order and ceremony. And because it was necessary
that I should likewise be a minister unto Osiris, there was no long
delay: for in the night after, appeared unto me one of that order,
covered with linnen robes, holding in his hands speares wrapped in Ivie,
and other things not convenient to declare, which then he left in my
chamber, and sitting in my seate, recited to me such things as were
necessary for the sumptuous banket of mine entrie. And to the end I
might know him againe, he shewed me how the ankle of his left foote was
somewhat maimed, which caused him a little to halt.

After that I manifestly knew the will of the God Osiris, when mattins
was ended, I went from one to another, to find him out which had the
halting marke on his foote, according as I learned by my vision; at
length I found it true: for I perceived one of the company of the
Priests who had not onely the token of his foote, but the stature and
habite of his body, resembling in every point as he appeared in the
night: he was called Asinius Marcellus, a name not much disagreeing from
my transformation. By and by I went to him, which knew well enough all
the matter, as being monished by like precept in the night: for the
night before as he dressed the flowers and garlands about the head of
the god Osiris, he understood by the mouth of the image which told the
predestinations of all men, how he had sent a poore man of Madura, to
whom he should minister his sacraments, to the end hee should receive
a reward by divine providence, and the other glory, for his vertuous
studies. When I saw my selfe this deputed unto religion, my desire was
stopped by reason of povertie, for I had spent a great part of my goods
in travell and peregrination, but most of all in the Citie of Rome,
whereby my low estate withdrew me a great while.

In the end being oft times stirred forward, not without great trouble
of mind, I was constrained to sell my robe for a little money: howbeit
sufficient for all my affaires. Then the Priest spake unto me saying,
How is it that for a little pleasure thou art not afraid to sell thy
vestiments, and entring into so great ceremonies, fearest to fall into
povertie? Prepare thy selfe, and abstaine from all animall meats, as
beasts and fish. In the meane season I frequented the sacrifices of
Serapis, which were done in the night, which thing gave me great comfort
to my peregrination, and ministred unto me more plentifull living,
considering I gained some money in haunting the court, by reason of my
Latin tongue.

Immediately after I was eftsoones called and admonished by the god
Osiris, to receive a third order of religion. Then I was greatly
astonied, because I could not tell what this new vision signified, or
what the intent of the celestiall god was, doubting least the former
Priests had given me ill counsell, and fearing that they had not
faithfully instructed me: being in this manner as it were incensed the
god Osiris appeared to me the night following, and giving me admonition
said, There is no occasion why thou shouldest be afraid with so often
order of religion, as though there were somewhat omitted, but that thou
shouldest rather rejoyce, since as it hath pleased the gods to call thee
three times, when as there was never yet any person that atchieved to
the order but once: wherefore thou maist thinke thy selfe happy for
so great benefits. And know thou that the religion which thou must
now receive, is right necessary, if thou meane to persever in the
worshipping of the goddesse, and to make solempnity on the festivall
day with the blessed habite, which thing shalt be a glory and renowne to
thee.

After this sort, the divine majesty perswaded me in my sleepe, whereupon
by and by I went towards the Priest, and declared all that which I had
seene, then I fasted ten dayes according to the custome, and of mine
owne proper will I abstained longer then I was commanded: and verely I
did nothing repent of the paine which I had taken, and of the charges
which I was at, considering that the divine providence had given me such
an order, that I gained much money in pleading of causes: Finally after
a few dayes, the great god Osiris appeared to me in the night, not
disguised in any other forme, but in his owne essence, commanding me
that I should be an Advocate in the court, and not feare the slander and
envie of ill persons, which beare me stomacke and grudge by reason of my
doctrine, which I had gotten by much labour: moreover, he would not that
I should be any longer of the number of his Priests, but he allotted me
to be one of the Decurions and Senatours: and after he appointed me
a place within the ancient pallace, which was erected in the time of
Silla, where I executed my office in great joy with a shaven Crowne.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Golden Asse, by Lucius Apuleius

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOLDEN ASSE ***

***** This file should be named 1666.txt or 1666.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/6/6/1666/

Produced by Donal O'Danachair and David Widger

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
