Project Gutenberg's The Adventures of Paddy Beaver, by Thornton W. Burgess

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Adventures of Paddy Beaver

Author: Thornton W. Burgess

Illustrator: Harrison  Cody

Release Date: August 21, 2006 [EBook #19092]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF PADDY BEAVER ***




Produced by Sigal Alon, Jacqueline Jeremy, La Monte H.P.
Yarroll, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net









[Illustration: Paddy pretended to be terribly frightened. _Page 80_.]


THE
ADVENTURES OF

Paddy
BEAVER

THORNTON W. BURGESS



LITTLE, BROWN AND COMPANY
BOSTON            TORONTO


Copyright 1917 by Thornton W. Burgess

_Illustrations by Harrison Cody_

       *       *       *       *       *




CONTENTS

CHAPTER

     I  PADDY THE BEAVER BEGINS WORK

    II  PADDY PLANS A POND

   III  PADDY HAS MANY VISITORS

    IV  SAMMY JAY SPEAKS HIS MIND

     V  PADDY KEEPS HIS PROMISE

    VI  FARMER BROWN'S BOY GROWS
        CURIOUS

   VII  FARMER BROWN'S BOY GETS ANOTHER
        SURPRISE

  VIII  PETER RABBIT GETS A DUCKING

    IX  PADDY PLANS A HOUSE

     X  PADDY STARTS HIS HOUSE

    XI  PETER RABBIT AND JERRY MUSKRAT
        ARE PUZZLED

   XII  JERRY MUSKRAT LEARNS SOMETHING

  XIII  THE QUEER STOREHOUSE

   XIV  A FOOTPRINT IN THE MUD

    XV  SAMMY JAY MAKES PADDY A CALL

   XVI  OLD MAN COYOTE IS VERY CRAFTY

  XVII  OLD MAN COYOTE IS DISAPPOINTED

 XVIII  OLD MAN COYOTE TRIES ANOTHER
        PLAN

   XIX  PADDY AND SAMMY JAY BECOME
        FRIENDS

    XX  SAMMY JAY OFFERS TO HELP PADDY

   XXI  PADDY AND SAMMY JAY WORK TOGETHER

  XXII  PADDY FINISHES HIS HARVEST

       *       *       *       *       *




THE ADVENTURES OF PADDY THE BEAVER

I

PADDY THE BEAVER BEGINS WORK

  Work, work all the night
  While the stars are shining bright;
  Work, work all the day;
  I have got no time to play.


This little rhyme Paddy the Beaver made up as he toiled at building the
dam which was to make the pond he so much desired deep in the Green
Forest. Of course it wasn't quite true, that about working all night and
all day. Nobody could do that, you know, and keep it up. Everybody has
to rest and sleep. Yes, and everybody has to play a little to be at
their best. So it wasn't quite true that Paddy worked all day after
working all night. But it was true that Paddy had no time to play. He
had too much to do. He had had his playtime during the long summer, and
now he had to get ready for the long cold winter.

Now of all the little workers in the Green Forest, on the Green Meadows,
and in the Smiling Pool, none can compare with Paddy the Beaver, not
even his cousin, Jerry Muskrat. Happy Jack Squirrel and Striped Chipmunk
store up food for the long cold months when rough Brother North Wind and
Jack Frost rule, and Jerry Muskrat builds a fine house wherein to keep
warm and comfortable, but all this is as nothing to the work of Paddy
the Beaver.

As I said before, Paddy had had a long playtime through the summer. He
had wandered up and down the Laughing Brook. He had followed it way up
to the place where it started. And all the time he had been studying and
studying to make sure that he wanted to stay in the Green Forest. In the
first place, he had to be sure that there was plenty of the kind of food
that he likes. Then he had to be equally sure that he could make a pond
near where this particular food grew. Last of all, he had to satisfy
himself that if he did make a pond and build a home, he would be
reasonably safe in it. And all these things he had done in his playtime.
Now he was ready to go to work, and when Paddy begins work, he sticks to
it until it is finished. He says that is the only way to succeed, and
you know and I know that he is right.

Now Paddy the Beaver can see at night just as Reddy Fox and Peter
Rabbit and Bobby Coon can, and he likes the night best, because he feels
safest then. But he can see in the daytime too, and when he feels that
he is perfectly safe and no one is watching, he works then too. Of
course the first thing to do was to build a dam across the Laughing
Brook to make the pond he so much needed. He chose a low open place deep
in the Green Forest, around the edge of which grew many young
aspen-trees, the bark of which is his favorite food. Through the middle
of this open place flowed the Laughing Brook. At the lower edge was just
the place for a dam. It would not have to be very long, and when it was
finished and the water was stopped in the Laughing Brook, it would just
have to flow over the low open place and make a pond there. Paddy's eyes
twinkled when he first saw it. It was right then that he made up his
mind to stay in the Green Forest.

So now that he was ready to begin his dam he went up the Laughing
Brook to a place where alders and willows grew, and there he began
work; that work was the cutting of a great number of trees by means
of his big front teeth which were given him for just this purpose.
And as he worked, Paddy was happy, for one can never be truly happy
who does no work.




II

PADDY PLANS A POND


Paddy the Beaver was busy cutting down trees for the dam he had planned
to build. Up in the woods of the North from which he had come to the
Green Forest he had learned all about tree-cutting and dam-building and
canal-digging and house-building. Paddy's father and mother had been
very wise in the ways of the Beaver world, and Paddy had been quick to
learn. So now he knew just what to do and the best way of doing it. You
know a great many people waste time and labor doing things the wrong
way, so that they have to be done over again. They forget to be sure
they are right, and so they go ahead until they find they are wrong,
and all their work goes for nothing.

But Paddy the Beaver isn't this kind. Paddy would never have leaped
into the spring with the steep sides without looking, as Grandfather
Frog did. So now he carefully picked out the trees to cut. He could
not afford to waste time cutting down a tree that wasn't going to be
just what he wanted when it was down. When he was sure that the tree
was right, he looked up at the top to find out whether, when he had
cut it, it would fall clear of other trees. He had learned to do that
when he was quite young and heedless. He remembered just how he had
felt when after working hard, oh, so hard, to cut a big tree, he had
warned all his friends to get out of the way so that they would not be
hurt when it fell, and then it hadn't fallen at all because the top had
caught in another tree. He was so mortified that he didn't get over it
for a long time.

So now he made sure that a tree was going to fall clear and just where
he wanted it. Then he sat up on his hind legs, and with his great broad
tail for a brace, began to make the chips fly. You know Paddy has the
most wonderful teeth for cutting. They are long and broad and sharp.
He would begin by making a deep bite, and then another just a little
way below. Then he would pry out the little piece of wood between.
When he had cut very deep on one side so that the tree would fall that
way, he would work around to the other side. Just as soon as the tree
began to lean and he was sure that it was going to fall, he would
scamper away so as to be out of danger. He loved to see those tall
trees lean forward slowly, then faster and faster, till they struck
the ground with a crash.

Just as soon as they were down, he would trim off the branches until
the trees were just long poles. This was easy work, for he could take
off a good-sized branch with one bite. On many he left their bushy
tops. When he had trimmed them to suit him and had cut them into the
right lengths, he would tug and pull them down to the place where he
meant to build his dam.

There he placed the poles side by side, not across the Laughing Brook
like a bridge, but with the big ends pointing up the Laughing Brook,
which was quite broad but shallow right there. To keep them from
floating away, he rolled stones and piled mud on the bushy ends. Clear
across on both sides he laid those poles until the land began to rise.
Then he dragged more poles and piled on top of these and wedged short
sticks crosswise between them.

And all the time the Laughing Brook was having harder and harder work
to run. Its merry laugh grew less merry and finally almost stopped,
because, you see, the water could not get through between all those
poles and sticks fast enough. It was just about that time that the
little people of the Smiling Pool decided that it was time to see just
what Paddy was doing, and they started up the Laughing Brook, leaving
only Grandfather Frog and the tadpoles in the Smiling Pool, which for a
little while would smile no more.




III

PADDY HAS MANY VISITORS


Paddy the Beaver knew perfectly well that he would have visitors just
as soon as he began to build his dam. He expected a lot of them. You
see, he knew that none of them ever had seen a Beaver at work unless
perhaps it was Prickly Porky the Porcupine, who also had come down
from the North. So as he worked he kept his ears open, and he smiled
to himself as he heard a little rustle here and then a little rustle
there. He knew just what those little rustles meant. Each one meant
another visitor. Yes, Sir, each rustle meant another visitor, and yet
not one had shown himself.

Paddy chuckled. "Seems to me that you are dreadfully afraid to show
yourselves," said he in a loud voice, just as if he were talking to
nobody in particular. Everything was still. There wasn't so much as a
rustle after Paddy spoke. He chuckled again. He could just _feel_ ever
so many eyes watching him, though he didn't see a single pair. And he
knew that the reason his visitors were hiding so carefully was because
they were afraid of him. You see, Paddy was much bigger than most of the
little meadow and forest people, and they didn't know what kind of a
temper he might have. It is always safest to be very distrustful of
strangers. That is one of the very first things taught all little meadow
and forest children.

Of course, Paddy knew all about this. He had been brought up that way.
"Be sure, and then you'll never be sorry" had been one of his mother's
favorite sayings, and he had always remembered it. Indeed, it had saved
him a great deal of trouble. So now he was perfectly willing to go right
on working and let his hidden visitors watch him until they were sure
that he meant them no harm. You see, he himself felt quite sure that
none of them was big enough to do him any harm. Little Joe Otter was
the only one he had any doubts about, and he felt quite sure that Little
Joe wouldn't try to pick a quarrel. So he kept right on cutting trees,
trimming off the branches, and hauling the trunks down to the dam he
was building. Some of them he floated down the Laughing Brook. This
was easier.

Now when the little people of the Smiling Pool, who were the first to
find out that Paddy the Beaver had come to the Green Forest, had started
up the Laughing Brook to see what he was doing, they had told the Merry
Little Breezes where they were going. The Merry Little Breezes had been
greatly excited. They couldn't understand how a stranger could have been
living in the Green Forest without their knowledge. You see, they quite
forgot that they very seldom wandered to the deepest part of the Green
Forest. Of course they started at once as fast as they could go to tell
all the other little people who live on or around the Green Meadows, all
but Old Man Coyote. For some reason they thought it best not to tell
him. They were a little doubtful about Old Man Coyote. He was so big and
strong and so sly and smart that all his neighbors were afraid of him.
Perhaps the Merry Little Breezes had this fact in mind, and knew that
none would dare go to call on the stranger if they knew that Old Man
Coyote was going too. Anyway, they simply passed the time of day with
Old Man Coyote and hurried on to tell every one else, and the very last
one they met was Sammy Jay.

Sammy was terribly put out to think that anything should be going on
that he didn't know about first. You know he is very fond of prying into
the affairs of other people, and he loves dearly to boast that there is
nothing going on in the Green Forest or on the Green Meadows that he
doesn't know about. So now his pride was hurt, and he was in a terrible
rage as he started after the Merry Little Breezes for the place deep in
the Green Forest where they said Paddy the Beaver was at work. He didn't
believe a word of it, but he would see for himself.




IV

SAMMY JAY SPEAKS HIS MIND


When Sammy Jay reached the place deep in the Green Forest where Paddy
the Beaver was so hard at work, he didn't hide as had the little
four-footed people. You see, of course, he had no reason to hide,
because he felt perfectly safe. Paddy had just cut a big tree, and it
fell with a crash as Sammy came hurrying up. Sammy was so surprised
that for a minute he couldn't find his tongue. He had not supposed
that anybody but Farmer Brown or Farmer Brown's boy could cut down so
large a tree as that, and it quite took his breath away. But he got it
again in a minute. He was boiling with anger, anyway, to think that he
should have been the last to learn that Paddy had come down from the
North to make his home in the Green Forest, and here was a chance to
speak his mind.

"Thief! thief! thief!" he screamed in his harshest voice.

Paddy the Beaver looked up with a twinkle in his eyes. "Hello, Mr. Jay!
I see you haven't any better manners than your cousin who lives up where
I came from," said he.

"Thief! thief! thief!" screamed Sammy, hopping up and down, he was
so angry.

"Meaning yourself, I suppose," said Paddy. "I never did see an honest
Jay, and I don't suppose I ever will."

"Ha, ha, ha!" laughed Peter Rabbit, who had quite forgotten that he
was hiding.

"Oh, how do you do, Mr. Rabbit? I'm very glad you have called on me this
morning," said Paddy, just as if he hadn't known all the time just where
Peter was. "Mr. Jay seems to have gotten out of the wrong side of his
bed this morning."

Peter laughed again. "He always does," said he. "If he didn't, he
wouldn't be happy. You wouldn't think it to look at him, but he is happy
right now. He doesn't know it, but he is. He always is happy when he can
show what a bad temper he has."

Sammy Jay glared down at Peter. Then he glared at Paddy. And all the
time he still shrieked "Thief!" as hard as ever he could. Paddy kept
right on working, paying no attention to Sammy. This made Sammy more
angry than ever. He kept coming nearer and nearer until at last he
was in the very tree that Paddy happened to be cutting. Paddy's
eyes twinkled.

"I'm no thief!" he exclaimed suddenly.

"You are! You are! Thief! Thief!" shrieked Sammy. "You're stealing
our trees!"

"They're not your trees," retorted Paddy. "They belong to the Green
Forest, and the Green Forest belongs to all who love it, and we all have
a perfect right to take what we need from it. I need these trees, and
I've just as much right to take them as you have to take the fat acorns
that drop in the fall."

"No such thing!" screamed Sammy. You know he can't talk without
screaming, and the more excited he gets, the louder he screams. "No such
thing! Acorns are food. They are meant to eat. I have to have them to
live. But you are cutting down whole trees. You are spoiling the Green
Forest. You don't belong here. Nobody invited you, and nobody wants you.
You're a thief!"

Then up spoke Jerry Muskrat, who, you know, is cousin to Paddy
the Beaver.

"Don't you mind him," said he, pointing at Sammy Jay. "Nobody does.
He's the greatest trouble-maker in the Green Forest or on the Green
Meadows. He would steal from his own relatives. Don't mind what he
says, Cousin Paddy."

Now all this time Paddy had been working away just as if no one was
around. Just as Jerry stopped speaking, Paddy thumped the ground with
his tail, which is his way of warning people to watch out, and suddenly
scurried away as fast as he could run. Sammy Jay was so surprised that
he couldn't find his tongue for a minute, and he didn't notice anything
peculiar about that tree. Then suddenly he felt himself falling. With a
frightened scream, he spread his wings to fly, but branches of the tree
swept him down with them right into the Laughing Brook.

You see while Sammy had been speaking his mind, Paddy the Beaver had cut
down the very tree in which he was sitting.

Sammy wasn't hurt, but he was wet and muddy and terribly
frightened,--the most miserable looking Jay that ever was seen.
It was too much for all the little people who were hiding. They
just had to laugh. Then they all came out to pay their respects
to Paddy the Beaver.




V

PADDY KEEPS HIS PROMISE


Paddy the Beaver kept right on working just as if he hadn't any
visitors. You see, it is a big undertaking to build a dam. And when that
was done there was a house to build and a supply of food for the winter
to cut and store. Oh, Paddy the Beaver had no time for idle gossip, you
may be sure! So he kept right on building his dam. It didn't look much
like a dam at first, and some of Paddy's visitors turned up their noses
when they first saw it. They had heard stories of what a wonderful
dam-builder Paddy was, and they had expected to see something like the
smooth, grass-covered bank with which Farmer Brown kept the Big River
from running back on his low lands. Instead, all they saw was a great
pile of poles and sticks which looked like anything but a dam.

"Pooh!" exclaimed Billy Mink, "I guess we needn't worry about the
Laughing Brook and the Smiling Pool, if that is the best Paddy can do.
Why, the water of the Laughing Brook will work through that in no time."

Of course Paddy heard him, but he said nothing, just kept right
on working.

"Just look at the way he has laid those sticks!" continued Billy Mink.
"Seems as if any one would know enough to lay them _across_ the Laughing
Brook instead of just the other way. I could build a better dam
than that."

Paddy said nothing; he just kept right on working.

"Yes, Sir," Billy boasted. "I could build a better dam than that. Why,
that pile of sticks will never stop the water."

"Is something the matter with your eyesight, Billy Mink?" inquired
Jerry Muskrat.

"Of course not!" retorted Billy indignantly. "Why?"

"Oh, nothing much, only you don't seem to notice that already the
Laughing Brook is over its banks above Paddy's dam," replied Jerry,
who had been studying the dam with a great deal of interest.

Billy looked a wee bit foolish, for sure enough there was a little pool
just above the dam, and it was growing bigger.

Paddy still kept at work, saying nothing. He was digging in front of
the dam now, and the mud and grass he dug up he stuffed in between the
ends of the sticks and patted down with his hands. He did this all along
the front of the dam and on top of it too, wherever he thought it was
needed. Of course this made it harder for the water to work through, and
the little pond above the dam began to grow faster. It wasn't a great
while before it was nearly to the top of the dam, which at first was
very low. Then Paddy brought more sticks. This was easier now, because
he could float them down from where he was cutting. He would put them in
place on the top of the dam, then hurry for more. Wherever it was
needed, he would put in mud. He even rolled a few stones in to help hold
the mass.

So the dam grew and grew, and so did the pond above the dam. Of course,
it took a good many days to build so big a dam, and a lot of hard work!
Every morning the little people of the Green Forest and the Green
Meadows would visit it, and every morning they would find that it
had grown a great deal in the night, for that is when Paddy likes
best to work.

By this time, the Laughing Brook had stopped laughing, and down in the
Smiling Pool there was hardly water enough for the minnows to feel safe
a minute. Billy Mink had stopped making fun of the dam, and all the
little people who live in the Laughing Brook and the Smiling Pool were
terribly worried.

To be sure Paddy had warned them of what he was going to do, and had
promised that just as soon as his pond was big enough, the water would
once more run in the Laughing Brook. They tried to believe him, but they
couldn't help having just a wee bit of fear that he might not be wholly
honest. You see, they didn't know him, for he was a stranger. Jerry
Muskrat was the only one who seemed absolutely sure that everything
would be all right. Perhaps that was because Paddy is his cousin, and
Jerry couldn't help but feel proud of such a big cousin and one who was
so smart.

So day by day the dam grew, and the pond grew, and then one morning
Grandfather Frog, down in what had once been the Smiling Pool, heard a
sound that made his heart jump for joy. It was a murmur that kept
growing and growing, until at last it was the merry laugh of the
Laughing Brook. Then he knew that Paddy had kept his word and water
would once more fill the Smiling Pool.




VI

FARMER BROWN'S BOY GROWS CURIOUS


Now it happened that the very day before Paddy the Beaver decided that
his pond was big enough, and so allowed the water to run in the Laughing
Brook once more, Farmer Brown's boy took it into his head to go fishing
in the Smiling Pool. Just as usual he went whistling down across the
Green Meadows. Somehow, when he goes fishing, he always feels like
whistling. Grandfather Frog heard him coming and dived into the little
bit of water remaining in the Smiling Pool and stirred up the mud at the
bottom so that Farmer Brown's boy shouldn't see him.

Nearer and nearer drew the whistle. Suddenly it stopped right short off.
Farmer Brown's boy had come in sight of the Smiling Pool or rather, it
was what used to be the Smiling Pool. Now there wasn't any Smiling Pool,
for the very little pool left was too small and sickly-looking to smile.
There were great banks of mud, out of which grew the bulrushes. The
lily-pads were forlornly stretched out towards the tiny pool of water
remaining. Where the banks were steep and high, the holes that Jerry
Muskrat and Billy Mink knew so well were plain to see. Over at one side
stood Jerry Muskrat's house, wholly out of water.

Somehow, it seemed to Farmer Brown's boy that he must be dreaming. He
never, never had seen anything like this before, not even in the very
driest weather of the hottest part of the summer. He looked this way and
looked that way. The Green Meadows looked just as usual. The Green
Forest looked just as usual. The Laughing Brook--ha! What was the matter
with the Laughing Brook? He couldn't hear it and that, you know, was
very unusual. He dropped his rod and ran over to the Laughing Brook.
There wasn't any brook. No, sir, there wasn't any brook; just pools of
water with the tiniest of streams trickling between. Big stones over
which he had always seen the water running in the prettiest of little
white falls were bare and dry. In the little pools frightened minnows
were darting about.

Farmer Brown's boy scratched his head in a puzzled way. "I don't
understand it," said he. "I don't understand it at all. Something must
have gone wrong with the springs that supply the water for the Laughing
Brook. They must have failed. Yes, Sir, that is just what must have
happened. But I never heard of such a thing happening before, and I
really don't see how it could happen." He stared up into the Green
Forest just as if he thought he could see those springs. Of course, he
didn't think anything of the kind. He was just turning it all over in
his mind. "I know what I'll do! I'll go up to those springs this
afternoon and find out what the trouble is," he said out loud. "They are
way over almost on the other side of the Green Forest, and the easiest
way to get there will be to start from home and cut across the Old
Pasture up to the edge of the Mountain behind the Green Forest. If I try
to follow up the Laughing Brook now, it will take too long, because it
winds and twists so. Besides, it is too hard work."

With that, Farmer Brown's boy went back and picked up his rod. Then he
started for home across the Green Meadows, and for once he wasn't
whistling. You see, he was too busy thinking. In fact, he was so busy
thinking that he didn't see Jimmy Skunk until he almost stepped on him,
and then he gave a frightened jump and ran, for without a gun he was
just as much afraid of Jimmy as Jimmy was of him when he did have a gun.

Jimmy just grinned and went on about his business. It always tickles
Jimmy to see people run away from him, especially people so much bigger
than himself; they look so silly.

"I should think that they would have learned by this time that if
they don't bother me, I won't bother them," he muttered, as he rolled
over a stone to look for fat beetles. "Somehow, folks never seem to
understand me."

[Illustration]




VII

FARMER BROWN'S BOY GETS ANOTHER SURPRISE


Across the Old Pasture to the foot of the Mountain back of the Green
Forest tramped Farmer Brown's boy. Ahead of him trotted Bowser the
Hound, sniffing and snuffing for the tracks of Reddy or Granny Fox. Of
course he didn't find them, for Reddy and Granny hadn't been up in the
Old Pasture for a long time. But he did find old Jed Thumper, the big
gray Rabbit who had made things so uncomfortable for Peter Rabbit once
upon a time, and gave him such a fright that old Jed didn't look where
he was going and almost ran headfirst into Farmer Brown's boy.

"Hi, there, you old cottontail!" yelled Farmer Brown's boy, and this
frightened Old Jed still more, so that he actually ran right past his
own castle of bullbriars without seeing it.

Farmer Brown's boy kept on his way, laughing at the fright of old Jed
Thumper. Presently he reached the springs from which came the water that
made the very beginning of the Laughing Brook. He expected to find them
dry, for way down on the Green Meadows the Smiling Pool was nearly dry,
and the Laughing Brook was nearly dry, and he had supposed that of
course the reason was that the springs where the Laughing Brook started
were no longer bubbling.

But they were! The clear cold water came bubbling up out of the ground
just as it always had, and ran off down into the Green Forest in a
little stream that would grow and grow as it ran and become the Laughing
Brook. Farmer Brown's boy took off his ragged old straw hat and scowled
down at the bubbling water just as if he thought it had no business to
be bubbling there.

Of course, he didn't think just that. The fact is, he didn't know just
what he did think. Here were the springs bubbling away just as they
always had. There was the little stream starting off down into the Green
Forest with a gurgle that by and by would become a laugh, just as it
always had. And yet down on the Green Meadows on the other side of the
Green Forest there was no longer a Laughing Brook or a Smiling Pool. He
felt as if he ought to pinch himself to make sure that he was awake and
not dreaming.

"I don't know what it means," said he, talking out loud. "No, Sir, I
don't know what it means at all, but I'm going to find out. There's a
cause for everything in this world, and when a fellow doesn't know a
thing, it is his business to find out all about it. I'm going to find
out what has happened to the Laughing Brook, if it takes me a year!"

With that he started to follow the little stream which ran gurgling
down into the Green Forest. He had followed that little stream more than
once, and now he found it just as he remembered it. The farther it ran,
the larger it grew, until at last it became the Laughing Brook, merrily
tumbling over rocks and making deep pools in which the trout loved to
hide. At last he came to the edge of a little open hollow in the very
heart of the Green Forest. He knew what splendid deep holes there were
in the Laughing Brook here, and how the big trout loved to lie in them
because they were deep and cool. He was thinking of these trout now and
wishing that he had brought along his fishing-rod. He pushed his way
through a thicket of alders and then--Farmer Brown's boy stopped
suddenly and fairly gasped! He had to stop because there right in front
of him was a pond!

He rubbed his eyes and looked again. Then he stooped down and put his
hand in the water to see if it was real. There was no doubt about it. It
was real water,--a real pond where there never had been a pond before.
It was very still there in the heart of the Green Forest. It was always
very still there, but it seemed stiller than usual as he tramped around
the edge of this strange pond. He felt as if it were all a dream. He
wondered if pretty soon he wouldn't wake up and find it all untrue. But
he didn't, and so he kept on tramping until presently he came to a
dam,--a splendid dam of logs and sticks and mud. Over the top of it the
water was running, and down in the Green Forest below he could hear the
Laughing Brook just beginning to laugh once more. Farmer Brown's boy sat
down with his elbows on his knees and his chin in his hands. He was
almost too much surprised to even think.

[Illustration]




VIII

PETER RABBIT GETS A DUCKING


Farmer Brown's boy sat with his chin in his hands staring at the new
pond in the Green Forest and at the dam which had made it. That dam
puzzled him. Who could have built it? What did they build it for? Why
hadn't he heard them chopping? He looked carelessly at the stump of one
of the trees, and then a still more puzzled look made deep furrows
between his eyes. It looked--yes, it looked very much as if teeth, and
not an axe, had cut down that tree. Farmer Brown's boy stared and
stared, his mouth gaping wide open. He looked so funny that Peter
Rabbit, who was hiding under an old pile of brush close by, nearly
laughed right out.

But Peter didn't laugh. No, Sir, Peter didn't laugh, for just that very
minute something happened. Sniff! Sniff! That was right behind him at
the very edge of the old brush-pile, and every hair on Peter stood on
end with fright.

"Bow, wow, wow!" It seemed to Peter that the great voice was right in
his very ears. It frightened him so that he just _had_ to jump. He
didn't have time to think. And so he jumped right out from under the
pile of brush and of course right into plain sight. And the very instant
he jumped there came another great roar behind him. Of course it was
from Bowser the Hound. You see, Bowser had been following the trail of
his master, but as he always stops to sniff at everything he passes, he
had been some distance behind. When he came to the pile of brush under
which Peter was hiding he had sniffed at that, and of course he had
smelled Peter right away.

Now when Peter jumped out so suddenly, he had landed right at one end
of the dam. The second roar of Bowser's great voice frightened him still
more, and he jumped right up on the dam. There was nothing for him to do
now but go across, and it wasn't the best of going. No, indeed, it
wasn't the best of going. You see, it was mostly a tangle of sticks.
Happy Jack Squirrel or Chatterer the Red Squirrel or Striped Chipmunk
would have skipped across it without the least trouble. But Peter Rabbit
has no sharp little claws with which to cling to logs and sticks, and
right away he was in a peck of trouble. He slipped down between the
sticks, scrambled out, slipped again, and then, trying to make a long
jump, he lost his balance and--tumbled heels over head into the water!

Poor Peter Rabbit! He gave himself up for lost this time. He could swim,
but at best he is a poor swimmer and doesn't like the water. He couldn't
dive and keep out of sight like Jerry Muskrat or Billy Mink. All he
could do was to paddle as fast as his legs would go. The water had gone
up his nose and down his throat so that he choked, and all the time he
felt sure that Bowser the Hound would plunge in after him and catch him.
And if he shouldn't, why Farmer Brown's Boy would simply wait for him to
come ashore and then catch him.

But Farmer Brown's boy didn't do anything of the kind. No, Sir, he
didn't. Instead he shouted to Bowser and called him away. Bowser didn't
want to come, but he long ago learned to obey, and very slowly he walked
over to where his master was sitting.

"You know it wouldn't be fair, old fellow, to try to catch Peter now. It
wouldn't be fair at all, and we never want to do anything unfair, do
we?" said he. Perhaps Bowser didn't agree, but he wagged his tail as if
he did, and sat down beside his master to watch Peter swim.

It seemed to Peter as if he never, never would reach the shore,
though really it was only a very little distance that he had to
swim. When he did scramble out, he was a sorry looking Rabbit.
He didn't waste any time, but started for home as fast as he could
go, lipperty--lipperty--lip. And Farmer Brown's boy and Bowser the
Hound just laughed and didn't try to catch him at all.

"Well, I never!" exclaimed Sammy Jay, who had seen it all from the
top of a pine-tree. "Well, I never! I guess Farmer Brown's boy isn't
so bad, after all."

[Illustration]




IX

PADDY PLANS A HOUSE


Paddy the Beaver sat on his dam, and his eyes shone with happiness as he
looked out over the shining water of the pond he had made. All around
the edge of it grew the tall trees of the Green Forest. It was very
beautiful and very still and very lonesome. That is, it would have
seemed lonesome to almost any one but Paddy the Beaver. But Paddy never
is lonesome. You see, he finds company in the trees and flowers and all
the little plants.

It was still, very, very still. Over on one side was a beautiful rosy
glow in the water. It was the reflection from jolly, round, red Mr. Sun.
Paddy couldn't see him because of the tall trees, but he knew exactly
what Mr. Sun was doing. He was going to bed behind the Purple Hills.
Pretty soon the little stars would come out and twinkle down at him. He
loves the little stars and always watches for the first one.

Yes, Paddy the Beaver was very happy. He would have been perfectly
happy but for one thing: Farmer Brown's boy had found his dam and pond
that very afternoon, and Paddy wasn't quite sure what Farmer Brown's boy
might do. He had kept himself snugly hidden while Farmer Brown's boy was
there, and he felt quite sure that Farmer Brown's boy didn't know who
had built the dam. But for this very reason he might, he just _might_,
try to find out all about it, and that would mean that Paddy would have
to be always on the watch.

"But what's the use of worrying over troubles that haven't come yet, and
may never come? Time enough to worry when they do come," said Paddy to
himself, which shows that Paddy has a great deal of wisdom in his little
brown head. "The thing for me to do now is to get ready for winter, and
that means a great deal of work," he continued. "Let me see, I've got to
build a house, a big, stout, warm house, where I will be warm and safe
when my pond is frozen over. And I've got to lay in a supply of food,
enough to last me until gentle Sister South Wind comes to prepare the
way for lovely Mistress Spring. My, my, I can't afford to be sitting
here dreaming, when there is such a lot to be done!"

With that Paddy slipped into the water and swam all around his new pond
to make sure of just the best place to build his house. Now placing
one's house in just the right place is a very important matter. Some
people are dreadfully careless about this. Jimmy Skunk, for instance,
often makes the mistake of digging his house (you know Jimmy makes his
house underground) right where every one who happens along that way will
see it. Perhaps that is because Jimmy is so independent that he doesn't
care who knows where he lives.

But Paddy the Beaver never is careless. He always chooses just the very
best place. He makes sure that it is best before he begins. So now,
although he was quite positive just where his house should be, he swam
around the pond to make doubly sure. Then, when he was quite satisfied,
he swam over to the place he had chosen. It was where the water was
quite deep.

"There mustn't be the least chance that the ice will ever get thick
enough to close up my doorway," said he, "and I'm sure it never will
here. I must make the foundations strong and the walls thick. I must
have plenty of mud to plaster with, and inside, up above the water, I
must have the snuggest, warmest room where I can sleep in comfort. This
is the place to build it, and it is high time I was at work."

With that Paddy swam over to the place where he had cut the trees for
his dam, and his heart was light, for he had long ago learned that the
surest way to be happy is to be busy.




X

PADDY STARTS HIS HOUSE


Jerry Muskrat was very much interested when he found that Paddy the
Beaver, who, you know, is his cousin, was building a house. Jerry is a
house-builder himself, and down deep in his heart he very much doubted
if Paddy could build as good a house as he could. His house was down in
the Smiling Pool, and Jerry thought it a very wonderful house indeed,
and was very proud of it. It was built of mud and sod and little alder
and willow twigs and bulrushes. Jerry had spent one winter in it, and he
had decided to spend another there after he had fixed it up a little.
So, as long as he didn't have to build a brand new house, he could
afford the time to watch his cousin Paddy. Perhaps he hoped that Paddy
would ask his advice.

But Paddy did nothing of the kind. He had seen Jerry Muskrat's house,
and he had smiled. But he had taken great pains not to let Jerry see
that smile. He wouldn't have hurt Jerry's feelings for the world. He is
too polite and good-natured to do anything like that. So Jerry sat on
the end of an old log and watched Paddy work. The first thing to build
was the foundation. This was of mud and grass with sticks worked into it
to hold it together. Paddy dug the mud from the bottom of his new pond.
And because the pond was new, there was a great deal of grassy sod
there, which was just what Paddy needed. It was very convenient.

Jerry watched a little while and then, because Jerry is a worker
himself, he just had to get busy and help. Rather timidly he told his
big cousin that he would like to have a share in building the new house.

"All right," replied Paddy, "that will be fine. You can bring mud while
I am getting the sticks and grass."

So Jerry dived down to the bottom of the pond and dug up mud and piled
it on the foundation and was happy. The little stars looked down and
twinkled merrily as they watched the two workers. So the foundation grew
and grew down under the water. Jerry was very much surprised at the size
of it. It was ever and ever so much bigger than the foundation for his
own house. You see, he had forgotten how much bigger Paddy is.

Each night Jerry and Paddy worked, resting during the daytime.
Occasionally Bobby Coon or Reddy Fox or Unc' Billy Possum or Jimmy Skunk
would come to the edge of the pond to see what was going on. Peter
Rabbit came every night. But they couldn't see much because, you know,
Paddy and Jerry were working under water.

But at last Peter was rewarded. There, just above the water, was a
splendid platform of mud and grass and sticks. A great many sticks were
carefully laid as soon as the platform was above the water, for Paddy
was very particular about this. You see, it was to be the floor for the
splendid room he was planning to build. When it suited him, he began to
pile mud in the very middle.

Jerry puzzled and puzzled over this. Where was Paddy's room going to
be, if he piled up the mud that way? But he didn't like to ask
questions, so he kept right on helping. Paddy would dive down to the
bottom and then come up with double handfuls of mud, which he held
against his chest. He would scramble out onto the platform and waddle
over to the pile in the middle, where he would put the mud and pat it
down. Then back to the bottom for more mud.

And so the mud pile grew and grew, until it was quite two feet high.
"Now," said Paddy, "I'll build the walls, and I guess you can't help me
much with those. I'm going to begin them to-morrow night. Perhaps you
will like to see me do it, Cousin Jerry."

"I certainly will," replied Jerry, still puzzling over that pile of mud
in the middle.




XI

PETER RABBIT AND JERRY MUSKRAT ARE PUZZLED


Jerry Muskrat was more and more sure that his big cousin, Paddy the
Beaver, didn't know quite so much as he might about house-building.
Jerry would have liked to offer some suggestions, but he didn't quite
dare. You see, he was very anxious not to displease his big cousin. But
he felt that he simply had got to speak his mind to some one, so he swam
across to where he had seen Peter Rabbit almost every night since Paddy
began to build. Sure enough, Peter was there, sitting up very straight
and staring with big round eyes at the platform of mud and sticks out in
the water where Paddy the Beaver was at work.

[Illustration: "Why it's a house you stupid. It's Paddy's new house,"
replied Jerry. _Page 57_.]

"Well, Peter, what do you think of it?" asked Jerry.

"What is it?" asked Peter innocently. "Is it another dam?"

Jerry threw back his head and laughed and laughed.

Peter looked at him suspiciously. "I don't see anything to laugh at,"
said he.

"Why, it's a house, you stupid. It's Paddy's new house," replied Jerry,
wiping the tears of laughter from his eyes.

"I'm not stupid!" retorted Peter. "How was I to know that that pile of
mud and sticks is meant for a house? It certainly doesn't look it. Where
is the door?"

"To tell you the truth, I don't think it is much of a house myself,"
replied Jerry. "It has got a door, all right. In fact, it has got three.
You can't see them because they are under water, and there is a passage
from each right up through that platform of mud and sticks, which is the
foundation of the house. It really is a very fine foundation, Peter; it
really is. But what I can't understand is what Paddy is thinking of by
building that great pile of mud right in the middle. When he gets his
walls built, where will his bedroom be? There won't be any room at all.
It won't be a house at all--just a big useless pile of sticks and mud."

Peter scratched his head and then pulled his whiskers thoughtfully as he
gazed out at the pile in the water where Paddy the Beaver was at work.

"It does look foolish, that's a fact," said he. "Why don't you point
out to him the mistake he is making, Jerry? You have built such a
splendid house yourself that you ought to be able to help Paddy and show
him his mistakes."

Jerry had smiled a very self-satisfied smile when Peter mentioned his
fine house, but he shook his head at the suggestion that he should give
Paddy advice.

"I--I don't just like to," he confessed. "You know, he might not like it
and--and it doesn't seem as if it would be quite polite."

Peter sniffed. "That wouldn't trouble me any if he were my cousin,"
said he.

Jerry shook his head. "No, I don't believe it would," he replied, "but
it does trouble me and--and--well, I think I'll wait awhile."

Now all this time Paddy had been hard at work. He was bringing the
longest branches which he had cut from the trees out of which he had
built his dam, and a lot of slender willow and alder poles. He pushed
these ahead of him as he swam. When he reached the foundation of his
house, he would lean them against the pile of mud in the middle with
their big ends resting on the foundation. So he worked all the way
around until by and by the mud pile in the middle couldn't be seen. It
was completely covered with sticks, and they were cunningly fastened
together at the tops.




XII

JERRY MUSKRAT LEARNS SOMETHING

  If you think you know it all
  You are riding for a fall.
  Use your ears and use your eyes,
  But hold your tongue and you'll be wise.


Jerry Muskrat will tell you that is as true as true can be.

Jerry knows. He found it out for himself. Now he is very careful what
he says about other people or what they are doing. But he wasn't so
careful when his cousin, Paddy the Beaver, was building his house. No,
Sir, Jerry wasn't so careful then. He thought he knew more about
building a house than Paddy did. He was sure of it when he watched
Paddy heap up a great pile of mud right in the middle where his room
ought to be, and then build a wall of sticks around it. He said as much
to Peter Rabbit.

Now it is never safe to say anything to Peter Rabbit that you don't
care to have others know. Peter has a great deal of respect for Jerry
Muskrat's opinion on house-building. You see, he very much admires
Jerry's snug house in the Smiling Pool. It really is a very fine house,
and Jerry may be excused for being proud of it. But that doesn't
excuse Jerry for thinking that he knows all there is to know about
house-building. Of course Peter told every one he met that Paddy the
Beaver was making a foolish mistake in building his house, and that
Jerry Muskrat, who ought to know, said so.

So whenever they got the chance, the little people of the Green Forest
and the Green Meadows would steal up to the shore of Paddy's new pond
and chuckle as they looked out at the great pile of sticks and mud which
Paddy had built for a house, but in which he had forgotten to make a
room. At least they supposed that he had forgotten this very important
thing. He must have, for there wasn't any room. It was a great joke.
They laughed a lot about it, and they lost a great deal of the respect
for Paddy which they had had since he built his wonderful dam.

Jerry and Peter sat in the moonlight talking it over. Paddy had stopped
bringing sticks for his wall. He had dived down out of sight, and he was
gone a long time. Suddenly Jerry noticed that the water had grown very,
very muddy all around Paddy's new house. He wrinkled his brows trying to
think what Paddy could be doing. Presently Paddy came up for air. Then
he went down again, and the water grew muddier than ever. This went on
for a long time. Every little while Paddy would come up for air and a
few minutes of rest. Then down he would go, and the water would grow
muddier and muddier.

At last Jerry could stand it no longer. He just had to see what was
going on. He slipped into the water and swam over to where the water was
muddiest. Just as he got there up came Paddy.

"Hello, Cousin Jerry!" said he. "I was just going to invite you over to
see what you think of my house inside. Just follow me."

Paddy dived, and Jerry dived after him. He followed Paddy in at one of
the three doorways under water and up a smooth hall right into the
biggest, nicest bedroom Jerry had ever seen in all his life. He just
gasped in sheer surprise. He couldn't do anything else. He couldn't find
his tongue to say a word. Here he was in this splendid great room up
above the water, and he had been so sure that there wasn't any room at
all! He just didn't know what to make of it.

Paddy's eyes twinkled. "Well," said he, "what do you think of it?"

"I--I--think it is splendid, just perfectly splendid! But I don't
understand it at all, Cousin Paddy. I--I--Where is that great pile of
mud I helped you build in the middle?" Jerry looked as foolish as he
felt when he asked this.

"Why, I've dug it all away. That's what made the water so muddy,"
replied Paddy.

"But what did you build it for in the first place?" Jerry persisted.

"Because I had to have something to rest my sticks against while I was
building my walls, of course," replied Paddy. "When I got the tops
fastened together for a roof, they didn't need a support any longer, and
then I dug it away to make this room. I couldn't have built such a big
room any other way. I see you don't know very much about house-building,
Cousin Jerry."

"I--I'm afraid I don't," confessed Jerry sadly.




XIII

THE QUEER STOREHOUSE


Everybody knew that Paddy the Beaver was laying up a supply of food for
the winter, and everybody thought it was queer food. That is, everybody
but Prickly Porky the Porcupine thought so. Prickly Porky likes the same
kind of food, but he never lays up a supply. He just goes out and gets
it when he wants it, winter or summer. What kind of food was it? Why,
bark, to be sure. Yes, Sir, it was just bark--the bark of certain kinds
of trees.

Now Prickly Porky can climb the trees and eat the bark right there, but
Paddy the Beaver cannot climb, and if he should just eat the bark that
he can reach from the ground it would take such a lot of trees to keep
him filled up that he would soon spoil the Green Forest. You know, when
the bark is taken off a tree all the way around, the tree dies. That is
because all the things that a tree draws out of the ground to make it
grow and keep it alive are carried up from the roots in the sap, and the
sap cannot go up the tree trunks and into the branches when the bark is
taken off, because it is up the inside of the bark that it travels. So
when the bark is taken from a tree all the way around the trunk, the
tree just starves to death.

Now Paddy the Beaver loves the Green Forest as dearly as you and I do,
and perhaps even a little more dearly. You see, it is his home. Besides,
Paddy never is wasteful. So he cuts down a tree so that he can get all
the bark instead of killing a whole lot of trees for a very little bark,
as he might do if he were lazy. There isn't a lazy bone in him--not one.
The bark he likes best is from the aspen. When he cannot get that, he
will eat the bark from the poplar, the alder, the willow, and even the
birch. But he likes the aspen so much better that he will work very hard
to get it. Perhaps it tastes better because he does have to work so hard
for it.

There were some aspen-trees growing right on the edge of the pond Paddy
had made in the Green Forest. These he cut just as he had cut the trees
for his dam. As soon as a tree was down, he would cut it into short
lengths, and with these swim out to where the water was deep, close to
his new house. He took them one by one and carried the first ones to the
bottom, where he pushed them into the mud just enough to hold them.
Then, as fast as he brought more, he piled them on the first ones. And
so the pile grew and grew.

Jerry Muskrat, Peter Rabbit, Bobby Coon, and the other little people of
the Green Forest watched him with the greatest interest and curiosity.
They couldn't quite make out what he was doing. It was almost as if he
were building the foundation for another house.

"What's he doing, Jerry?" demanded Peter, when he could keep still
no longer.

"I don't exactly know," replied Jerry. "He said that he was going to
lay in a supply of food for the winter, just as I told you, and I
suppose that is what he is doing. But I don't quite understand what he
is taking it all out into the pond for. I believe I'll go ask him."

"Do, and then come tell us," begged Peter, who was growing so curious
that he couldn't sit still.

So Jerry swam out to where Paddy was so busy. "Is this your food supply,
Cousin Paddy?" he asked.

"Yes," replied Paddy, crawling up on the side of his house to rest.
"Yes, this is my food supply. Isn't it splendid?"

"I guess it is," replied Jerry, trying to be polite, "though I like
lily-roots and clams better. But what are you going to do with it? Where
is your storehouse?"

"This pond is my storehouse," replied Paddy. "I will make a great pile
right here close to my house, and the water will keep it nice and fresh
all winter. When the pond is frozen over, all I will have to do is to
slip out of one of my doorways down there on the bottom, swim over here
and get a stick, and fill my stomach. Isn't it handy?"

[Illustration]




XIV

A FOOTPRINT IN THE MUD


Very early one morning Paddy the Beaver heard Sammy Jay making a
terrible fuss over in the aspen-trees on the edge of the pond Paddy
had made in the Green Forest. Paddy couldn't see because he was inside
his house, and it has no window, but he could hear. He wrinkled up his
brows thoughtfully.

"Seems to me that Sammy is very much excited this morning," said he,
talking to himself, a way he has because he is so much alone. "When he
screams like that, Sammy is usually trying to do two things at
once--make trouble for somebody and keep somebody else out of trouble;
and when you come to think of it, that's rather a funny way of doing. It
shows that he isn't all bad, and at the same time he is a long way from
being all good. Now, I should say from the sounds that Sammy has
discovered Reddy Fox trying to steal up on some one over where my
aspen-trees are growing. Reddy is afraid of me, but I suspect that he
knows that Peter Rabbit has been hanging around here a lot lately,
watching me work, and he thinks perhaps he can catch Peter. I shall have
to whisper in one of Peter's long ears and tell him to watch out."

After a while he heard Sammy Jay's voice growing fainter and fainter in
the Green Forest. Finally he couldn't hear it at all. "Whoever was there
has gone away, and Sammy has followed just to torment them," thought
Paddy. He was very busy making a bed. He is very particular about his
bed, is Paddy the Beaver. He makes it of fine splinters of wood which he
splits off with those wonderful great cutting teeth of his. This makes
the driest kind of a bed. It requires a great deal of patience and work,
but patience is one of the first things a little Beaver learns, and
honest work well done is one of the greatest pleasures in the world, as
Paddy long ago found out for himself. So he kept at work on his bed for
some time after all was still outside.

At last Paddy decided that he would go over to his aspen-trees and look
them over to decide which ones he would cut the next night. He slid down
one of his long halls, out the doorway at the bottom of the pond, and
then swam up to the surface, where he floated for a few minutes with
just his head out of water. And all the time his eyes and nose and ears
were busy looking, smelling, and listening for any sign of danger.
Everything was still. Sure that he was quite safe, Paddy swam across to
the place where the aspen-trees grew, and waddled out on the shore.

Paddy looked this way and looked that way. He looked up in the tree
tops, and he looked off up the hill, but most of all he looked at the
ground. Yes, Sir, Paddy just studied the ground. You see, he hadn't
forgotten the fuss Sammy Jay had been making there, and he was trying to
find out what it was all about. At first he didn't see anything unusual,
but by and by he happened to notice a little wet place, and right in the
middle of it was something that made Paddy's eyes open wide. It was a
footprint! Some one had carelessly stepped in the mud.

"Ha!" exclaimed Paddy, and the hair on his back lifted ever so little,
and for a minute he had a prickly feeling all over. The footprint was
very much like that of Reddy Fox, only it was larger.

"Ha!" said Paddy again, "that certainly is the footprint of Old Man
Coyote! I see I have got to watch out more sharply than I had thought
for. All right, Mr. Coyote; now that I know you are about, you'll have
to be smarter than I think you are to catch me. You certainly will be
back here to-night looking for me, so I think I'll do my cutting right
now in the daytime."




XV

SAMMY JAY MAKES PADDY A CALL


Paddy the Beaver was hard at work. He had just cut down a good-sized
aspen-tree and now he was gnawing it into short lengths to put in his
food pile in the pond. As he worked, Paddy was doing a lot of thinking
about the footprint of Old Man Coyote in a little patch of mud, for he
knew that meant that Old Man Coyote had discovered his pond, and would
be hanging around, hoping to catch Paddy off his guard. Paddy knew it
just as well as if Old Man Coyote had told him so. That was why he was
at work cutting his food supply in the daytime. Usually he works at
night, and he knew that Old Man Coyote knew it.

"He'll try to catch me then," thought Paddy, "so I'll do my working on
land now and fool him."

The tree he was cutting began to sway and crack. Paddy cut out one
more big chip, then hurried away to a safe place while the tree fell
with a crash.

"Thief! thief! thief!" screamed a voice just back of Paddy.

"Hello, Sammy Jay! I see you don't feel any better than usual this
morning," said Paddy. "Don't you want to sit up in this tree while I
cut it down?"

Sammy grew black in the face with anger, for he knew that Paddy was
laughing at him. You remember how only a few days before he had been so
intent on calling Paddy bad names that he actually hadn't noticed that
Paddy was cutting the very tree in which he was sitting, and so when it
fell he had had a terrible fright.

"You think you are very smart, Mr. Beaver, but you'll think differently
one of these fine days!" screamed Sammy. "If you knew what I know, you
wouldn't be so well satisfied with yourself."

"What do you know?" asked Paddy, pretending to be very much alarmed.

"I'm not going to tell you what I know," retorted Sammy Jay. "You'll
find out soon enough. And when you do find out, you'll never steal
another tree from our Green Forest. Somebody is going to catch you,
and it isn't Farmer Brown's boy either!"

Paddy pretended to be terribly frightened. "Oh, who is it? Please tell
me, Mr. Jay," he begged.

Now to be called Mr. Jay made Sammy feel very important. Nearly
everybody else called him Sammy. He swelled himself out trying to look
as important as he felt, and his eyes snapped with pleasure. He was
actually making Paddy the Beaver afraid. At least he thought he was.

"No, Sir, I won't tell you," he replied. "I wouldn't be you for a great
deal though! Somebody who is smarter than you are is going to catch you,
and when he gets through with you, there won't be anything left but a
few bones. No, Sir, nothing but a few bones!"

"Oh, Mr. Jay, this is terrible news! Whatever am I to do?" cried Paddy,
all the time keeping right on at work cutting another tree.

"There's nothing you can do," replied Sammy, grinning wickedly at
Paddy's fright. "There's nothing you can do unless you go right straight
back to the North where you came from. You think you are very smart
but--"

Sammy didn't finish. Crack! Over fell the tree Paddy had been cutting
and the top of it fell straight into the alder in which Sammy was
sitting. "Oh! Oh! Help!" shrieked Sammy, spreading his wings and flying
away just in time.

Paddy sat down and laughed until his sides ached. "Come make me another
call some day, Sammy!" he said. "And when you do, please bring some real
news. I know all about Old Man Coyote. You can tell him for me that when
he is planning to catch people he should be careful not to leave
footprints to give himself away."

Sammy didn't reply. He just sneaked off through the Green Forest,
looking quite as foolish as he felt.




XVI

OLD MAN COYOTE IS VERY CRAFTY

  Coyote has a crafty brain;
  His wits are sharp his ends to gain.


There is nothing in the world more true than that. Old Man Coyote has
the craftiest brain of all the little people of the Green Forest or the
Green Meadows. Sharp as are the wits of old Granny Fox, they are not
quite as sharp as the wits of Old Man Coyote. If you want to fool him,
you will have to get up very early in the morning, and then it is more
than likely that you will be the one fooled, not he. There is very
little going on around him that he doesn't know about. But once in a
while something escapes him. The coming of Paddy the Beaver to the Green
Forest was one of these things. He didn't know a thing about Paddy until
Paddy had finished his dam and his house, and was cutting his supply of
food for the winter.

You see, it was this way: When the Merry Little Breezes of Old Mother
West Wind first heard what was going on in the Green Forest and hurried
around over the Green Meadows and through the Green Forest to spread the
news, as is their way, they took the greatest pains not to even hint it
to Old Man Coyote because they were afraid that he would make trouble
and perhaps drive Paddy away. The place that Paddy had chosen to build
his dam was so deep in the Green Forest that Old Man Coyote seldom went
that way. So it was that he knew nothing about Paddy, and Paddy knew
nothing about him for some time.

But after a while Old Man Coyote noticed that the little people of
the Green Meadows were not about as much as usual. They seemed to have
a secret of some kind. He mentioned the matter to his friend, Digger
the Badger.

Digger had been so intent on his own affairs that he hadn't noticed
anything unusual, but when Old Man Coyote mentioned the matter he
remembered that Blacky the Crow headed straight for the Green Forest
every morning. Several times he had seen Sammy Jay flying in the same
direction as if in a great hurry to get somewhere.

Old Man Coyote grinned. "That's all I need to know, friend Digger,"
said he. "When Blacky the Crow and Sammy Jay visit a place more than
once, something interesting is going on there. I think I'll take a
stroll up through the Green Forest and have a look around."

With that, off Old Man Coyote started. But he was too sly and crafty to
go straight to the Green Forest. He pretended to hunt around over the
Green Meadows just as he usually did, all the time working nearer and
nearer to the Green Forest. When he reached the edge of it, he slipped
in among the trees, and when he felt sure that no one was likely to see
him, he began to run this way and that way with his nose to the ground.

"Ha!" he exclaimed presently, "Reddy Fox has been this way lately."

Pretty soon he found another trail. "So," said he, "Peter Rabbit has
been over here a good deal of late, and his trail goes in the same
direction as that of Reddy Fox. I guess all I have to do now is to
follow Peter's trail, and it will lead me to what I want to find out."

So Old Man Coyote followed Peter's trail, and he presently came to the
pond of Paddy the Beaver. "Ha!" said he, as he looked out and saw
Paddy's new house. "So there is a newcomer to the Green Forest! I have
always heard that Beaver is very good eating. My stomach begins to feel
empty this very minute." His mouth began to water, and a fierce, hungry
look shone in his yellow eyes.

It was just then that Sammy Jay saw him and began to scream at the top
of his lungs so that Paddy the Beaver over in his house heard him. Old
Man Coyote knew that it was of no use to stay longer with Sammy Jay
about, so he took a hasty look at the pond and found where Paddy came
ashore to cut his food. Then, shaking his fist at Sammy Jay, he started
straight back for the Green Meadows. "I'll just pay a visit here in the
night," said he, "and give Mr. Beaver a surprise while he is at work."

But with all his craft, Old Man Coyote didn't notice that he had left a
footprint in the mud.

[Illustration]




XVII

OLD MAN COYOTE IS DISAPPOINTED


Old Man Coyote lay stretched out in his favorite napping place on the
Green Meadows. He was thinking of what he had found out up in the Green
Forest that morning--that Paddy the Beaver was living there. Old Man
Coyote's thoughts seemed very pleasant to himself, though really they
were very dreadful thoughts. You see, he was thinking how easy it was
going to be to catch Paddy the Beaver, and what a splendid meal he would
make. He licked his chops at the thought.

"He doesn't know I know he's here," thought Old Man Coyote. "In fact, I
don't believe he even knows that I am anywhere around. Of course, he
won't be watching for me. He cuts his trees at night, so all I will have
to do is to hide right close by where he is at work, and he'll walk
right into my mouth. Sammy Jay knows I was up there this morning, but
Sammy sleeps at night, so he will not give the alarm. My, my, how good
that Beaver will taste!" He licked his chops once more, then yawned and
closed his eyes for a nap.

Old Man Coyote waited until jolly, round, red Mr. Sun had gone to bed
behind the Purple Hills, and the Black Shadows had crept out across the
Green Meadows. Then, keeping in the blackest of them, and looking very
much like a shadow himself, he slipped into the Green Forest. It was
dark in there, and he made straight for Paddy's new pond, trotting along
swiftly without making a sound. When he was near the aspen-trees which
he knew Paddy was planning to cut, he crept forward very slowly and
carefully. Everything was still as still could be.

"Good!" thought Old Man Coyote. "I am here first, and now all I need do
is to hide and wait for Paddy to come ashore."

So he stretched himself flat behind some brush close beside the little
path Paddy had made up from the edge of the water and waited. It was
very still, so still that it seemed almost as if he could hear his heart
beat. He could see the little stars twinkling in the sky and their own
reflections twinkling back at them from the water of Paddy's pond. Old
Man Coyote waited and waited. He is very patient when there is something
to gain by it. For such a splendid dinner as Paddy the Beaver would make
he felt that he could well afford to be patient. So he waited and
waited, and everything was as still as if no living thing but the trees
were there. Even the trees seemed to be asleep.

At last, after a long, long time, he heard just the faintest splash. He
pricked up his ears and peeped out on the pond with the hungriest look
in his yellow eyes. There was a little line of silver coming straight
towards him. He knew that it was made by Paddy the Beaver swimming.
Nearer and nearer it drew. Old Man Coyote chuckled way down deep inside,
without making a sound. He could see Paddy's head now, and Paddy was
coming straight in, as if he hadn't a fear in the world.

Almost to the edge of the pond swam Paddy. Then he stopped. In a few
minutes he began to swim again, but this time it was back in the
direction of his house, and he seemed to be carrying something. It was
one of the little food logs he had cut that day, and he was taking it
out to his storehouse. Then back he came for another. And so he kept on,
never once coming ashore. Old Man Coyote waited until Paddy had carried
the last log to his storehouse and then, with a loud whack on the water
with his broad tail, had dived and disappeared in his house.

Then Old Man Coyote arose and started elsewhere to look for his dinner,
and in his heart was bitter disappointment.




XVIII

OLD MAN COYOTE TRIES ANOTHER PLAN


For three nights Old Man Coyote had stolen up through the Green Forest
with the coming of the Black Shadows and had hidden among the
aspen-trees where Paddy the Beaver cut his food, and for three nights
Paddy had failed to come ashore. Each night he had seemed to have enough
food logs in the water to keep him busy without cutting more. Old Man
Coyote lay there, and the hungry look in his eyes changed to one of
doubt and then to suspicion. Could it be that Paddy the Beaver was
smarter than he thought? It began to look very much as if Paddy knew
perfectly well that he was hiding there each night. Yes, Sir, that's the
way it looked. For three nights Paddy hadn't cut a single tree, and yet
each night he had plenty of food logs ready to take to his storehouse in
the pond.

"That means that he comes ashore in the daytime and cuts his trees,"
thought Old Man Coyote as, tired and with black anger in his heart, he
trotted home the third night. "He couldn't have found out about me
himself; he isn't smart enough. It must be that some one has told him.
And nobody knows that I have been over there but Sammy Jay. It must be
he who has been the tattletale. I think I'll visit Paddy by daylight
to-morrow, and then we'll see!"

Now the trouble with some smart people is that they are never able to
believe that others may be as smart as they. Old Man Coyote didn't know
that the first time he had visited Paddy's pond he had left behind him a
footprint in a little patch of soft mud. If he had known it, he wouldn't
have believed that Paddy would be smart enough to guess what that
footprint meant. So Old Man Coyote laid all the blame at the door of
Sammy Jay, and that very morning, when Sammy came flying over the Green
Meadows, Old Man Coyote accused him of being a tattletale and threatened
the most dreadful things to Sammy if ever he caught him.

Now Sammy had flown down to the Green Meadows to tell Old Man Coyote
how Paddy was doing all his work on land in the daytime. But when Old
Man Coyote began to call him a tattletale and accuse him of having
warned Paddy, and to threaten dreadful things, he straightway forgot all
his anger at Paddy and turned it all on Old Man Coyote. He called him
everything he could think of, and this was a great deal, for Sammy has a
wicked tongue. When he hadn't any breath left, he flew over to the Green
Forest, and there he hid where he could watch all that was going on.

That afternoon Old Man Coyote tried his new plan. He slipped into the
Green Forest, looking this way and that way to be sure that no one saw
him. Then very, very softly, he crept up through the Green Forest
towards the pond of Paddy the Beaver. As he drew near, he heard a crash,
and it made him smile. He knew what it meant. It meant that Paddy was at
work cutting down trees. With his stomach almost on the ground, he crept
forward little by little, little by little, taking the greatest care not
to rustle so much as a leaf. Presently he reached a place where he could
see the aspen-trees, and there sure enough was Paddy, sitting up on his
hind legs and hard at work cutting another tree.

Old Man Coyote lay down for a few minutes to watch. Then he wriggled
a little nearer. Slowly and carefully he drew his legs under him and
made ready for a rush. Paddy the Beaver was his at last! At just
that very minute a harsh scream rang out right over his head "Thief!
thief! thief!"

It was Sammy Jay, who had silently followed him all the way. Paddy the
Beaver didn't stop to even look around. He knew what that scream meant,
and he scrambled down his little path to the water as he never had
scrambled before. And as he dived with a great splash, Old Man Coyote
landed with a great jump on the very edge of the pond.




XIX

PADDY AND SAMMY JAY BECOME FRIENDS


Paddy the Beaver floated in his pond and grinned in the most provoking
way at Old Man Coyote, who had so nearly caught him. Old Man Coyote
fairly danced with anger on the bank. He had felt so sure of Paddy
that time that it was hard work to believe that Paddy had really gotten
away from him. He bared his long cruel teeth, and he looked very fierce
and ugly.

"Come on in; the water's fine!" called Paddy.

Now, of course, this wasn't a nice thing for Paddy to do, for it only
made Old Man Coyote all the angrier. You see, Paddy knew perfectly well
that he was absolutely safe, and he just couldn't resist the temptation
to say some unkind things. He had had to be on the watch for days lest
he should be caught, and so he hadn't been able to work quite so well as
he could have done with nothing to fear, and he still had a lot of
preparations to make for winter. So he told Old Man Coyote just what he
thought of him, and that he wasn't as smart as he thought he was or he
never would have left a footprint in the mud to give him away.

When Sammy Jay, who was listening and chuckling as he listened, heard
that, he flew down where he would be just out of reach of Old Man
Coyote, and then he just turned that tongue of his loose, and you know
that some people say that Sammy's tongue is hung in the middle and wags
at both ends. Of course, this isn't really so, but when he gets to
abusing people it seems as if it must be true. He called Old Man Coyote
every bad name he could think of. He called him a sneak, a thief, a
coward, a bully, and a lot of other things.

"You said I had warned Paddy that you were trying to catch him and that
was why you failed to find him at work at night, and all the time you
had warned him yourself!" screamed Sammy. "I used to think that you were
smart, but I know better now. Paddy is twice as smart as you are."

  "Mr. Coyote is ever so sly;
  Mr. Coyote is clever and spry;
    If you believe all you hear.
  Mr. Coyote is naught of the kind;
  Mr. Coyote is stupid and blind;
    He can't catch a flea on his ear."

Paddy the Beaver laughed till the tears came at Sammy's foolish verse,
but it made Old Man Coyote angrier than ever. He was angry with Paddy
for escaping from him, and he was angry with Sammy, terribly angry, and
the worst of it was he couldn't catch either one, for one was at home in
the water and the other was at home in the air and he couldn't follow in
either place. Finally he saw it was of no use to stay there to be
laughed at, so, muttering and grumbling, he started for the Green
Meadows.

As soon as he was out of sight Paddy turned to Sammy Jay.

"Mr. Jay," said he, knowing how it pleased Sammy to be called mister,
"Mr. Jay, you have done me a mighty good turn to-day, and I am not going
to forget it. You can call me what you please and scream at me all you
please, but you won't get any satisfaction out of it, because I simply
won't get angry. I will say to myself, 'Mr. Jay saved my life the other
day,' and then I won't mind your tongue."

Now this made Sammy feel very proud and very happy. You know it is very
seldom that he hears anything nice said of him. He flew down on the
stump of one of the trees Paddy had cut. "Let's be friends," said he.

"With all my heart!" replied Paddy.

[Illustration]




XX

SAMMY JAY OFFERS TO HELP PADDY


Paddy sat looking thoughtfully at the aspen-trees he would have to cut
to complete his store of food for the winter. All those near the edge of
his pond had been cut. The others were scattered about some little
distance away. "I don't know," said Paddy out loud. "I don't know."

"What don't you know?" asked Sammy Jay, who, now that he and Paddy had
become friends, was very much interested in what Paddy was doing.

"Why," replied Paddy, "I don't know just how I am going to get those
trees. Now that Old Man Coyote is watching for me, it isn't safe for
me to go very far from my pond. I suppose I could dig a canal up to
some of the nearest trees and then float them down to the pond, but
it is hard to work and keep sharp watch for enemies at the same time.
I guess I'll have to be content with some of these alders growing
close to the water, but the bark of aspens is so much better that
I--I wish I could get them."

"What's a canal?" asked Sammy abruptly.

"A canal? Why, a canal is a kind of ditch in which water can run,"
replied Paddy.

Sammy nodded. "I've seen Farmer Brown dig one over on the Green Meadows,
but it looked like a great deal of work. I didn't suppose that any one
else could do it. Do you really mean that you can dig a canal, Paddy?"

"Of course I mean it," replied Paddy, in a surprised tone of voice. "I
have helped dig lots of canals. You ought to see some of them back where
I came from."

"I'd like to," replied Sammy. "I think it is perfectly wonderful. I
don't see how you do it."

"It's easy enough when you know how," replied Paddy. "If I dared to, I'd
show you."

Sammy had a sudden idea. It almost made him gasp. "I tell you what, you
work and I'll keep watch!" he cried. "You know my eyes are very sharp."

"Will you?" cried Paddy eagerly. "That would be perfectly splendid. You
have the sharpest eyes of any one whom I know, and I would feel
perfectly safe with you on watch. But I don't want to put you to all
that trouble, Mr. Jay."

"Of course I will," replied Sammy, "and it won't be any trouble at all.
I'll just love to do it." You see, it made Sammy feel very proud to have
Paddy say that he had such sharp eyes. "When will you begin?"

"Right away, if you will just take a look around and see that it is
perfectly safe for me to come out on land."

Sammy didn't wait to hear more. He spread his beautiful blue wings and
started off over the Green Forest straight for the Green Meadows. Paddy
watched him go with a puzzled and disappointed air. "That's funny,"
thought he. "I thought he really meant it, and now off he goes without
even saying good-by."

In a little while back came Sammy, all out of breath. "It's all right,"
he panted. "You can go to work just as soon as you please."

Paddy looked more puzzled than ever. "How do you know?" he asked. "I
haven't seen you looking around."

"I did better than that," replied Sammy. "If Old Man Coyote had been
hiding somewhere in the Green Forest, it might have taken me some time
to find him. But he isn't. You see, I flew straight over to his home in
the Green Meadows to see if he is there, and he is. He's taking a
sun-bath and looking as cross as two sticks. I don't think he'll be back
here this morning, but I'll keep a sharp watch while you work."

Paddy made Sammy a low bow. "You certainly are smart, Mr. Jay," said
he. "I wouldn't have thought of going over to Old Man Coyote's home to
see if he was there. I'll feel perfectly safe with you on guard. Now
I'll get to work."




XXI

PADDY AND SAMMY JAY WORK TOGETHER


Jerry Muskrat had been home at the Smiling Pool for several days. But
he couldn't stay there long. Oh, my, no! He just had to get back to see
what his big cousin, Paddy the Beaver, was doing. So as soon as he was
sure that everything was all right at the Smiling Pool he hurried back
up the Laughing Brook to Paddy's pond, deep in the Green Forest. As soon
as he was in sight of it, he looked eagerly for Paddy. At first he
didn't see him. Then he stopped and gazed over at the place where Paddy
had been cutting aspen-trees for food. Something was going on there,
something queer. He couldn't make it out.

Just then Sammy Jay came flying over.

"What's Paddy doing?" Jerry asked.

Sammy Jay dropped down to the top of an alder-tree and fluffed out all
his feathers in a very important way. "Oh," said he, "Paddy and I are
building something!"

"You! Paddy and you! Ha, ha! Paddy and you building something!"
Jerry laughed.

"Yes, me!" snapped Sammy angrily. "That's what I said; Paddy and I are
building something."

Jerry had begun to swim across the pond by this time, and Sammy was
flying across. "Why don't you tell the truth, Sammy, and say that Paddy
is building something and you are making him all the trouble you can?"
called Jerry.

Sammy's eyes snapped angrily, and he darted down at Jerry's little brown
head. "It isn't true!" he shrieked. "You ask Paddy if I'm not helping!"

Jerry ducked under water to escape Sammy's sharp bill. When he came up
again, Sammy was over in the little grove of aspen-trees where Paddy was
at work. Then Jerry discovered something. What was it? Why a little
water-path led right up to the aspen-trees, and there, at the end of the
little water-path, was Paddy the Beaver hard at work. He was digging and
piling the earth on one side very neatly. In fact, he was making the
water-path longer. Jerry swam right up the little water-path to where
Paddy was working. "Good morning, Cousin Paddy," said he. "What are you
doing?"

"Oh," replied Paddy, "Sammy Jay and I are building a canal."

Sammy Jay looked down at Jerry in triumph, and Jerry looked at Paddy as
if he thought that he was joking.

"Sammy Jay? What's Sammy Jay got to do about it?" demanded Jerry.

"A whole lot," replied Paddy. "You see, he keeps watch while I work. If
he didn't, I couldn't work, and there wouldn't be any canal. Old Man
Coyote has been trying to catch me, and I wouldn't dare work on shore if
it wasn't that I am sure that the sharpest eyes in the Green Forest are
watching for danger."

Sammy Jay looked very much pleased indeed and very proud. "So you see it
takes both of us to make this canal; I dig while Sammy watches. So we
are building it together," concluded Paddy with a twinkle in his eyes.

"I see," said Jerry slowly. Then he turned to Sammy Jay. "I beg your
pardon, Sammy," said he. "I do, indeed."

"That's all right," replied Sammy airily. "What do you think of
our canal?"

"I think it is wonderful," replied Jerry.

And indeed it was a very fine canal, straight, wide, and deep enough
for Paddy to swim in and float his logs out to the pond. Yes, indeed, it
was a very fine canal.




XXII

PADDY FINISHES HIS HARVEST

  "Sharp his tongue and sharp his eyes--
  Sammy guards against surprise.
  If 'twere not for Sammy Jay
  I could do no work to-day."


When Sammy overheard Paddy the Beaver say that to Jerry Muskrat, it
made him swell up all over with pure pride. You see, Sammy is so used to
hearing bad things about himself that to hear something nice like that
pleased him immensely. He straightway forgot all the mean things he had
said to Paddy when he first saw him--how he had called him a thief
because he had cut the aspen-trees he needed. He forgot all this. He
forgot how Paddy had made him the laughing-stock of the Green Forest and
the Green Meadows by cutting down the very tree in which he had been
sitting. He forgot everything but that Paddy had trusted him to keep
watch and now was saying nice things about him. He made up his mind that
he would deserve all the nice things that Paddy could say, and he
thought that Paddy was the finest fellow in the world.

Jerry Muskrat looked doubtful. He didn't trust Sammy, and he took
care not to go far from the water when he heard that Old Man Coyote
had been hanging around. But Paddy worked away just as if he hadn't
a fear in the world.

"The way to make people want to be trusted is to trust them," said he
to himself. "If I show Sammy Jay that I don't really trust him, he will
think it is of no use to try and will give it up. But if I do trust him,
and he knows that I do, he'll be the best watchman in the Green Forest."

And this shows that Paddy the Beaver has a great deal of wisdom, for it
was just as he thought. Sammy was on hand bright and early every
morning. He made sure that Old Man Coyote was nowhere in the Green
Forest, and then he settled himself comfortably in the top of a tall
pine-tree where he could see all that was going on while Paddy the
Beaver worked.

Paddy had finished his canal, and a beautiful canal it was, leading
straight from his pond up to the aspen-trees. As soon as he had finished
it, he began to cut the trees. As soon as one was down he would cut it
into short lengths and roll them into the canal. Then he would float
them out to his pond and over to his storehouse. He took the larger
branches, on which there was sweet, tender bark, in the same way, for
Paddy is never wasteful.

After a while he went over to his storehouse, which, you know, was
nothing but a great pile of aspen-logs and branches in his pond close by
his house. He studied it very carefully. Then he swam back and climbed
up on the bank of his canal.

"Mr. Jay," said he, "I think our work is about finished."

"What!" cried Sammy, "Aren't you going to cut the rest of those
aspen-trees?"

"No," replied Paddy. "Enough is always enough, and I've got enough to
last me all winter. I want those trees for next year. Now I am fixed for
the winter. I think I'll take it easy for a while."

Sammy looked disappointed. You see he had just begun to learn that the
greatest pleasure in the world comes from doing things for other people.
For the first time since he could remember some one wanted him around
and it gave him such a good feeling down deep inside!


THE END






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Adventures of Paddy Beaver, by 
Thornton W. Burgess

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ADVENTURES OF PADDY BEAVER ***

***** This file should be named 19092.txt or 19092.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/0/9/19092/

Produced by Sigal Alon, Jacqueline Jeremy, La Monte H.P.
Yarroll, and the Online Distributed Proofreading Team at
http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
