The Project Gutenberg EBook of The History of a Lie, by Herman Bernstein

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The History of a Lie
       'The Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion'

Author: Herman Bernstein

Release Date: September 8, 2006 [EBook #19200]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF A LIE ***




Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Jonathan Niehof, the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net,
Nikola Smolenski, cinnabar, and Distributed Proofreaders
Europe at http://dp.rastko.net





[Transcriber's Note: This text has many notes in [square brackets]
which are in the original. Added for this electronic edition are
labels for footnotes and illustrations; the actual contents of
such are original. Also added are transcriptions (in the original
Cyrillic) of facsimile pages, and transliterations (into the Roman
alphabet, using the GOST system) of the same. An XHTML version with
the original facsimile images is also available.

Any translations appear in the original paper edition.

=Bold= and _italic_ passages are transcribed per this example.]

THE HISTORY OF A LIE

_“The Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion”_

_“Sin has many tools, but a lie is the handle which fits them all.”_
                                    —OLIVER WENDELL HOLMES.

A STUDY
BY
HERMAN BERNSTEIN

AUTHOR OF “WITH MASTER MINDS,” ETC.

NEW YORK

J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY
57 ROSE STREET

COPYRIGHT, 1921, BY J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY




_FOREWORD_


_This is the history of a Lie—of a cruel and terrible Lie invented for
the purpose of defaming the entire Jewish people. Given out as fiction,
by a German anti-Semitic writer, involved in the Waldeck forgery case,
who concealed his identity under the pen-name of an Englishman, it was
gradually changed and elaborated, and finally groomed as fact. Agents of
the Russian secret police department and of the unscrupulous “Black
Hundreds” then utilized this fiction as the framework for the
“protocols” through which they sought to crush the Jews and prop up the
tottering Russian dynasty.

Tsarism destroyed itself, but the agents of Tsarism, still dreaming of
their past glory and of a restoration of their privileges, are at work
again, both here and abroad.

Out of the scrapheap of Russian autocracy, they have exhumed their old
weapons and are striking at the Jews again. Upon the structure of the
old myths they are striving to erect new falsehoods in order to
intensify everywhere chaos and confusion and dissatisfaction so that
they may attain their own dastardly and selfish ends.

In the war’s aftermath the Jews are being blamed by the minions of
autocracy and reaction for all the ills that have befallen mankind. Some
blame them for the war, and others for the peace. Some attack them for
the defeat of the German military machine, and others for the victory of
the allies. In Germany they are attacked by the Junkers for having
opposed the submarine warfare and thus assured Germany’s defeat; while
in some of the allied countries the Jews are denounced for constituting
“the brains of Germany.” All the revolutionary leaders of Germany are
credited to the Jews, and bolshevism, which has as little in common with
Judaism as it has with Christianity, is branded as a Jewish movement;
and there are Jew-baiters who in their blind madness have gone so far as
to declare that ex-Kaiser Wilhelm was not only influenced by the Jews
but is himself of Jewish descent, and for this reason did not defend
Germany as loyally as he should have done. He conspired against the
Hohenzollern dynasty and undermined it. He destroyed his own throne
because he was serving the secret Jewish world organization.

On such absurdities have people been fed, since the armistice, in
civilized countries by antisemitic agitators and their dupes, while Jews
have been slaughtered in the Ukraine, in Poland and in Hungary.

I submit in this little book the documentary evidence showing how the
so-called “Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion” on which this new crusade
is predicated, were forged._

HERMAN BERNSTEIN.

_New York, February, 1921._




CONTENTS


                                                           PAGE
FOREWORD                                                      3


CHAPTER ONE
THE MYSTERIOUS PROTOCOLS

The Lie of a Jewish World Conspiracy—Is There a Jewish
Conspiracy?—Anonymous Accusations—The Mysterious
“Protocols” of Sergei Nilus—How did “Nilus” Secure
Them?—Contradictory Explanations—Who is “Nilus”?
How his Sponsors Disagree—What Russian Publicists
Say                                                           7


CHAPTER TWO
THE STORY FROM WHICH THE PROTOCOLS
WERE FABRICATED

Essence of “Protocols” Was German Fiction of “Sir John
Retcliffe”—Who Was “Retcliffe”?—His Infamous Record—His
Bloodcurdling Story—The Meeting in the
Cemetery—An Avowed Myth—Meeting Every Hundred
Years Attended by “Representatives of the Twelve
Tribes of Israel”—The “Son of the Accursed” Also Attends
and Provides Comic Interludes                                16


CHAPTER THREE
FICTION FORGED INTO “FACT”

The Lie in its Second Stage—The Tale Becomes “Fact”—The
“Rabbi’s” Speech—Its Authenticity Vouched for by
“Retcliffe”—An Illuminating Footnote—A Dedication to
The Russian “Black Hundreds”—The Imaginary
“Speech” Bears Witness to Authenticity of “Protocols,”
Themselves Based on “Speech”—Three Stages of the
Lie                                                          43


CHAPTER FOUR
THE RUSSIAN SPONSORS OF THE FORGERY

Nilus on the Protocols—Only “the God-Anointed Tsar of
Russia” Can Save the World—Passages from Nilus
Omitted by Translators—On Tolstoy—On the Emancipation
of Women—On the “Sanhedrin” and “its Faithful
Ally, England”                                               55


CHAPTER FIVE
FORGERS DISAGREE

The Butmi Protocols—“Representatives of Zion” Not to be
Confounded with “Zionists”—Butmi Contradicts Nilus—Plan
for World Conquest Conceived 929 B. C. E.—The
“Symbolic Snake”—Universal Suffrage a Jewish Device—Every
Jew Familiar with Plot                                       59


CHAPTER SIX
THE BLACK HUNDREDS, THEIR DUPES AND CRIMES

Russia in 1905—The Unsuccessful Revolution—The Reaction
and the Reactionaries—Lutostansky and His Work—The
“Symbolic Snake” According to Lutostansky—Who
Plagiarized?—Lutostansky on the English People—Are
the English the “Lost Tribes”?—How the Protocols
Were “Doctored” by Butmi—Conclusion                          63




CHAPTER ONE

THE MYSTERIOUS PROTOCOLS

The Lie of a Jewish World Conspiracy—Is There a Jewish
Conspiracy?—Anonymous Accusations—The Mysterious “Protocols” of Sergei
Nilus—How did “Nilus” Secure Them?—Contradictory Explanations—Who is
“Nilus”?—How his Sponsors Disagree—What Russian Publicists Say.


Is there a Jewish conspiracy against the world or is there a conspiracy
against the Jews? What are the so-called “Protocols of the Wise Men of
Zion?” Who is “the Russian mystic,” Sergius Nilus, the sponsor of the
Protocols? What forces are behind the anti-Jewish propaganda that is
international in scope and that seeks at this time to spread all over
the world the poison of prejudice and hatred against the Jews, reviving
long-exploded mediaeval legends?

Many Americans have asked these questions ever since the publication of
“The Cause of the World Unrest,” “The Protocols and World Revolution,”
“The Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion,” and the anti-Jewish articles in
Henry Ford’s Dearborn Independent.

In 1919 a translation of extracts from what purports to be a book by one
Sergius Nilus was published in Germany. During 1920 a translation was
published in England under the name of “The Jewish Peril,” and under
various titles, in different versions, it was reproduced in the United
States, France, Sweden, Denmark, Finland and even Japan. The Japanese
edition is in the Russian language. In all these books “the Russian
mystic,” Sergius Nilus, is given as the sponsor of a number of secret
“documents” by which it is intended to show that the Jews are
responsible for all the ills that have already befallen the world and
that are still to come.

The method is simple. Was there a revolution in Russia? Blame the Jews.
Was there a revolution in Germany? Blame the Jews. Who made the French
Revolution? The Jews. Who caused the World War? The Jews. Who profited
by the war? The Jews. Is there anywhere an industrial crisis? The Jews
are, of course, the cause of it. Has the World War brought forth
Bolshevism? The Jews are naturally the fathers of it. First the Jews
engineered the war, and then they pulled the strings behind the scenes
of the Peace Conference. They secured special privileges at the Peace
Table, because, according to the Protocols, they control the gold of the
world, the press of the world, the rulers of the world. And if, as a
result of the World War, millions of Jews have suffered untold agonies,
persecution, starvation, and pogroms, it is no doubt only part of their
deep-laid plot to gain control of the world for Zion through poverty and
suffering!

Are governments just to the Jews, giving them equal rights? Then it is
obvious that Jews are either at the head of such governments or are
hidden behind the present rulers. If the Jews cannot exert sufficient
influence over the rulers themselves, there are Jewesses in high places,
through whom the cause of Zion is served—and all this is done by the
Jews with but one aim in view—to dominate the world, to become its
autocratic masters, to break down the moral power of Christendom and set
up Israel as “the despot” over the peoples of the earth. According to
the Protocols, all this is engineered with the aid and through the
instrumentality of the Freemasons.

The propagandists everywhere, in Germany, England, France, the
Scandinavian countries, Japan and the United States, basing all their
arguments on the “Protocols” vouched for by “the Russian mystic” Sergius
Nilus, see in the present chaotic conditions the absolute fulfillment of
the prophecies outlined by the so-called “Wise Men of Zion” years ago.
The propagandists are violent and vicious, foaming at their mouths,
appealing to the basest passions, insinuating, accusing, pointing their
fingers at “the source of all evil”—at the Jews who constitute but a
fraction of one per cent of the world’s population, and who are in
Europe to-day, after the close of the World War, more wretched and
miserable than ever before,—persecuted, hounded and starved.

What are these mysterious Protocols? How did they come to “the Russian
mystic” who revealed them in 1905, and which have now been exhumed from
obscurity for the purpose of enlightening the world, and which point to
the Jews as the cause of all unrest, chaos and confusion?

Nilus, “the Russian mystic,” is credited with several versions of how he
had secured the Protocols, and his stories flatly contradict one
another. In 1905 he said that the Protocols were given to him by a
prominent Russian conservative whose name he did not mention, and who in
turn had received them from an unnamed woman who had stolen them from
“one of the most influential leaders of Freemasonry at the close of a
secret meeting of the initiated in France.” Then, several years later,
Nilus wrote that his friend himself had stolen the Protocols from “the
headquarters of the Society of Zion in France.” Several years
afterwards, in a new edition of his book, Nilus said that the
“Protocols” came from Switzerland and not from France. This time he
named his Russian conservative friend, Sukhotin, who had died in the
meantime. He added that the Protocols were not Jewish-Masonic but
Zionist documents secretly read at the Zionist Congress in Basle in
1897.

Then followed a new edition of the Nilus book bearing the date of 1917.
A translation of this edition has recently appeared in this country,
containing a brand-new explanation as to how the Protocols were rescued
and given to the world. This explanation is taken from the German
version published in Charlottenburg. The introduction to that edition
says that the Protocols, having been read from day to day at the Basle
Congress, were sent as read to Frankfort on the Main. The disclosure of
them came through the infidelity of the messenger.

The 1917 edition is published with a prologue and an epilogue, like a
drama, which indeed it is, with all the ingredients of melodrama—a
villain, a mysterious woman, a Grand Duke, a conspiracy to destroy the
world, and a saint—Nilus, who convicts himself in his own writings of
falsification in the giving of these various accounts of how the
Protocols came into his possession.

Nothing is known of Sergius Nilus. Russian standard reference books and
encyclopedias contain no mention of his name.

The anonymous American editor of the Nilus book gives the following
information about Nilus:

“Serge Nilus, in the 1905 edition of whose book was first published the
_Zionist Protocols_, was, as he states, born in the year 1862, of
Russian parents holding liberal opinions. His family was fairly well
known in Moscow, for its members were educated people who were firm in
their allegiance to the Tsar and the Greek Church. On one side he is
said to have been connected by marriage with the nobility of the Baltic
provinces. Nilus himself was graduated from the University of Moscow and
early entered the civil service, obtaining a small appointment in the
law courts. Later, he received a post under the Procurator of a
provincial court in the Caucasus. Finally, tiring of the law, he went to
the Government of Orel, where he was a landowner and a noble. His
spiritual life had been tumultuous and full of trouble, and finally he
entered the Troitsky-Sergevsky Monastery near Moscow. ‘In answer to his
appeal for pardon, Saint Sergei, stern and angry, appeared to him twice
in a vision. He left the Monastery a converted man.’

“From 1905 until the present, little is known of his activities.
Articles are said to have appeared from time to time in the Russian
press from his pen. A returning traveller from Siberia in August, 1919,
was positive in his statement that Nilus was in Irkutsk in June of that
year. Whether his final fate was that of Admiral Kolchak is not known.”

The American editor of Sergius Nilus’s book containing the “Protocols”
is hiding behind anonymity. The name of the traveller from Siberia who
was so positive in his statement that Nilus was in Irkutsk is also
concealed. And Serge Nilus to whom Saint Sergei “appeared twice in a
vision” “is said to have written articles in the Russian press” of which
nobody has knowledge.

In Germany, Nilus is described as follows:

“Sergius Nilus was an employee of the Russian secret police department,
of the _okhrana_, connected with the Church, especially relating to
‘foreign religions.’ He lived for some time at the Optina Pustina
monastery. In 1901 he published a book entitled ‘The Great in the Small
and the Anti-Christ.’ According to the Lutsch Sveta, Nilus claims to
have received in 1901 a copy of the text of the Protocols from the
secret archives of the Main Zionist organization in France, but he
published the ‘protocols’ only in 1905. A second edition appeared in
1911, and finally another edition was brought out in the beginning of
1917, but all copies are said to have been destroyed.”

“The Cause of the World Unrest,” an anonymous book published in England
and reprinted in this country, speaks of Nilus and the “Protocols” as
follows:

“In the year 1903 a Russian, Serge Nilus, published a book entitled _The
Great in Little_. The second edition, which was published at Tsarskoye
Selo in 1905, had an additional chapter, the twelfth, under the heading
‘Anti-Christ as a Near Political Possibility.’ This chapter consisted of
some twenty pages of introduction followed by the text of twenty-four
‘Protocols of Meetings of the Learned Elders of Zion,’ and the book ends
with some twenty pages of commentaries on these protocols by Nilus.

“Directly after the protocols, comes a statement by Nilus that they are
‘signed by representatives of Zion of the thirty-third degree.’ These
protocols were secretly extracted or were stolen from a whole volume of
protocols. All this was got by my correspondent out of the secret
depositories of the Head Chancellery of Zion. This Chancellery is at
present on French territory.”

In the edition of 1917 Sergius Nilus wrote:

     “My book has already reached the fourth edition, but it is only
     definitely known to me now and in a manner worthy of belief, and
     that through Jewish sources, that these protocols are nothing other
     than the strategic plans for the conquest of the world under the
     heel of Israel, and worked out by the leaders of the Jewish
     people—and read by the ‘Prince of Exile,’ Theodor Herzl, during the
     first Zionist Congress, summoned by him in August, 1897, in Basle.”

It will be shown later that the so-called Butmi edition of the
“protocols” published in 1907 contains the definite statement of the man
who claims to have translated them into Russian from the French in 1901
that the Elders of Zion mentioned in the Protocols are not to be
confounded with the Zionist movement.

In the 1917 edition Sergius Nilus wrote:

     “In 1901 I came into possession of a manuscript, and this
     comparatively small book was destined to cause a deep change in my
     entire viewpoint as can only be caused in the heart of man by
     Divine Power. It was comparable with the miracle of making the
     blind see. ‘May Divine acts show on him.’

     “This manuscript was called ‘the protocols of the Zionist Men of
     Wisdom,’ and it was given to me by the now deceased leader of the
     Tchernigov nobility, who later became vice-governor of Stavropol,
     Alexis Nikolayevitch Sukhotin. I had already begun to work with my
     pen for the glory of the Lord, and I was friendly with Sukhotin.
     _He was a man of my opinion_, that is, extremely conservative, as
     they are now termed.

     “Sukhotin told me that he in turn had obtained the manuscript from
     a lady who always lived abroad. This lady was a noblewoman from
     Tchernigov. He mentioned her by name, but I have forgotten it. He
     said that she obtained it in some mysterious way, by theft, I
     believe.

     “Sukhotin also said that one copy of the manuscript was given by
     this lady to Sipiagin, the Minister of the Interior, upon her
     return from abroad, and that Sipiagin was subsequently killed. He
     said other things of the same mysterious character. But when I
     first became acquainted with the contents of the manuscript I was
     convinced that its terrible, cruel and straight-forward truth is
     witness of its true origin from the ‘Zionist Men of Wisdom,’ and
     that no other evidence of its origin would be needed.”

Feodor Roditchev, one of Russia’s most famous liberals, a member of the
nobility, a former member of the Duma, writing recently of the Nilus
protocols and of Sukhotin whom Nilus described as a man of his own
opinion, says:

     “For months I hear on all sides about the Nilus book and its
     success in England, and I am asked, Who is Nilus? There was a
     Nilus, an associate justice of the Moscow District Court. It is
     said that the manuscript was given to Nilus by Sukhotin, the
     notorious zemstvo official of Chernsk.

     “The Berlin edition contains no mention of Sukhotin, but in that
     edition Nilus said, ‘Pray for the soul of the boyar Alexis.’

     “The name of the notorious Alexey Nikolayevitch Sukhotin means
     nothing to the present generation. But there was a time when his
     name attracted attention.

     “Sukhotin arrested the peasants of a whole village for refusing to
     cart manure from his stables because the animals there were
     infected with glanders. Judge Tsurikov released the peasants.
     Tsurikov was removed for this, while Sukhotin justified his act by
     writing to the Minister of the Interior, Durnovo, that he had
     arrested the peasants not because they refused to cart his manure
     but because they dared disobey him as a zemstvo official. The
     reactionary Chernsk nobility made Sukhotin marshal of nobility. So
     it was this man who furnished the protocols of the secret meetings
     of the representatives of Zion! But how did Sukhotin get the
     protocols? An unknown friend had brought them to him. They were
     given to him by an unknown lady who had received them from an
     unknown but energetic participant in the Basle Congress. Is this
     credible? Well, then, there is another version of the origin of the
     protocols—but that is for the German readers. The Russian
     government sent a spy to the Basle Congress. He did not go to the
     Congress himself, but bribed one of the participants. He was
     carrying the protocols from Basle to Frankfurt to the local masonic
     organization. He stopped on the way in a little town, and gave the
     protocols to the spy. He engaged copyists who worked all night and
     copied the protocols.

     “In the first Russian version the protocols were supposed to have
     been brought to Russia in French. According to the German version,
     the protocols were copied, consequently they were in German, but
     the most important thing is that the protocols are not protocols at
     all, but a monograph—which could be called ‘the dream of a member
     of the Black Hundreds.’”

A distinguished Russian publicist says of the sponsor of the “protocols”
as follows:

     “In Russia the problems of Christianity and Judaism have been
     studied by such men as Vladimir Solovyov, Professor Troitzky,
     Professor Kokovtsev, Kartashov, Bulgakov, Berdyayev—men of profound
     intellect and a living conscience. In them the counterfeit ravings
     of the ignorant monk (Nilus) evoked but a smile of contempt. The
     low level of the circles in which men like Nilus moved and worked
     is only too well known. It was the world of police denunciations,
     divorce perjuries, monastic servility and feigned, blasphemous
     piety. In order to attract attention, Nilus’s ‘Protocols of the
     Wise Men of Zion’ had to emigrate from Russia. And the further away
     they went, the better they fared.”




CHAPTER TWO

THE STORY FROM WHICH THE PROTOCOLS WERE FABRICATED

Essence of “Protocols” Was German Fiction of “Sir John Retcliffe”—Who
Was “Retcliffe”?—His Infamous Record—His Bloodcurdling Story—The Meeting
in the Cemetery—An Avowed Myth—Meeting Every Hundred Years Attended by
“Representatives of the Twelve Tribes of Israel”—The “Son of the
Accursed” Also Attends and Provides Comic Interludes.


The query now naturally arises, what is the origin of these much
heralded “Protocols” which were published in Russia by Sergius Nilus in
1905, and a copy of which, it is triumphantly announced, is now in the
British Museum?

The anti-Jewish propagandists everywhere content themselves with the
“history” of the origin of the “Protocols” as given by the “Russian
mystic” Sergius Nilus. But fortunately “murder will out,” and the
criminals who perpetrated the stupendous forgery for the purpose of
slandering the Jews have left behind clues that enable one to visualize
the very process that they pursued in the perpetration of their crime.

In 1866-1870 there appeared in Berlin a series of novels entitled
“Biarritz—Rome” purporting to have been written by “Sir John Retcliffe,”
the pseudonym of Herman Goedsche, a German novelist with an unsavory
past. To conceal his identity and to convey the impression that the
antisemitism with which his writings abounded emanated from English
sources, he selected “Sir John Retcliffe” as his pen-name.

According to _Meyer’s Konversations Lexikon_ (Sixth edition, 1904,
Volume VIII, page 77), Herman Goedsche was born in February, 1815, in
Trachenberg, Silesia, and died on November 8, 1878, at Warmbrunn. He was
employed in the postal service, but as he was implicated in the Waldeck
forgery case, he left the service in 1849, and devoted himself to
literary work. Under the name of “Armin” he published a number of works
of fiction, but he was best known under the name of “Sir John
Retcliffe,” having published a series of sensational novels describing
the Crimean war, “Sebastopol,” “Rena-Sahib,” “Villafranca,” “Puebla,”
“Biarritz,” in 1866. A new edition of these works appeared in Berlin in
1903-4.

_Brockhaus’ Konversations Lexikon_ (supplement volume XVII, 1904) refers
to Goedsche, the novelist, known under the name of “Sir John Retcliffe”
(formerly “Armin”), as having played an infamous role in the Waldeck
forgery case. He was compelled to leave the postal service, and later
became a member of the staff of the _Preussische Kreutz Zeitung_.

The chapter of the Goedsche-Retcliffe novel which on even a cursory
reading will be found to contain the very essence of the Nilus Protocols
was published as a separate booklet in a Russian translation in 1872,
avowedly as a work of fiction. I have found a copy of this little volume
in the Russian Department of the Library of Congress, Washington, D. C.

An examination of this chapter, entitled “The Jewish Cemetery in Prague
and the Council of Representatives of the Twelve Tribes of Israel,” will
disclose the fact that every substantive statement contained in the
Protocols and elaborated in them is to be found in the
Goedsche-Retcliffe novelette.

We are thus supplied with an early draft of the so-called Protocols,
which have now been given worldwide publicity by anti-Jewish
propagandists, and which were first introduced to the world in the form
of a clumsy piece of blood-curdling fiction of the dime-novel variety.

In substantiation of this statement I now present a translation of this
chapter of the Russian version of this novel found in the Library of
Congress in Washington, published in St. Petersburg nearly fifty years
ago.

[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF TITLE PAGE OF THE FANTASTIC STORY PUBLISHED
IN RUSSIA IN 1872, CONTAINING THE FIRST DRAFT OF THE PROTOCOLS IN THE
FORM OF FICTION.]

[Transcription:
ЕВРЕЙСКОЕ КЛАДБИЩЕ ВЪ ПРАГѢ

и

СОВѢТЪ ПРЕДСТАВИТЕЛЕЙ

ДВѢНАДЦАТИ КОЛѢНЪ ИЗРАИЛЕВЫХЪ.

       *       *       *       *       *

С.-ПЕТЕРБУРГЪ.
ТИПОГРАФІЯ ТОВАРИЩЕСТВА «ОБЩЕСТВЕННАЯ ПОЛЬЗА»,
по мойкѣ, у круглаго рынка, № 5.
1872.
]

[Transliteration:
EVREJSKOE KLADBISHHE V PRAGE

i

SOVET PREDSTAVITELEJ

DVENADCATI KOLEN IZRAILEVYH.

       *       *       *       *       *

S.-PETERBURG.
TIPOGRAFIJA TOVARISHHESTVA «OBSHHESTVENNAJA POL'ZA»,

po mojke, u kruglago rynka, № 5.

1872.
]

_Translation of Title Page_

    THE JEWISH CEMETERY IN PRAGUE
                  And
    THE COUNCIL OF REPRESENTATIVES
    Of The Twelve Tribes of Israel

              ST. PETERSBURG
Printed by the Association “Obschestvenaya Polza”
    On the Moika, at the Round Market, No. 5
                  1872

[Illustration: FACSIMILE OF THE FOREWORD TO THE STORY PUBLISHED IN 1872,
SHOWING THAT THE AUTHOR REGARDED IT AS A “LEGENDARY STORY,” COLORED BY
THE AUTHOR’S “FANTASTIC IMAGINATION.”]

[Transcription:
ПРЕДИСЛОВІЕ.


Описаніе еврейскаго кладбища въ Прагѣ и легендарный
разсказъ о собраніи представителей двѣнадцати
израильскихъ колѣнъ заимствованы изъ историко-политическаго
романа Сера Джона Редклиффа «До Седана»,
помѣщеннаго въ журналѣ, издаваемомъ Николаемъ
Степановичемъ Львовымъ.

Содержаніе легенды не есть вымыселъ одного Редклиффа;
скорѣе Редклиффъ, съ свойственнымъ ему фантастическимъ
вooбраженіемъ, собралъ части въ одно
цѣлое и окрасилъ все поэтическими красками, поражающими,
можетъ быть, чрезмѣрною яркостію, но
тѣмъ не менѣе представляющими интересъ.

       *       *       *       *       *

Дозволено цензурою, С.-Петербургъ, 17-го мая 1872 года.
]

[Transliteration:
PREDISLOVIE.

Opisanie evrejskago kladbishha v Prage i legendarnyj
razskaz o sobranii predstavitelej dvenadcati
izrail'skih kolen zaimstvovany iz istoriko-politicheskago
romana Sera Dzhona Redkliffa «Do Sedana»,
pomeshhennago v zhurnale, izdavaemom Nikolaem
Stepanovichem L'vovym.

Soderzhanie legendy ne est' vymysel odnogo Redkliffa;
skoree Redkliff, s svojstvennym emu fantasticheskim
voobrazheniem, sobral chasti v odno
celoe i okrasil vse poeticheskimi kraskami, porazhajushhimi,
mozhet byt', chrezmernoju jarkostiju, no
tem ne menee predstavljajushhimi interes.

       *       *       *       *       *

Dozvoleno cenzuroju, S.-Peterburg, 17-go maja 1872 goda.
]




_(Translation)_

FOREWORD


“The description of the Jewish cemetery in Prague and the legendary
story of the meeting of the representatives of the twelve tribes of
Israel are borrowed from the historico-political novel by Sir John
Radcliff, ‘To Sedan,’ published in the magazine edited by Nicholas
Stepanovitch Lvoff.

“The contents of the legend are not the invention of Radcliff himself;
rather Radcliff, with his characteristic fantastic imagination,
collected various parts into one whole and painted all with poetic
colors, which strike one perhaps by their excessive gaudiness, but which
are nevertheless interesting.”

       *       *       *       *       *

Passed by the Censor, St. Petersburg, May 17, 1872

This product of “Radcliff’s fantastic imagination,” the work of one
experienced in the perpetration of forgeries, will now be permitted to
tell its own story. It requires no commentary. It clearly foreshadows
the protocols, with all its accompaniment of melodrama, not even
omitting the Devil, himself.

     THE JEWISH CEMETERY IN PRAGUE

     and

     The Council of Representatives of the Twelve Tribes of Israel


     “The Jewish quarter of Prague represents a remarkable labyrinth of
     crooked and narrow streets; it is situated in the outskirts of
     Prague which witnessed numerous bloody episodes of Bohemian and
     German history. The dwellers of the dirty and dilapidated houses of
     this quarter are engaged in petty trading and profiteering in
     their own as well as in other parts of the city. Prague is the only
     city in Germany where the Jews live entirely isolated from the
     nation whose name they have taken in order to avail themselves of
     the privileges of the city population and to exploit it for their
     own purposes. The Jewish quarter in Prague is the same as the
     rag-fair in Vienna and the Temple in Paris. In these places deals
     amounting to thousands are transacted daily.

     “If you take a few steps along this dirty, foul market-place, you
     will suddenly come upon an old, high, decayed wall which surrounds
     a space of from two to three acres. Elder-trees and other wild
     shrubbery wind around this wall. Old Jewish houses are crowded all
     along near this wall, threatened with destruction at any moment.
     The strange circle formed by this wall has an unwelcome, puzzling
     appearance.

     “This is the city of the dead—the renowned Prague cemetery.

     “In this abode of rest may be seen the spirit of the nation, whose
     bones found shelter here after long wandering,—here is stamped all
     its history, full of sufferings, struggles and resistance.

     “It seems as though at any moment these tombs, overgrown with
     shrubbery, are ready to open, these stones growing for thousands of
     years are ready to raise themselves, and to let out into the world
     the restless wanderer with a pack upon his shoulder, with a staff
     in his hand, in order to go again to strange peoples,—to cheat and
     combat them and to seek a new Canaan—his dominion! The Jewish
     cemetery in Prague is the very oldest cemetery known. It was closed
     by order of the government a hundred years ago. For foreigners it
     is a historical landmark; for the Jews it is a sacred place. The
     impression of this deserted spot is intensified by its
     surroundings. Amidst the closely crowded tombs and monuments,
     overgrown with moss, only a narrow passage remains which is almost
     entirely covered with shrubbery of thorn-bushes and mat-weed.

     “During the inspection, the watchman will tell the visitor the
     history of the death of Rabbi Ben Manasseh, the great conqueror of
     death, and Rabbi Loewe, the most learned Rabbi of the 17th century;
     he will speak of Simon the Just and of the Polish princess Anna
     Shmiless. He will then lead the visitor to the monument of Anna
     Kohn on which can be read the mysterious figure 606, which shows
     that the Jews, more than twelve hundred years ago, had buried
     their dead here, in the legendary times of Lyubush and her
     daughters.

     “If we are not to believe this figure, we must nevertheless agree
     with the opinion of the Jews that this is the oldest settlement and
     the first Jewish community in Europe.

     “Silently the Jewish guide and the curious foreigner go by one
     place where under an old lilac bush a heap of stone stands out, and
     when the foreigner asks, ‘What is this?’ the guide gives an evasive
     answer——

     “‘Beth Chaim—the house of life.’ Thus is the cemetery called. Yes,
     indeed, this place of rest is a house of life, for from here is
     given the mysterious impulse which makes the exiles masters of the
     earth and tyrants of nations,—the impulse which directs the golden
     calf to the chosen tribe.

     “The Jewish town has assumed a holiday aspect. The stands of the
     petty retailers have disappeared; Jewish boys and girls were
     strolling about in their holiday attire. The houses and windows
     were adorned with green branches. On the old benches sat men,
     talking seriously; in the alleys youths were chatting. From time to
     time men and women in their best Sabbath clothes were going to the
     synagogue, carrying prayer books in their hands; while poor
     Christian women whom need had forced to work in this quarter were
     running with keys and dishes in order to prepare for the feast.

     “It was the last day of the Feast of Booths, the day of Assembly,
     and dusk was gathering over the narrow streets, while the Christian
     part of the city was still brightly illumined by the last rays of
     the setting sun. Two men (the older wore a black silk mantle, with
     long earlocks, which showed that he was a Polish Jew; the other was
     middle aged, in modern clothes, with diamond studs in his shirt and
     a heavy golden chain on his vest) walked along the narrow streets,
     without paying any attention to the crowd.

     “The younger seemed to be the guide. Having come with his companion
     to the little house where the watchman of the cemetery lived, he
     knocked at the closed door, through a crevice of which the bright
     light of wax candles was seen, showing the watchman’s holiday mood.
     It was a good summer—a large number of foreigners had visited the
     cemetery and were generous in their gifts.

     “In the doorway appeared the thin face of the watchman, whose
     short-sighted eyes began to look fixedly into the darkness.

     “‘Come out into the street, Joel, somebody wants to talk to you!’

     “‘O, God of Justice,’ said the watchman with amazement, as he came
     out of the door,—‘One of the trustees! What is your pleasure to
     command me?’

     “‘This Rabbi desires to make a brief prayer in the cemetery; he is
     leaving to-morrow morning by train.’

     “‘In the cemetery? This evening? But you know yourself, Mr. Banker,
     that I am forbidden to open the gates after sunset, and to-night is
     also the holy Sabbath.’

     “‘First of all, there is no need for you to shout here about my
     calling,’ replied the banker, displeased. ‘Every Jewish rag-picker
     will know that banker Rosenberg was here to see you. As for the
     permit to open the gates, I myself, as a trustee, authorize you to
     do it. I will wait here until he has completed his prayer. The
     company in your house must not know what we are doing here. Arrange
     it so that the curious crowd will not rush in there.’

     “The watchman disappeared in the house, but soon returned with a
     bunch of keys and opened the gates of the cemetery. He took a
     lantern along and was about to light it.

     “‘Don’t!’ said the Rabbi in a low voice. ‘I don’t need any light.
     Lock the gates from the inside!’

     “‘But, Mr. von Rosenberg——’

     “‘Lock it, I say!’

     “The watchman obeyed.

     “‘Now lead me to the grave of the holy Rabbi Simeon-ben-Yehudah!’

     “‘Hold on to my coat, esteemed sir,’ said the watchman. ‘It is dark
     and you may stumble over the old graves.’

     “‘I can see better at night than in the daytime, my son!’ answered
     the learned Polish Jew.

     “‘Here is the grave!’

     “The old Rabbi reverently leaned over the tombstone. The watchman
     heard him pronounce a prayer in Jewish. He used so many words of
     ancient Hebrew, or some other words of a language he did not
     understand, that he knew only a few separate expressions, although
     he himself had been in the past a teacher at the Bohemian
     community.

     “Having completed his prayer, the stranger turned to the watchman
     of the cemetery:

     “‘When you accepted the position from your predecessor, did he not
     give you certain instructions?’

     “‘Me?’

     “‘Yes, you! It was so from the day the first person was buried in
     this place.’

     “‘Well, and what if he did give such instructions,—how does that
     concern you? This the first time I am asked about this matter since
     I am employed here.’

     “‘Because this happens once in a hundred years, and human life
     rarely lasts as long as that.’

     “‘I see that you know about it, Rabbi,’ said the frightened
     watchman. ‘But I can obey you only if you mention the word which
     was given to me by my predecessor, because I took a sacred oath on
     the Bible.’

     “The Polish Jew bent down and slowly pronounced a word of seven
     syllables.

     “The watchman bowed respectfully.

     “‘You are the Rabbi!’ he said. ‘All will be done as you command!’

     “‘You will send away the friends who are feasting in your house
     before the clock strikes eleven. At the first stroke you will open
     the gates of the cemetery, and at the last stroke you will get into
     your house, lock the doors and windows, lie down in your bed and
     turn into a corpse together with the members of your
     household,—into a corpse that sees and hears nothing.’

     “‘I will neither look nor listen.’

     “‘The angel of death will leave your soul in your body and will
     force you to wander about among the graves to the end of time if
     you do not carry out my orders correctly. Now go, and remember that
     by virtue of your position you are the servant of the great
     Jerusalem synagogue. I need not tell you that you should not say
     anything to that vain, worldly man who brought me here.’

     “Both returned to the gates, near which the banker was still on
     guard.

     “‘Well,’ he said, ‘your desire is fulfilled, Rabbi, and you may
     inform my friend in Warsaw that Rosenberg and Son are always ready
     to do a favor to a guest recommended by such a personage. Now let
     us go home; my wife is waiting for us.’

     “‘Let us go, my son,’ replied the Rabbi. ‘But relieve me of
     worldly pleasures. I shall spend the night in prayer!’

     “The banker shrugged his shoulders and gave the watchman a gold
     coin.

     “‘Joel,’ he said in a low voice, ‘the other trustees of the
     community must not know about this violation of the rule.’

     “The watchman nodded, and the companion again disappeared in the
     dark streets, which had already become deserted, while in the
     houses people talked merrily and the sounds of holiday festivities
     were heard.

     “How poor, dirty and dark these little houses looked from outside!
     But it was quite different within! In the rear rooms of many of
     these houses the bright light of numerous wax candles was reflected
     in the splendid high mirrors, in expensive dishes and precious
     rugs. Girls and women, who in the morning perhaps walked with trays
     in their hands, now were seated at the tables in heavy silk gowns
     with golden chains and bracelets; their jewels and diamonds were
     glittering.

       *       *       *       *       *

     “The clock in the town-hall tower struck ten. In the chapel, near
     the statue of St. Nepomucenus, upon a stone bench, sat a
     large-sized man, with the pale serious face of Germanic type. Every
     physiognomist, looking at him, would have said that this man had
     devoted his youth to serious scientific work and that he had spent
     many sleepless nights over books.

     “The clock had just struck ten when upon the bridge appeared a man
     in a light summer coat, of about the same age as the young
     scientist. His face was pale, of waxen color, without the slightest
     natural red in his cheeks; his particularly prominent nose
     indicated his Jewish extraction; his forehead was high and large,
     his head was strongly developed. He walked straight over to the man
     who was waiting and who quickly arose.

     “‘Good evening. I see you have received my letter. Have you it with
     you?’

     “‘Yes, I know it by heart, I have read it so many times. “My
     friend,” it is written there, “I have promised to give you the key
     to the Caballah, if I ever find the opportunity to do so. Although
     I am not always in the habit of fulfilling my vows, I am ready to
     fulfil this one, if you will wait for me in the evening of October
     8, in Prague, on the old Moldau bridge, under the statue of
     Nepomucenus.” Then follows your name.’

     “‘Yes, that is correct. Have you not yet given up your desire?’

     “‘Less than ever before! You would render science an invaluable
     service.’

     “‘Listen, doctor, bend down a little over the rail; that of which
     we speak must not be heard even by the waves of the Moldau, if we
     wish to remain alive.’

     “The young scientist looked in astonishment at his comrade, but did
     as he desired.

     “‘Three years ago, in Rome, when I promised to acquaint you with
     the mysteries of the Caballah, I did it more for the sake of
     boasting of a power and authority which, in reality, I did not
     possess. Although I had studied for some time the traditions of my
     nation, rather out of curiosity than because of the love of
     knowledge, I knew very well that I could hardly penetrate the
     corridor of those mysteries which I am still regarding as the
     sophistry and roguishness of exalted minds, invented for the
     purpose of holding fools in fear and subordination. But several
     accidental discoveries, made by me since then, have changed my
     views and have aroused in me a sense of curiosity.

     “‘You know, notwithstanding our brief acquaintance, that I am not
     the type of man who would abandon a clue or a conceived plan. What
     has caused me to make you my companion in satisfying my
     curiosity—that does not concern you. It is enough that now we have
     an opportunity to satisfy our mutual desire, and all depends on
     whether you will agree to accept the conditions upon which I can
     make you a partner in my investigation.’

     “‘If these are not against honor and conscience.’

     “‘In this respect you have nothing to risk, you are rather risking
     something else—your life. Do you feel that you are capable of
     facing a serious danger?’

     “‘For the sake of science, yes!’

     “‘Very well, in that case I must tell you that I will lead you to a
     place which we will not leave alive, if our presence is discovered.
     The slightest suspicion that we were uninvited witnesses of the
     secret will bring upon us persecution which will kill us sooner or
     later.’

     “‘You are whetting my curiosity, signor!’

     “‘That is all I wanted to tell you. The other thing—you know that
     I am a Jew by birth. Although the Jews have driven me from their
     midst and cursed me according to their custom and traditions
     because I adopted Christianity,—still I have my own reasons for
     stipulating a condition—your word of honor that you will be silent
     about all you will see and hear, until I authorize you to speak.’

     “‘I swear by my honor.’

     “‘Very well. You will recall in your investigations of the Caballah
     that in the mysterious books mention is made of a meeting of the
     heads or chosen ones of the nation,—a meeting which takes place
     from time to time?’

     “‘Yes, in the Yezire it is said very definitely, and if I
     understood correctly, such meetings take place every hundred
     years.’

     “‘Yes. The last meeting took place in 1760 and you recall that
     shortly afterward the movement of Judaism started. It is now 1787
     years since the destruction of Jerusalem and this year is
     designated for a meeting of the Cabalistic Sanhedrin. This is the
     day of the meeting; the place is this city. I want to be present at
     this meeting in spite of the danger and am ready to take you along
     with me.’

     “‘But will it not be dishonest to listen, will it not be an
     unlawful interference with other people’s secrets?’

     “‘Per Bacco! as we Italians say; with such hesitations you must
     abandon once for all the idea of fulfilling your desire. Or do you
     think that the people who guard the secret of the Caballah will
     bring it to you on a tray? As far as I am concerned, I shall
     discover the secret, at any cost!’

     “After reflecting a few minutes, the scientist came to a decision.

     “‘I shall go with you, come what may!’

     “‘Very well. Now we have agreed. Let us go,—there is no time to
     lose.’”

       *       *       *       *       *

     “The tower clock of the town-hall struck eleven. At the first
     stroke a key clicked in the lock of the cemetery gates. Then
     followed profound silence which indicated that the cemetery was
     open. The lights in the Jewish houses were gradually dying out, and
     at the same time the sounds of the merry feasting also subsided.

     “Mysterious silence reigned in that terrible place.

     “The gates creaked softly; the rustling of long coats was heard,
     touching the stones and shrubbery; finally a vague white figure
     appeared and slipped by like a shadow along the pathways.

     “This figure knelt before one of the tombstones; three times it
     touched the stone with its forehead and softly whispered a prayer.

     “Along the path leading from the gates came an old man, bent,
     limping, sighing and coughing. He came over to the ancient
     tombstone, and lowered himself on his knees near the white figure
     that had entered before him, and he, too, whispered a prayer.

     “Then heavy footsteps were heard, and a tall, impressive figure
     appeared on the road, clad in a white mantle, and he, too, fell
     down on his knees, as though unwillingly, in front of the
     tombstone.

     “Thirteen times this was repeated. Thirteen old men came over to
     the tombstone. The doctor counted them, but he could not understand
     whether they were alive or dead. A shiver crept down his back, his
     heart began to beat faster from fright. He involuntarily recalled
     the terrible legend of the Day of Atonement in the tenth month,
     Tishri, in the synagogue of Posen when, during the prayer of Kol
     Nidrei, the congregation kept growing larger and larger; unknown
     people, pushing one another, wrapped in prayer shawls, came in, one
     hundred after another, until the terrified Rabbi lifted his hand as
     if to curse and exclaimed: ‘He who has flesh in his cheeks, let him
     throw off the prayer shawl!’ Hundreds remained covered, and when
     the prayer shawls were torn away from them, all saw the skulls of
     the dead who had come out of the graves to celebrate the Day of
     Atonement with the rest of the congregation.

     “As there, it seemed to him that the prayer shawls had fallen off
     the heads of the praying old men, and a row of dead skulls
     appeared. At that moment the clock struck twelve. A sharp metallic
     sound rang out on the grave, after which a blue flame appeared and
     illumined the thirteen kneeling figures.

     “‘I greet you, Roshe beth Aboth (heads) of the twelve tribes of
     Israel,’ announced a dull voice.

     “‘We greet you, son of the accursed.’

     “‘A hundred years have already passed. Where have the Nesiyim
     (princes of the tribes) come from?’

     “‘From the lands where the nation of Adonai has been scattered by
     the orders of our forefathers.’

     “‘Are you ready to fulfil the promise during the coming century?’

     “‘We are ready!’

     “‘Then say, whose representatives are you, and where do you come
     from? Tribe of Judah?’

     “‘From Amsterdam,’ replied a strong, loud voice.

     “‘Tribe of Benjamin?’

     “‘Toledo!’ came the dull answer.

     “‘Tribe of Levi?’

     “‘Worms!’

     “‘Tribe of Manasseh?’

     “‘Budapest!’

     “‘Tribe of Gad?’

     “‘Cracow!’

     “‘Tribe of Simeon?’

     “‘Rome!’

     “‘Tribe of Zebulun?’

     “‘Paris!’

     “‘Tribe of Dan?’

     “‘Constantinople!’

     “‘Tribe of Asher?’

     “‘London!’

     “‘Tribe of Issachar?’

     “The answer came in a faint voice and could not be heard
     distinctly.

     “‘Tribe of Naphtali?’

     “‘Prague!’

     “‘And I am the representative of the unfortunate and exiles,’ said
     the man who asked the questions in a dull voice. ‘I am myself
     wandering about all over the world in order that I may unite you
     for the sake of the cause of redemption which has been promised to
     the seed of Abraham and which was taken from them by the sons of
     him who was crucified! Who is here of the house of Aaron, let him
     rise, scrutinize the heads of the tribes and gather the council.’

     “The man who was the first to arrive rose and then seated himself
     upon the tombstone. One by one the others came over to him and
     whispered in his ear a seven-syllabled word, and each time he
     nodded in approval. After that all returned to their former
     places. ‘Brethren,’ said the Levite, ‘our fathers formed a union
     which compels all those chosen as representatives of the tribes to
     gather every hundred years at the grave of the great teacher of
     Caballah whose doctrines give the chosen ones power on earth and
     supremacy over all the descendants of Ishmael. Eighteen hundred
     years the struggle has been conducted by the nation of Israel for
     supremacy which was promised to Abraham and which was taken away
     from us by the Cross. Trampled under foot by our enemies, under the
     terror of death and all kinds of humiliation and violence, the
     nation of Israel, nevertheless, has not abandoned this struggle,
     and as they are scattered all over the earth, the whole earth must
     belong to them! Our learned men are conducting this struggle for
     hundreds of years; the nation is gradually rising from its fall;
     its power is growing and spreading. To us belongs the earthly god,
     which was made for us with such sorrow by Aaron in the desert ...
     the Golden Calf which the backsliders are worshipping!’

     “‘We hear!’ they whispered on all sides.

     “‘When all the gold on earth will be ours, the power will go over
     to us. Then will be fulfilled the promise made to Abraham. Gold is
     the ruler of the earth. Gold is power, reward, pleasure ... all
     that human beings fear and desire. This is the mystery of the
     Caballa ... the teachings concerning the spirit which rules the
     world, and about the future! Eighteen centuries we have belonged to
     our enemies. The future belongs to us. For the fifth time in the
     course of the thousand-year-old struggle to which we have
     consecrated ourselves, those who know of the existence of the
     secret union have gathered here to take counsel as to the means
     which are afforded us by the sins of our enemies, and each time,
     for five hundreds years, a new Sanhedrim, ordered the fiercest
     struggle. But, excepting Russia, not a single century has been
     crowned with such success as this one. Therefore we may think that
     the time for which we are striving is near, and we may say, “The
     Future is ours!”’

     “‘Yes, if persecutions against the Jews will not take place in the
     meantime!’ pointed out one of the men with a bitter smile.

     “‘The dark days of such a danger are passed. The success of
     so-called civilization among the Christian nations may serve as the
     best protection for our endeavors. Before listening to the
     individual opinions, let us examine the material means, the pure
     capital possessed by the nation of Israel....’

     “‘But against the three and a half million Jews with their money
     there are 265 million enemies in Europe, or rather 500 million
     fists,’ remarked one of these present.

     “‘The head will protect us against the fists, as in the past. Labor
     is the slave of speculation, and violence is the slave of wisdom.
     Who will deny that cunning is the distinctive trait of our nation?

     “‘Our nation is ostentatious and greedy, arrogant and
     pleasure-loving.

     “‘Where there is light there is also shadow. It is not in vain that
     Adonai our God gave his chosen people the tenacity of a snake, the
     cunning of a fox, the look of a falcon, the memory of a dog, the
     diligence of an ant, and the sociability of a beaver. We were in
     captivity on the rivers of Babylon, and have become powerful! Our
     temple was destroyed, but we have built a thousand new temples! For
     eighteen hundreds years we were slaves; now we have grown head and
     shoulders above all other nations.’

     “All the twelve pronounced the concluding words—

     “‘Brethren,’ said the Levite, ‘the time has come when, in
     accordance with the laws of the founder of our union, we must
     determine ways and means by which the Jews shall attain their goal
     as soon as possible; our experience of a hundred years will help us
     in this. We who know must direct and guide the masses which are
     blind. We, the builders, will combine the dead stones into a pillar
     which must reach the sky.’

     “‘The Tower of Babel was destroyed by the hand of Him whose name I
     dare not pronounce,’ said the sceptic.

     “‘Our structure rests upon the foundation of the promise made to
     Abraham. It is your turn to speak, representative of the tribe of
     Reuben! By what means will the Jewish nation achieve power and
     supremacy over all other nations on earth?’

     “A shrill, unpleasant voice then spoke:

     “‘All the princes and the lands of Europe are at present in debt.
     The stock exchange regulates these debts. But such things are done
     only by movable capital; therefore all the movable capital must go
     over to the hands of the Jews. The foundation for this is already
     laid, judging from what we have heard here. If we will be supreme
     in the stock exchange, we will attain the same supremacy in the
     governments. Therefore it is necessary to facilitate loans in order
     to get them into our hands all the more. Wherever possible, we must
     take in exchange for capital, mortgages on railroads, taxes, mines,
     regalia and domains. Furthermore, the stock exchange is a means for
     the transfer of the belongings of the small people to the hands of
     the capitalists, by drawing them into stock gambling. Transactions
     in securities are a splendid invention of our nation. Although the
     stock exchange members cheat one another sometimes, it is the
     outsider who always pays in the end.’

     “The voice which resounded on the Paris Bourse became silent.

     “‘Do the _zekenim_ agree with the opinion of our brother?’ asked
     the Levite.

     “A whisper of approbation was the answer to this question.

     “‘Representative of the tribe of Simeon, it is your turn now!’

     “A serious, dull voice resounded after this order. Each word was
     pronounced slowly and thoughtfully:

     “‘Ownership of land is always the iron-clad, everlasting possession
     of every country. This in itself gives power, respect and
     influence. Therefore, the Jews should secure the possibility of
     acquiring real estate. It will not be hard to accomplish this, if
     we acquire movable capital. Therefore it is necessary to facilitate
     loans on land. Under the fear of scandal we will destroy land
     wealth and minimize its importance. Ownership of land should be
     mobilized, if lands are sold as other commodities. The more we help
     in the breaking up of estates, the more easily will they fall into
     our hands. Under the pretext of relieving the poor classes, it is
     necessary to levy all taxes of states and communities on the land
     owners. When the land is in our hands, the labor of the Christian
     workers and farmers will give us a tenfold income.’

     “He who did not belong to any tribe laughed sneeringly.

     “‘This advice is good, but not new. Ask in Paris and in Vienna, who
     owns the houses there?’

     “A whisper of approbation was heard again.

     “‘Tribe of Judah, your turn!’

     “The voice that resounded was marked with conviction and reminded
     one of the sound of the Thaller.

     “‘Industry, the power of the burgher, which hinders the Jewish
     nation, must be paralyzed even as agriculture. The manufacturer
     should be no better than an ordinary worker. The means to
     accomplish this may be the unlimited freedom of trade. The
     manufacturer will take the place of the artisan as he does not have
     to work, only to speculate. The children of Israel can adapt
     themselves to all branches of work. Their capital and dexterity
     will be the substitute for right. Transforming the artisans into
     our factory workers, we will be in a position to direct the masses
     for our political purposes. Whoever resists this system will be
     destroyed by competition. The senseless and ungrateful masses will
     not support the artisans in this struggle, if commodities are
     reduced in price to a certain extent.

     “A noisy approbation of the new Sanhedrin showed that the soundness
     of this advice had long been appreciated and even applied in
     practice.

     “‘Now it is my turn,’ said the representative of Levi—‘I speak in
     the name of the tribe of Aaron. The natural enemy of the Jews is
     the Christian church. Therefore we must try to humiliate it, we
     must instill into it free-thinking, scepticism, and conflicts.
     Therefore we will, first of all, start a war on the clergy, we will
     try to arouse suspicion against it and ridicule it. The main pillar
     of the church is the school. Therefore we must gain influence over
     the young. Under the guise of progress and the equal rights of all
     religions, we will destroy the study of religion in Christian
     schools. Then the Jews may become teachers in all schools; then
     religion will be taught at home. And as there is little time left
     for that, the spirit of religion will gradually decline, and
     eventually it will be destroyed altogether. Agitation for the
     appropriation of property belonging to the churches and schools,
     the transfer of church property to the state, or (what is the same)
     into the hands of the Jews, will be our reward!’

     “Again approbation followed the words of the man who had spoken.
     Nobody contradicted him and he announced:

     “‘Representative of the tribe of Isaachar, it is your turn!’

     “Now an old, trembling voice spoke:

     “‘Let our brethren strive for the abolition of armed force. The
     coarse military art is not for the sons of Israel. Not everyone can
     be a Gideon! The army is for the defense of the throne and the
     school of narrow patriotism. Not the sword, but reason and money
     must rule. Therefore at every opportune instance, it is necessary
     to help the downfall of the military class, to arouse suspicion in
     the masses against it, and to incite animosity against one another.
     It is enough for the soldiers to do police duty and to protect the
     wealthy from those who have nothing.’

     “‘The Lion of Judah has spoken,’ said the stranger angrily. ‘David
     conquered Goliath. The nations will soon wear long coats instead of
     military armour. A slap on the bourse will be equivalent to a lost
     battle.’

     “It looked as though a storm was rising against this arrogant
     sarcasm, but one word from the eldest restored them all to calm.

     “‘This is the son of Baal! He may say whatever he pleases. But he
     will do whatever is decided by the council of the tribes.’

     “‘The tribe of Zebulun may speak!’

     “A dull voice, like a storm in the distance, said as follows:

     “‘Our nation is conservative to its very root, and clings fast to
     what is old. But our interest demands that we participate, or,
     rather, direct the movements of nations. It is indisputable that
     ours is a time of many reforms, whose main purpose is the
     amelioration of the material condition of the needy classes. But
     for this the propertied classes must sacrifice their capitals.
     Capital is in the hands of the Jews. Therefore they must outwardly
     take part in the movement and try to divert it from social and
     political reforms. The masses themselves are blind and foolish, and
     permit the shouters to rule over them. Who shouts more loudly and
     more shrewdly than the Jews? Therefore our nation has been the
     first on the platform, in the press, and in all Christian
     communities! The more communities and meetings, the more
     dissatisfaction and idleness. From this it follows inevitably that
     the people grow poorer, that they become subjected to those who
     have money, leading to the enrichment of the latter. Besides, every
     movement makes us richer, for the smaller people are ruined and are
     contracting debts. The unstability of the foundation increases our
     power and our influence. Therefore the support of every kind of
     dissatisfaction, every revolution, increases our capital and brings
     us nearer to our goal.’

     “This terrible speech was followed by prolonged silence. Every
     member of this secret Sanhedrim seemed to be thinking of its
     terrible meaning. The son of Baal again laughed hoarsely.

     “‘Are you afraid of blood? It isn’t yours.’

     “Then one member of the gathering expressed his approval, and all
     others followed his example.

     “‘Son of the tribe of Dan, your turn!’

     “The answer bore the stamp of a Jew of the lower order:

     “‘Every business in which there is speculation and profit must be
     in our hands. That is our natural right. First of all, we must get
     control of the traffic in liquor, butter, wool, and bread. Then we
     shall have in our hands agriculture, farming. We can prepare bread
     everywhere, and if dissatisfaction and want should arise, we can
     easily throw the blame on the government. Petty wares, which give a
     great deal of trouble and yield very little profit, we can leave in
     the hands of the Christians. Let them work hard and suffer as the
     chosen people suffered for several centuries.’

     “This speech scarcely needed approval. The Levite called on the
     next one.

     “‘Tribe of Naphtali?’

     “The following words rang out shrilly and with assurance:

     “‘All governmental positions should be open to us. Once this
     principle is established, the cunning and flattery of the Jewish
     employees will help them to penetrate even there, and they will
     have real influence. I am speaking only of the posts which bring
     honor, power, and pre-eminence. Positions which require work and
     knowledge may remain for the Christians. Therefore the Jews may
     neglect positions of secondary importance. Justice is very
     important for us, the law is a great step forward. This occupation
     is suited to the cunning and skill of our people and gives us
     influence and power against our natural enemies. Why can’t a Jew be
     Minister of Education as he has already been more than once
     Minister of Finance?’

     “‘Remember the scaffold of Haman, the fate of Shushan and Leopold!’
     said a warning voice.

     “‘Why does the raven croak about the past which is so distant and
     almost forgotten? More than one of our people has been a Minister
     in France and respected by the King himself.’

     “Approval was expressed in a tone of satisfied pride; then the
     orator continued:

     “‘Our people must be among the legislators of the governments. The
     laws of the goyim against the children of Israel must be abolished.
     We will maintain the laws of our Fathers. We need no longer any
     laws that would protect us. No. We must concern ourselves about
     laws that will give us privileges. A mild law respecting
     bankruptcy, promulgated in the interests of humanity, would be a
     golden mountain in our hands. First of all we must see to it that
     the law regarding usury is abolished in all countries under the
     pretext that money would thereby become cheaper. Money is just such
     a commodity as others, and the law should give us the right to
     regulate its price according to our desire.’

     “‘Now is the turn for the tribe of Benjamin.’

     “‘What can I add to the counsel of such wise men? The Jew should
     also make use of honors, and should be at the head of all
     organizations that may give him honor without risks, and he should
     engage in science and the arts which are more adapted to the
     character of our people and which we can master more easily. We can
     become good actors and philosophers, because there is room for
     speculation in these domains. In the arts our people will look
     after the reception and will burn incense to ourselves. In science
     we will take up medicine and philosophy. These afford opportunities
     for theories and speculation. A physician penetrates the secrets of
     families and holds their lives in his hands.’

     “‘Tribe of Asher, your turn!’

     “‘We must demand free marriage between Jews and Christians. Israel
     will only be the gainer, even though there be an admixture of
     impure blood to a certain degree. Our sons and daughters will marry
     into renowned and powerful Christian families. We give money and
     thus have influence. The Christian relationship cannot have a bad
     influence on us, while we can exert a strong influence over them.
     That is one thing. Another thing is that we respect the Jewish
     woman and we enjoy the forbidden pleasure with the women of our
     enemies. We have money, and for money we can get everything. A Jew
     must never make a daughter of his own race his mistress. If he
     should desire to sin against the Seventh Commandment he should
     content himself with Christian girls.’

     “‘What is the use of employing the beautiful girls of the goyim in
     our stores if not for this?’ angrily interposed the representative
     of the evil spirit. ‘Whoever will not want to satisfy our desire
     will get no work, consequently no bread. Go to the large cities and
     you will see that they are not waiting for your wise men’s orders.
     Substitute a contract for sacrament in the marriage of Christians
     and their wives and daughters will come to you still more readily.’

     “The terrible cynicism of these words, touching such a delicate
     subject, must have produced a profound impression, especially since
     the views of the ancient doctrines were so strict on the topic of
     moral purity.

     “‘What does the law say?’ asked one of the twelve.

     “‘For adultery with a woman of our own people—death; for seducing a
     girl—a fine, if she was not betrothed; if she was betrothed—death.
     But the law is not so rigorous with regard to one who lives with a
     slave—her body belongs to her master.’

     “‘Are the goyim better than our slaves?’

     “This explanation was followed by a whisper of approval.

     “‘The tribe of Manasseh may speak now!’

     “The last of the orators lifted his hand and during his speech he
     raised and lowered it, as if desiring thus to make a stronger
     impression by his words. His voice was hoarse and unpleasant, but
     he spoke skilfully and with assurance.

     “‘If gold is the first power in the world, the press is the second.
     Of what value are all the opinions and advice given here without
     the aid of the press? We will attain our aim only when the press is
     in our hands. Our people must direct the daily publications. We are
     cunning, shrewd, and we possess money which we know how to utilize
     for our purposes. We need great political newspapers which mold
     public opinion—criticism, the literature of the streets and the
     stage. In this way we will crowd out the Christians step by step,
     and will dictate to the world what it should believe in, what it
     should respect, and what it should curse. We will repeat the
     sorrowful cry of Israel and the complaints against the persecutions
     which are directed against us. Then, even though each individual
     may be against us, the masses, in their stupidity, will always be
     for us. With the press in our hands, we can turn wrong into right,
     dishonesty into honesty. We can shake all foundations, and separate
     families. We can destroy faith in all that our enemies, until now,
     have believed. We can ruin credits and arouse passions. We can
     declare war; we can award fame or disgrace. We can uplift or ruin
     talent.

     “‘When Israel shall have gold and the press in his hands, we will
     be able to ask: “On what day will it please you to _put on Atarah_
     (crown) which belongs to us by right, to erect Shisse (?) and
     extend the Shebet (sceptre) over the nations of the earth?”’

     “A noisy greeting followed these words and the agitated men who
     listened hardly understood for some time what was being said at the
     meeting. At last the voice of the Levite called upon all to be
     silent.

     “‘The Roshe-Bate-Aboth of the twelve tribes have uttered words of
     wisdom. These words will be as pillars for the times to come, if
     the son of him “who has not rest” will write these words upon his
     memory and spread the seeds among the nation of Israel in order
     that it may grow to be a mighty tree. They will be the sword with
     which Israel will strike down his enemies. Our posterity must share
     among themselves happiness, wealth and power as it shared
     misfortune and dangers. They must help one another. Wherever one of
     them places his foot, he must drag another—his brother—along with
     him. If one of them is unfortunate, others must help him, if he but
     lives according to the law of our nation.

     “‘He who was in prison for ten years, may become a rich man to whom
     princes will bow, if only our people will not forsake him. Where
     everybody is against us, all will be for us. After forty years of
     wandering in the desert, the hand of Jehovah brought us to power in
     the land of Canaan; the same hand will lead us after forty-five
     times forty years from our misfortune and miseries to rule over
     lands which are forty-five times vaster than Canaan. If Israel
     shall obey the decision here adopted by the Sanhedrin of the
     Caballah, our grandchildren, coming a hundred years hence to the
     grave of the founder of our union, will announce to him that they
     have indeed become the princes of the world and that the promise
     made to the nation of Israel has been fulfilled. Other nations will
     become his slaves! Renew our oath, sons of the golden calf, and go
     to all lands of the world.’

     “The blue flame flared up brightly upon the grave of the Rabbi;
     each of the thirteen threw upon the tomb a stone which each carried
     under his cloak.

     “It seemed to the doctor that on the top of the tombstone, in the
     bluish flame, there appeared a monstrous golden figure of an
     animal.

     “Then he heard the same metallic sound that he had heard when the
     light first appeared. Then impenetrable darkness covered the
     cemetery.

     “The white figures again slipped by among the tombstones. The gates
     creaked softly.

     “The clock in the tower struck two past midnight. The last of the
     mysterious visitors knocked at the window and a hoarse voice said
     (as though the speaker knew that the watchman was not asleep):

     “‘Close the house of life, watchman of those who are awaiting the
     resurrection, and may your lips be sealed with the seal of Solomon
     for a hundred years.’

     “The scholar still lay motionless; he was afraid to stir; all he
     had heard had made upon him such a dreadful impression.

     “A noise near him indicated that his companion was rising.

     “‘To concentrate in their hands all the capital of the nations of
     all lands; to secure possession of all the land, railroads, mines,
     houses; to be at the head of all organizations, to occupy the
     highest governmental posts, to paralyze commerce and industry
     everywhere, to seize the press, to direct legislation, public
     opinion and national movements—and all for the purpose of
     subjugating all nations on earth to their power! No! I shall
     struggle against the golden calf and shall smash it to pieces as
     Moses smashed it in the desert.’

     “‘What we heard is a threat against all society. Here is my hand, I
     will be your comrade in this struggle against the power of gold.’

     “The Italian shook his head, but accepted the extended hand. ‘No,’
     he said, ‘I want to act alone. There is a force which, if properly
     directed, is not weaker than gold. That force is poverty and her
     companion, labor. I shall call them out and lead them into battle.
     Proud Israel! Beware! I shall put against you the _Artel_ (union)
     and Labor.’

     “‘And I,’ said the scholar, with animation, ‘all that is lofty and
     noble,—science, idealism, faith—I shall lead these against this
     materialism.’

     “His comrade laughed:

     “‘Your ideals will crumble as clay striking against metal. Only the
     forces of poverty and hunger can be the fighters that will defeat
     the golden calf. Our ways part here; you will go one way, and I
     another. My promise is fulfilled; but remember your vow—be silent
     as to all that you have heard and seen here!’”

This is the weird, fantastic “thriller” from which sprang the Protocols.
It is the first stage. According to this story not only were there
present at a secret meeting in the Prague Cemetery, the representatives
of the twelve tribes of Israel, ten of which totally disappeared nearly
twenty-five centuries ago, but also the son of “the accursed one,” the
Devil, was there, making side-remarks from time to time. His assigned
function was that of spreading the decisions of the Wise Men of Zion
among the Jews in order that they conquer the world.

Dr. Herman L. Strack, professor of theology at the University of Berlin,
one of the foremost Christian authorities on theological and religious
literature, commenting on this Goedsche-Retcliffe concoction, says that
this tale of the ghostly convocation in the Jewish cemetery at Prague,
discloses no real knowledge of Judaism, that the reference to mixed
marriages indicates gross ignorance of actual Jewish thought, and that
the Hebrew words supposed to have been employed by the spokesmen for the
various tribes appear to have been borrowed from a dictionary. He also
points to Goedsche-Retcliffe’s story and the “Rabbi’s Speech” about to
be mentioned as the sources of the Protocols.




CHAPTER THREE

FICTION FORGED INTO “FACT”

The Lie in its Second Stage—The Tale Becomes “Fact”—The “Rabbi’s”
Speech—Its Authenticity Vouched for by “Retcliffe”—An Illuminating
Footnote—A Dedication to the Russian “Black Hundreds”—The Imaginary
“Speech” Bears Witness to Authenticity of “Protocols,” Themselves Based
on “Speech”—Three Stages of the Lie.


A number of years after this Russian translation of the
Goedsche-Retcliffe story appeared, Sir John Retcliffe, alias Goedsche,
deeming it important for his purpose of adding fuel to the flame of
anti-semitism that had been lighted in Germany, undertook to convert
this work of fiction, this offspring of his imagination, into a
statement of fact. This led him to adopt the simple device of
consolidating into one continuous speech the dialogue contained in his
shilling shocker, and putting the speech into the mouth of an imaginary
Rabbi in such a way as to make it appear to be an address delivered by
him to a secret convocation of Jews. And the very man who had invented
the speeches set down in his work of fiction twenty years before, now
vouched for the authenticity of the obviously fabricated speech which he
attributed to a Rabbi who had his birth in the contorted mind of this
notorious forger.

A translation from the Russian of the apocryphal “Rabbi’s Speech,” with
the introductory note as published in Russia by G. Butmi, in 1907, in a
book entitled “The Enemy of the Human Race,” dedicated by the author to
the Black Hundreds, will now be laid before the reader. A comparison of
it, with the scene in the cemetery, will at once demonstrate the
identity of authorship. Below is a facsimile of the title page of this
book, a copy of which is in the Russian collection of the Library of
Congress, in Washington, D. C.

[Illustration: Cyrillic]

[Transcription:
Г. БУТМИ.

ОБЛИЧИТЕЛЬНЫЯ РѢЧИ.


ВРАГИ

РОДА ЧЕЛОВѢЧЕСКАГО.

ПОСВЯЩАЕТСЯ СОЮЗУ РУССКАГО НАРОДА.

Четвертое, обработанное и дополненное изданіе.


С.-ПЕТЕРБУРГЪ.

Тип. Училища Глухонѣмыхъ Гороховая, 18.

1907.
]

[Transliteration:
G. BUTMI.

OBLICHITEL'NYJA RECHI.


VRAGI

RODA CHELOVECHESKAGO.

POSVJASHHAETSJA SOJUZU RUSSKAGO NARODA.

Chetvertoe, obrabotannoe i dopolnennoe izdanie.


S.-PETERBURG.

Tip. Uchilishha Gluhonemyh Gorohovaja, 18.

1907.
]


THE RABBI’S SPEECH

To the Jewish People.[*]

[Footnote *: NOTE. (Toward the end of the last century there appeared a
book in London by Retcliffe entitled “A Review of Political and
Historical Events During the Past Ten Years.” This work was translated
into French. The French periodical press, without waiting for the
complete translation of the book, reproduced certain parts of it because
they were of special interest. Thus the French newspapers and magazines
published translations from the English of an intensely interesting
speech, most edifying for Russia (from the Hebrew), delivered by one of
the Rabbis, THE AUTHENTICITY OF WHICH SPEECH IS VOUCHED FOR BY THE
ABOVE-MENTIONED AUTHOR. This inimitable gem must in the eyes of Russians
assume all the more importance since it is brought out by that “highly
civilized” humane and practical country, England, which has given
protection to the Russian Jews against the unsuccessfully invented
persecutions on the part of the Russian government and people. This
monstrous document was sent at the time in printed form, in the French
language, to the editorial office of the Odessa newspaper “Novorosisk
Telegraph” for those who might want to examine the accuracy of the
translation published in No. 4996 of that newspaper, dated January 15,
1891, and reprinted in No. 21 of the Petersburg newspaper “Znamya,”
dated January 22, 1904. THE SPEECH RELATES TO THE TIME OF THE SANHEDRIN
OF 1869.)]

[Paragraphs which are indented and parts in italics were omitted in the
Butmi version, but are given in the French publication “Le Péril Judéo
Maçonnique—I. Les Protocols des Sages de Zion,” by Jouin, Paris, 1920.]

     “Our fathers ordained the chosen ones in Israel to gather, without
     fail, once every century, at the grave of our great Master Caleb,
     the sainted Rabbi Simeon Ben Judah, whose great knowledge is
     imparted to the elect of each generation to gain the power over the
     whole world and authority over all the descendants of Israel....

          “It is already eighteen centuries that the war of Israel is
          being waged with the power which had been promised to Abraham
          but which had been snatched away from him by the _Cross_.
          Trampled under foot, humiliated by his enemies, ceaselessly
          under threats of death, of persecution, of rapine and violence
          of every sort, Israel has not succumbed; and if he is
          dispersed over the whole world it is because the whole world
          should belong to him.

     “It has been for a few [eighteen] centuries now that our learned
     men have been fighting against the Cross with courage and
     persistence which nothing can break. Our people is rising gradually
     and, with each day, its forces are growing. _It is to us that this
     God of the day belongs, which was erected by Aaron in the
     wilderness, this golden calf, this universal deity of the epoch._

     “When we become, at last, the sole possessors of all the gold to be
     found on earth, the true power will practically be transferred to
     our hands, and the promises made to Abraham will be fulfilled.
     _Gold—is the greatest power on earth; it is might, reward, the
     instrument of every authority, it is all man, both fears and
     desires. This is the sole mystery, the most profound science of
     that spirit with the aid of which the entire world is ruled._ This
     is what the future holds in store. Eighteen centuries have belonged
     to our enemies; this century and the following must belong to us,
     the People of Israel, and will be ours, without fail. Here, for the
     tenth time during a thousand years of cruel and incessant struggle
     with our enemies, have assembled at this cemetery; at the grave of
     the great Master, Caleb, the sainted Rabbi Simeon Ben Judah, the
     elect of each of the tribes of the Israelite people, in order to
     discuss and agree upon, the means of making use, in the interests
     of our cause, of all the tremendous mistakes and errors, which our
     enemies—the Christians—have not ceased to commit. Every time the
     new Sanhedrin (assembly) proclaimed and preached merciless warfare
     against our enemies, but not once during the past centuries did our
     forefathers succeed in concentrating in our hands such an enormous
     quantity of gold [_and consequently of power_] as the nineteenth
     century has given us. We are therefore able, without any senseless
     illusions, to flatter ourselves with the hope of attaining our goal
     before long, and we can look forward with assurance into the very
     eyes of the future.

     “Persecutions and insults,—these sombre and tortuous times, which
     the people of Israel bore with heroic patience,—have fortunately
     come to an end, owing to the progress of civilization among the
     Christians, and this progress is the best shield under which we can
     hide and scheme, in order that we may cover quickly and decisively
     the last leg of that distance which divides us from our supreme
     aim. Let us cast a cursory glance at the economic situation of
     Europe and analyze the resources which fell to the Israelites from
     the beginning of the present century, owing to the concentration in
     their hands of the tremendous capital which is in their possession
     at the present time. It turns out that in Paris, London, Vienna,
     Berlin, Amsterdam, Hamburg, Rome, Naples, etc. [_and in all
     lands—the Rothschilds_], that everywhere, the Israelites are the
     masters of the financial situation, being as they are possessors of
     many billions, not to mention localities of the second and third
     class where all the financial funds are in their hands and not
     mentioning that, without their direct influence, no financial
     operation, no work of any importance, could be carried out anywhere
     at any time. At present, all the emperors, kings and ruling princes
     are burdened with tremendous debts incurred in order to be able to
     maintain numerous standing armies [_to sustain their tottering
     thrones_]. The Bourse quotes and regulates these moneys, and we are
     the full masters of the Bourse in all the centres of the globe. The
     problem before us now is to facilitate even to a greater extent the
     means of contracting these loans and thus to become the sole
     managers of all valuables, after which the exploitation of all
     their railroads, mines, forests, large factories and industrial
     plants, as well as of all other (real property) including duties
     and taxes, will fall into our hands, as a security for the capital
     lent by us to the various States.

     “Agriculture will forever remain the principal source of a
     country’s wealth. The possession of large plots of land will pave
     for us even a broader way to honors and will strengthen our
     influence (over the highest officials of the country). From this
     follows, that our efforts will be directed towards inducing our
     brethren in Israel to make large agricultural purchases. We must,
     therefore, do our utmost to break up large estates into small
     parcels, in order to be able to purchase them in the easiest and
     quickest way. Under the pretext of trying to help the working
     classes, it is necessary to oppress the large landowners with
     taxation in all its severity. When these possessions will thus
     gradually be transferred into our hands, the whole labor of the
     Christian proletariat will become for us a new source of tremendous
     profits. _Since the Christian Church is one of our most dangerous
     enemies, we must work tirelessly to weaken its influence, and in
     order to accomplish this, it is necessary to use all our efforts to
     implant in the Christian intellectual class ideas of atheism,
     scepticism, dissension and to call forth religious disputes among
     the newly-formed groups and sects of Christendom._

          “Logically, we must begin by depreciating the ministers of
          this religion. Let us declare open war on them, let us provoke
          suspicions on their devotion, on their private conduct, and by
          ridicule and persiflage we shall be right in the consideration
          attached to the state and the costume of the priest.

     “Every war, every revolution, every political and religious
     upheaval brings nearer the moment when we shall attain the great
     end for which we have been striving so long. Commerce and
     speculation—these branches, most plentiful in their fruits,—must
     never be suffered to slip out of the hands of the Israelites.

          “... and once these branches have become identified with us,
          we shall, through the flattery and perspicacity of our
          executives, know how to penetrate to the prime source of true
          influence and power. It is understood that we are concerned
          only with those pursuits that entail honors, power or
          privileges, for all those that require knowledge, labor or
          disagreeable conditions, these can and should be left to the
          Christians. The magistrature is an institution of prime
          importance for us. The legal profession develops most the
          faculty of civilization and initiates one furthest in the
          affairs of our natural enemies, the Christians, and it is
          through it that we can subject them to our mercy. Why should
          not the Jews become Ministers of Instruction when they have so
          often been Ministers of Finance? The Jews must also aspire to
          the rank of legislators with the object of abrogating the laws
          made by the Goim, faithless sinners, against the sons of
          Israel, the true believers, in their invariable attachment to
          the holy laws of Abraham.

          “Moreover, on this point, our plan is nearing the most
          complete realization, for progress has nearly everywhere
          recognized and accorded to us the same civic rights as to
          Christians, but that which it is of importance to obtain, that
          which must be the object of our ceaseless efforts, is a law
          less severe on bankruptcy. We shall make of it a gold mine
          more rich than were ever the mines of California.

          “With this object in view the people of Israel must direct its
          ambition towards those high offices of authority which have
          the power to distribute honors and esteem. The most assured
          way of attaining such offices is to have weight and importance
          in the various industrial enterprises, financial and
          commercial operations, and to be on guard for all pitfalls and
          temptations which may lead to the prosecution of the sons of
          Israel in the country’s courts.

          “Our people, in deciding upon one operation or another, must
          be guided by wisdom and tact, which are the distinguishing
          traits of its natural gifts. We must not remain passive to
          anything that may aid us in gaining a place of honor in
          society; philosophy, medicine, law, political economy—in other
          words, all branches of science, art, literature—represent a
          wide field where even our smallest successes, developing our
          abilities, will be of great benefit to our cause.

          “These vocations are inseparable from speculation. Thus the
          production of a musical composition, even though it be very
          mediocre, will furnish to our co-religionists a plausible
          reason for elevating on a pedestal and surrounding with a halo
          the Jew who will be the author of it. As for the sciences,
          medicine and philosophy, they must equally be a part of our
          intellectual domain.

     “_To the physician are usually confided the most intimate secrets
     of the family and he, therefore, holds in his hands the health and
     life of our ancient enemies—the Christians._ We are obliged to
     encourage matrimonial unions between Israelites and Christians, for
     the people of Israel, risking no loss whatsoever from such contact,
     will only gain from such unions.

          “... The introduction of a certain quantity of impure blood
          into our God-chosen race will not corrupt it. Our daughters
          will furnish us with these marriages alliances with Christian
          families that possess influence and power. In exchange for the
          money that we give, it is just that we obtain influence on
          everything that surrounds us.

     “Our relationship with the Christians will not make us deviate from
     the path we have always been following; on the contrary, with a
     certain degree of artfulness and cunning, this relationship will
     gradually make us full masters of their destinies. _It is
     desirable, that the Israelites refrain from keeping concubines of
     our holy faith and rather select Christian girls for the part._ The
     substitution of the simple formality of a contract before some
     civil power for the church ceremony is of the greatest importance
     to us, because on this condition Christian women will overflow our
     camp.—If gold is the first power on this earth, then the second
     power is undoubtedly the press. But of what significance is the
     latter without the former? Since we cannot realize all the
     above-stated aims without the assistance of the press, _it is
     absolutely necessary that the management of all the newspapers and
     magazines of all the countries, be in our hands. The possession of
     gold, of the press and of sufficient means for the satisfaction of
     certain qualities of its soul, will make us masters of public
     opinion and will subjugate to us the masses._

     “Following this method on every step of our way with a persistence
     which is one of our highest qualities, we will push the Christians
     aside and reduce their influence to zero. We will dictate to the
     world what it should believe, what it must revere or despise. It is
     possible that persons will be found who will arise against us;
     arming themselves, they will hurl insults and curses at us; but the
     docile, ignorant masses will harken to us and will take our part.
     _Once we become absolute masters of the press, we will easily be
     able to refashion the ideas of honor, of virtue, of
     faithfulness—and to deal the first blow to the family-conception
     which is considered to this day as the most sacred institution and
     which must be reduced to a state of decay. We shall then be able to
     uproot the belief in that which our enemies, the Christians, shall
     have worshipped until that time and instead of that, having brought
     up the army in a spirit of infatuation with the various passions,
     we shall openly declare war upon everything that the gentiles are
     at present revering and worshipping._

     “May all this be understood and noted, and let every child of
     Israel become imbued with its true principles. Then our might will
     grow like a gigantic tree the branches of which will bear fruits,
     known as riches, pleasure, power.

          “... as a compensation for that hideous condition which for
          long centuries has been the unique lot of the people of
          Israel.

     “When one of us makes a step forward let the next one follow him.
     If his foot slips let his co-religionists hasten to support him.
     If an Israelite is trapped by the court of the country in which he
     resides, his brethren in faith should use all their efforts to get
     him out of trouble or to help him otherwise, but on the condition
     that the Israelite in question acted according to the laws which
     Israel observes strictly and guards for so many centuries, and the
     precepts of our religion.

          “Our people is conservative, faithful to the religious
          ceremonies and usages which our ancestors have bequeathed to
          us.

     “It is very important for us to pretend to be expounders and
     protagonists of social questions prevalent at the time in a
     country, especially of those whose aim it is to better the fate of
     the workingman; but, in reality, our efforts must gravitate towards
     possession and rule over the movements of public opinion.

     “The blindness of the masses and the tendency of their leaders to
     yield to oratory, as empty as it is loud, make them easy prey for
     us and a double weapon for our popularity and credit. With the aid
     of oratory, our speakers will be able to make people believe our
     artificial enthusiasm which Christians usually attain through the
     medium of genuine sentiment.

     “It is necessary, to support as much as possible, the Proletariat
     and to subjugate it to those in charge of the finances. Acting in
     this manner, it will be for us to incite the masses, whenever we
     shall need them. We will use them as weapons for upheavals and
     revolutions and each of these catastrophes will move our cause
     forward with gigantic strides and will bring us, with a quick pace,
     nearer our goal—to reign over the entire world, as it was promised
     by our Father Abraham.”

[_For the sake of illustration, the following extracts, out of many that
might be selected, are taken from the Goedsche-Retcliffe novel which
were afterwards elaborated and presented as facts._]


     FIRST STAGE OF THE LIE—THE NOVELETTE

     If we will be supreme in the stock exchange, we will attain the
     same supremacy in the governments. Therefore it is necessary to
     facilitate loans in order to get them into our hands all the more.
     Wherever possible, we must take in exchange for capital, mortgages
     on railroads, taxes, mines, regalias (?) and domains. (Page 32.)

     Ownership of land is always the iron-clad, everlasting possession
     of every country. This in itself gives power, respect and
     influence. Therefore the Jews should secure the possibility of
     acquiring real estate. Therefore it is necessary to facilitate the
     loans on land. The more we will help the breaking up of estates,
     the more easily they will fall into our hands. (Page 33.)

     Industry the power of the burgher, which hinders the Jewish nation
     must be paralyzed even as agriculture. (Page 34.)

     The natural enemy of the Jews is the Christian Church. Therefore we
     must try to humiliate it, we must instil into it free-thinking,
     scepticism, and conflicts. Therefore we will first of all start a
     war on the clergy, we will try to arouse suspicion against it and
     humiliate it.

     Let our brethren strive for the abolition of armed force.... Not
     the sword, but reason and money must rule. (Page 35.)

     Our nation is conservative to its very root, and clings fast to the
     old. But our interests demand that we participate, or, rather,
     direct the movements of nations. It is indisputable that ours is a
     time of many reforms, whose main purpose is the amelioration of the
     material condition of the needy classes. But for this the
     propertied classes must sacrifice their capital. Capital is in the
     hands of the Jews. Therefore, they must outwardly take part in the
     movement and try to divert it from social and political reforms.
     The masses themselves are blind and foolish and permit the shouters
     to rule over them.... The instability of the foundation increases
     our power and our influence. Therefore the support of every kind of
     revolution increases our capital and brings us nearer to our goal.
     (Pages 36-37.)

     Of what value are all the opinions and advice given here without
     the aid of the press? We will attain our aim only when the press
     will be in our hands. Our people must direct the daily
     publications.... We need great political newspapers which will mold
     public opinion—criticism, the literature of the street and the
     stage. In this way we will crowd out the Christians step by step,
     and will dictate to the world what it should believe in, what it
     should respect and what it should curse. We will repeat the
     sorrowful cry of Israel and the complaints against the persecutions
     which are directed against us.... With the press in our hands we
     can turn wrong into right, dishonesty into honesty. We can shake
     all foundations and separate families. We can destroy faith in all
     that our enemies believed until now. We can ruin credits and arouse
     passions. We can declare war; we can give fame or disgrace. We can
     uplift or ruin talent. (Page 43.)

[_The following are parallel extracts from the imaginary Rabbi’s speech
vouched for by the author of the novelette as fact a number of years
later._]


     SECOND STAGE OF THE LIE—“THE RABBI’S SPEECH”

     When we become at last the sole possessors of all the gold to be
     found on earth, the power will practically be transferred to our
     hands, and the promises made to Abraham will be fulfilled. Gold—is
     the greatest power on earth, it is might, reward, the instrument of
     every authority, it is all man, both fears and desires.... The
     problem before us now is to facilitate even to a greater extent the
     means of contracting these loans and thus to become the sole
     managers of all the valuables, after which the exploitation of all
     their railroads, mines, forests, large factories and industrial
     plants, as well as of all other real property, including duties and
     taxes, will fall into our hands, as a security for the capital lent
     to us by the various states.

     Agriculture will forever remain the principal source of a country’s
     wealth. The possession of large plots of land will pave for us even
     a broader way to honors and will strengthen our influence over the
     highest officials of the country. From this follows, that our
     efforts will be directed towards inducing our brethren in Israel to
     make large agricultural purchases. We must, therefore, do our
     utmost to break up large estates into small parcels, in order to be
     able to purchase them in the easiest and quickest way. Under the
     pretext of trying to help the working classes, it is necessary to
     oppress the large landowners with taxation in all its severity.
     When these possessions will thus gradually be transferred in our
     hands, the whole labor of the Christian proletariat will become for
     us a new source of tremendous profits.

     Commerce and speculation—these branches, most plentiful in their
     fruits,—must never be suffered to slip out of the hands of the
     Israelites,—with this object in view the people of Israel must
     direct its ambition towards those high offices of authority which
     have the power to distribute honors and esteem.

     Since the Christian Church is one of our most dangerous enemies, we
     must work tirelessly to weaken its influence, and in order to
     accomplish this, it is necessary to use all our efforts to implant
     in the Christian intellectual class ideas of Atheism, scepticism,
     dissension and to call forth religious disputes among the
     newly-formed groups and sects of Christendom.

     It is very important for us to pretend to be expounders and
     protagonists of social questions prevalent at the time in a
     country, especially of those whose aim it is to better the fate of
     the workingman; but, in reality, our efforts must gravitate towards
     possession and rule over the movements of public opinion.

     The blindness of the masses and the tendency of their leaders to
     fall for oratory as empty as it is loud, will make them easy prey
     for us and a double weapon for our popularity and credit. With the
     aid of oratory, our speakers will be able to make people believe
     our artificial enthusiasm which Christians usually attain through
     genuine sentiment....

     Once we become absolute masters of the press, we will easily be
     able to refashion the ideas of honor, of virtue, of
     faithfulness—and to deal the first blow to the family-conception
     which is considered to this day as the most sacred institution and
     which must be reduced to a state of decay. We shall then be able to
     uproot the belief in that which our enemies, the Christians, shall
     have worshipped until that time and instead of that, having brought
     up the army in a spirit of infatuation with the various passions,
     we shall openly declare war upon everything which the Gentiles are
     at present revering and worshipping....

[_The following are extracts from the new version of the “protocols”
introduced by Nilus in 1905, showing the different stages of the
forgery._]


     THIRD STAGE OF THE LIE—“THE PROTOCOLS”[*]

     [Footnote *: These extracts are taken from “The Protocols of the
     Wise Men of Zion,” published by the Beckwith Company, New York,
     1920.]

     All the wheels of the government mechanism are driven by the motor
     which is in our hands, and that motor is—gold. (Prot. 5.)

     To make it possible for liberty definitely to disintegrate and ruin
     Gentile society, industry must be placed upon a speculative basis.
     The result will be that all products extracted from industry from
     the soil will not remain in their hands but will pass through
     speculation into our possession. (Prot. 4.)

     The aristocracy of the Gentiles as a political force has passed
     away.... But as owners of land, they are harmful to us in that they
     are independent in their sources of livelihood. Therefore at all
     costs we must deprive them of their land. The best means to attain
     this is to increase land taxes and mortgage indebtedness. These
     measures will keep land ownership in a state of unconditional
     subordination. (Prot. 6.)

     See second quotation above.

     At the same time it is necessary to encourage trade and industry
     vigorously and especially speculation, the function of which is to
     act as a counterpoise to industry.... It is necessary for industry
     to deplete the land both of laborers and capital, and, through
     speculation, transfer all the money of the world into our hands,
     thereby throwing the Gentiles into the ranks of the proletariat.
     (Prot. 6.)

     It is for this reason that we must undermine faith, eradicate from
     the minds of the Gentiles the very principle of God and soul and
     replace these conceptions by mathematical calculations and material
     desires. (Prot. 4.)

     We have taken good care long ago to discredit the Gentile clergy
     and thereby to destroy their mission, which at present might hamper
     us considerably. Their influence over people diminishes daily.
     (Prot. 17.)

     It is indispensible for our purposes that, as far as possible, wars
     should bring no territorial advantages. This will shift war to an
     economic footing and nations will perceive the strength of our
     superiority in the aid we render. Such a condition of affairs will
     place both sides under the control of our international agents with
     their million eyes, whose vision is unhampered by any frontiers.
     (Prot. 2.)

     We will represent ourselves as the saviors of the laboring classes
     who have come to liberate them from this oppression by suggesting
     that they join our army of socialists, anarchists, communists, to
     whom we always extend our help under the guise of the fraternal
     principles of the universal solidarity of our social masonry....
     (Prot. 3.)

     We will adopt for ourselves the liberal side of all parties and all
     movements and provide orators who will talk so much that they will
     tire the people with their speeches until they turn from orators in
     disgust. (Prot. 5.)

     We shall handle the press in the following manner ... to end of
     Protocol 12.




CHAPTER FOUR

THE RUSSIAN SPONSORS OF THE FORGERY

Nilus on the Protocols—Only “the God-Anointed Tsar of Russia” Can Save
the World—Passages from Nilus Omitted by Translators—On Tolstoy—On the
Emancipation of Women—On the “Sanhedrin” and “its Faithful Ally,
England.”


In 1905 the second edition of Serge Nilus’s book appeared, printed on
government presses at Tsarskoye Selo, containing a new and elaborated
version of the protocols.

The translators of the Nilus protocols published in his 1905 edition, a
copy of which is in the British Museum, have deliberately omitted
numerous passages from his prologue and epilogue. These passages show
clearly the purpose of the volume. Nilus writes: “We may perhaps be
reproached, and justly, for the apocryphal character of the document
presented. But if it were possible to demonstrate its accuracy by
documents or through the testimony of trustworthy witnesses, if it were
possible to unveil the faces of those who are at the head of the world
conspiracy and who hold its bloody strings in their hands, then the very
‘mystery of lawlessness’ would be infringed upon, and it must remain
intact until its incarnation in the ‘son of destruction.’” Then he goes
on to say that the world is rushing towards its destruction, and that
there is only one force that can save it, and that is the “God-Anointed
Tsar of Russia.” The omitted portions of the Nilus book show distinctly
that it is a work of propaganda for the Russian autocracy. Nilus
denounced Leo Tolstoy, the emancipation of women, and all movements
leading toward progress.

The editors of the protocols in Europe and America, realizing that these
passages would disclose to intelligent people the real motive of the
Nilus protocols and thus discredit them, have deliberately omitted them
in the translations.

Here are some of the omitted portions of the notorious Nilus book, which
are his own utterances and do not purport to constitute a part of the
Protocols. They are translated from a photographed copy of the volume in
the British Museum:

       *       *       *       *       *

     “We have succeeded in obtaining for our use from a man close to us,
     now deceased, a manuscript in which are described with unusual
     precision and clearness the course and progress of the universal
     fatal mystery aiming to bring the apostate world to an inevitable
     catastrophe. This manuscript was given to us about four years ago
     (in 1901) with the assurance that it was an accurate copy—a
     translation of the original documents stolen by a woman from one of
     the most powerful and sacred directors of Freemasonry after one of
     the secret meetings of the ‘initiates’ in France, the present nest
     of the Freemason’s sect. This manuscript under the general title
     ‘Protocols of Meetings of the Wise Men of Zion’ I now call to the
     attention of all who wish to see or hear. These ‘Protocols’ at a
     first cursory glance might seem to be what we are accustomed to
     call truisms; they are more or less commonplaces although expressed
     with a boldness and a hatred not altogether customary in
     commonplaces. A proud, deeply-rooted, ancient, for a long time
     secretly growing,—and what is more frightful than all,—a religious
     rage boils between the lines, bubbling over and escaping from the
     overfilled vessel of violence and vengeance, already approaching
     complete triumph.

     “It must be mentioned, by the way, that the title of the manuscript
     does not fully justify the contents: these are not protocols of a
     meeting but rather the report of someone in power, divided into
     parts which are not even always logically connected: the impression
     remains that this is a fragment of something much more significant,
     the beginning of which has been lost. The origin of the manuscript,
     as given by us above, furnishes sufficient explanation of this.

       *       *       *       *       *

     “We may perhaps be reproached, and justly, for the apocryphal
     character of the document presented. But if it were possible to
     demonstrate its accuracy by documents or through the testimony of
     trustworthy witnesses, if it were possible to unveil the faces of
     those who are at the head of the world conspiracy and who hold its
     bloody strings in their hands, then the very ‘mystery of
     lawlessness’ would be infringed upon, and it must remain intact
     until its incarnation in the ‘son of destruction.’ In the
     complexity of the present criminally-earthly process _we must not
     search for direct evidence_; we are forced to content ourselves
     with indirect proof and of these it seems that the attention of the
     sad Christian observer is fully satisfied.

     “The history of the Rothschilds show that the whole republican era
     of France is due to Zion and that not a single one of those elected
     to office has to this time ever done what he promised to do, if the
     demands of his electors did not coincide with the plans of the
     government of Zion.

     “What has become of unfortunate France!...

     “‘Let him who has ears, listen!’”

       *       *       *       *       *

     “‘Now the Spirit speaketh expressly, that in the latter times some
     shall depart from the faith, giving heed to seducing spirits, and
     doctrines of devils;

     “‘Speaking lies in hypocrisy; having their conscience seared with a
     hot iron;

     “‘Forbidding to marry, and commanding to abstain from meats, which
     God hath created to be received with thanksgiving of them which
     believe and know the truth.’

     “Is not this Tolstoy and his followers scattered over the whole
     world?!”

       *       *       *       *       *

     “In every age there have been many women ‘drowning in sin and led
     on by various lusts’: the ebb and flow of this sin in woman’s heart
     characterized whole epochs of particular human defection but at no
     time of the seeming triumph of sin have there been women
     ‘constantly studying’—this sign represents entirely a universal
     inheritance and is an exclusive characteristic of our epoch.

     “Who is ignorant of the so-called ‘woman question,’ the
     emancipation of woman, that has already succeeded in breaking up so
     many families and which threatens an even greater disruption in the
     future?!...

     “For the sake of some phantom the bride and mother abandons her
     true mission. Is not this the greatest and most unfortunate world
     revolution!”

       *       *       *       *       *

     “The Sanhedrin was unseizable and invulnerable. It carried the
     roots of evil from France into Scotland, where under a different
     name it entered into a league with united England, with whom, after
     having let it in behind the curtain of its secret and having
     declared deadly war to papism, it cooperates even to the present
     day, helping out England in her exploits over the whole world with
     its capital and concessions, in which respect the Sanhedrin was
     never penurious.

     “As to the question why England and no other European government
     was chosen as the point of resistance for the fighting Sanhedrin,
     the Sanhedrin gives no reply. We are inclined to think that the
     cause is to be found in the isolated island position of the
     sufficiently strong government, and perhaps in the kinship between
     the English and the Jews.[*]

     [Footnote *: As is known, there is a scientific theory which tries
     to prove that the English are the descendants of one of the
     scattered tribes of Israel. The Sanhedrin which directs the course
     of contemporary science, is not ashamed to produce whatever
     theories are advantageous to them. According to certain tenuous
     evidences in the air it seems that a new theory is being produced
     according to which the honor of birth relationship with the
     God-elected Sanhedrin is extended to America and ... Japan. AVIS A
     L’ANGLETERRE!...)]

     “Having covered the whole of Europe with a network of Masonic lies
     (the symbol of the temple of Solomon is preserved for them also),
     possessing countless millions, in face of the general fall of the
     Christian spirit among the European peoples, in whom there was
     artificially spread and supported the cult of the golden calf;
     having poisoned the idea of godliness and spirituality in the heart
     of the peoples by ‘scientific’ theories, the Sanhedrin—the priest
     of the golden idol created by it, has gained control of the
     spiritual life of all Europe, and with its help, with the help of
     its gold, with the sold consciousness of those standing at the helm
     of power, and with the help of its faithful ally—England, it has
     corrupted and perverted all the political foundations of Europe,
     and through them the well-being and spiritual health of its
     population. The French revolution, glorified by the Masonized
     historical science of ‘greatness’ and the fall of the ‘great’
     Napoleon have shown to the world the significance and strength of
     the Sanhedrin. But the world did not recognize the new
     manifestation of Satan: at that time the words of truth of the
     Evangel and the apostolic foresight had become alien to him.”




CHAPTER FIVE

FORGERS DISAGREE

The Butmi Protocols—“Representatives of Zion” Not to be Confounded with
“Zionists”—Butmi Contradicts Nilus—Plan for World Conquest Conceived 929
B. C. E.—The “Symbolic Snake”—Universal Suffrage a Jewish Device—Every
Jew Familiar with Plot.


In the book issued by G. Butmi to which reference has been made, and
which contains the “Rabbi’s Speech” already considered, there is to be
found still another version of the protocols. Butmi was a Black Hundred
writer. It appeared in 1907 and was dedicated to the Black Hundred
organization. Appropriately enough it was published by the Society of
Deaf and Dumb, as will be seen from the facsimile reproduction of the
title page. With exceeding _naïveté_ Butmi published the forged speech
attributed by Retcliffe-Goedsche to a Jewish Rabbi as proof of the
genuineness of the protocols, and side by side with the fabricated
speech appears the Butmi version of the protocols which had undergone
further changes subsequent to the publication in 1905 of “the documents”
by Serge Nilus.

The headlines over the protocols in the Butmi 1907 version read as
follows:

     “PROTOCOLS TAKEN OUT OF THE SECRET DEPOSITORIES OF THE MAIN OFFICE
     OF ZION.

     “‘(Extracts from ancient and modern protocols of the Sages of Zion
     of the Universal Organization of Freemasons.)’

Thus the Protocols were in 1907 presented by G. Butmi, dedicated to the
Black Hundreds, as Masonic, not as Jewish documents. In his introduction
the author says, in part, as follows:

     “‘These secret protocols were secured with great difficulty in
     fragmentary form, and were translated into Russian in December,
     1901. It is almost impossible to get at the secret depositories
     again where they are hidden, and therefore they cannot be
     reinforced by definite information as to the place, day, month,
     year, where and when they were composed.

     “‘The reader who is more or less familiar with the secrets of
     Freemasonry will draw from the general character of the criminal
     plot, outlined in the protocols, the conclusion as to their
     authenticity, and from several details he will suppose with great
     certainty that the mentioned protocols were taken from the
     documents of the Masonic lodge of Egyptian ritual, or Mizraim,
     which is joined mostly by Jews....

     “‘But the above-mentioned failure to mention the time and place
     where the protocols were composed might call forth in the reader,
     who is entirely unfamiliar with the abominations of Masonic
     doctrines, doubts as to the authenticity of these documents.’”

At the end of the “protocols” published in this edition by Butmi, in
1907, there appears a note by the man who declares that he had secured
and translated the documents from the French, on December 9, 1901, and
in the very first two lines of his note, he states that the
representatives of Zion mentioned in the documents are not to be
confounded with the representatives of the Zionist movement. The Russian
mystic Serge Nilus, in his later editions, connected the documents with
the Zionist Congress in Basle and with the head of the Zionist movement,
Dr. Theodore Herzl.

The translator, as do Nilus and Lutostansky, also gives a version of
“the political plan devised by the Wise Men of Zion.” This translator,
however, states that the “political plan was conceived 929 years before
the birth of Christ. It was invented by Solomon and Judean sages in
theory.”

Here follow extracts from the so-called Translator’s Note:


     [Illustration: Cyrillic]

     [Transcription:
     но если имъ не дать крови, они не спятъ, а борются...

     Примѣчаніе переводчика.

     Изложенные протоколы подписаны Сіонскими представителями
     (не смѣшивайте съ представителями сіонистскаго движенія). Они
     выхвачены изъ цѣлой книги протоколовъ, всего содержанія
     которой не удалось переписать по краткости времени, даннаго
     на прочтеніе ихъ переводчику этихъ протоколовъ. Къ нимъ
     было приложено еще небольшое прибавленіе и планъ завоеванія
     міpa Евреями мирнымъ путемъ. Эти протоколы и чертежъ добыты
     изъ тайныхъ хранилищъ Сіонской Главной Канцеляціи,
     нынѣ находящейся на французской территоріи.

     На упомянутомъ чертежѣ значился весь политическій планъ
     Сіона по отношенію къ имѣющимъ  быть пройденными этапамъ
     ]

     [Transliteration:
     no esli im ne dat' krovi, oni ne spjat, a borjutsja...

     Primechanie perevodchika.

     Izlozhennye protokoly podpisany Sionskimi predstaviteljami
     (ne smeshivajte s predstaviteljami sionistskago dvizhenija). Oni
     vyhvacheny iz celoj knigi protokolov, vsego soderzhanija
     kotoroj ne udalos' perepisat' po kratkosti vremeni, dannago
     na prochtenie ih perevodchiku etih protokolov. K nim
     bylo prilozheno eshhe nebol'shoe pribavlenie i plan zavoevanija
     mira Evrejami mirnym putem. Eti protokoly i chertezh dobyty
     iz tajnyh hranilishh Sionskoj Glavnoj Kanceljacii,
     nyne nahodjashhejsja na francuzskoj territorii.

     Na upomjanutom chertezhe znachilsja ves' politicheskij plan
     Siona po otnosheniju k imejushhim byt' projdennymi etapam
     ]

     _Translator’s Note._

     “The expounded protocols are signed the representatives of Zion
     (_do not confound them with the representative of the Zionist
     movement_). They were taken out of a whole book of protocols, the
     entire contents of which it was impossible to copy because of the
     short time allowed the translator for reading these protocols. A
     small appendix was attached to them and a plan of conquering the
     world by the Jews by peaceful means. Those protocols and the Sketch
     were taken from the secret depositories of the Main Office of Zion,
     now located on French territory.

     “The above-mentioned sketch contained the entire political plan of
     Zion with regard to the stages to be passed through by this
     movement and to the means of passing from one to another. The
     aforesaid political plan was conceived 929 years before the birth
     of Christ. It was invented by Solomon and the Judean Sages in
     theory; according to historical events, it was elaborated and
     enlarged by their followers initiated in this plan.

     “These sages decided to conquer the world peacefully for Zion, with
     the cunning of the Symbolic Snake, whose head should be composed of
     the Jewish Government initiated in the plans of the Wise Men
     (always masked even to their people), and the body—the Jewish
     nation.

     “Crawling into the bosom of governments, this snake has undermined
     or eaten away all non-Jewish governmental powers, according to
     their growth, in various continents, but particularly in Europe,
     which he should do also in the future, following exactly the
     outlines of the plan until the cycle of the road travelled by it
     will close by the return of the head of the Snake to Zion,—that is,
     until this snake will include in the sphere of its circle all
     Europe, and through Europe the whole world, utilizing all forces
     conquered by economic means in order to draw the other continents
     into the sphere of its cycle....

     “For instance, the economic theory of the ballot system has made it
     possible to carry out everything that was desirable in the
     interests of the elevation of Zion. The Jewish authorities
     commenced to act by means of bribing or by instigating the majority
     of votes as soon as they succeeded to manage so that the decisions
     of that majority became the determining factor in questions of
     national life. The crowd always in need, or the greedy intelligent
     class, short-sighted liberals and other blind people have also
     rendered good service to Zion. Therefore the republican is the most
     desirable and convenient form of government for Zion because it
     gives full sway for the activities of the armies of Zion—for
     anarchists of thought and action, called socialists.

     “All that which is outlined above is the work of the hands of the
     nation without a territory, constituting but a drop in the ocean of
     humanity, but possessing the most ideal Government, every member of
     which is familiarized with the plan of action worked out in the
     course of centuries, from which he cannot deviate. The politics of
     the goyim is the politics of accidental circumstances, engineered
     by the Jews, and tends not towards perfecting the affairs of the
     state, but towards struggle for the sake of greed, or more often
     for the personal aggrandizement of the administrators.

     “From this it is clear, on whose side there must be victory and the
     guidance of the world.

     “Translation from the French, December 9, 1901.”




CHAPTER SIX

THE BLACK HUNDREDS, THEIR DUPES AND CRIMES

Russia in 1905—The Unsuccessful Revolution—The Reaction and the
Reactionaries—Lutostansky and His Work—The “Symbolic Snake” According to
Lutostansky—Who Plagiarized?—Lutostansky on the English People—Are the
English the “Lost Tribes”?—How the Protocols Were “Doctored” by
Butmi—Conclusion.


As the writings of Sergius Nilus are typical of the “literature”
produced under the auspices of the Russian Black Hundred organizations
which sought to save the Czar’s throne by pogroms, I examined a large
number of publications brought out in Russia during the period when “the
Russian Mystic,” Sergius Nilus, published his pretended discovery, the
“Protocols.” His book, “The Great in the Small and anti-Christ,”
appeared in 1905 after the Russo-Japanese War, when the Russian
revolutionists made an attempt to overthrow the Czar’s government. A new
organization was formed for the support of the Russian throne. It was
known as “the Union of the Russian People,”—“the Black Hundred,”—whose
program was Jew-baiting. It was then that Russia adopted a definite,
anti-Jewish policy of vengeance—a pogrom policy. The “Black Hundred”
held the Jews responsible for Russia’s defeat in the war and for the
attempted revolution,—and neither the Czar nor his loyal organization of
the “Black Hundred” ever forgave Count Sergius Witte, who won for Russia
at the Portsmouth Peace Conference what she had lost on the
battlefields, for inducing Nicholas II to grant a constitution to
Russia. “The Black Hundreds” nicknamed Witte “the Jewish Count of
Portsmouth.” They attacked him and attempted to assassinate him. They
assassinated at that time two Jewish members of the Duma, Yollos and
Hertzenstein. It was during that period of Judophobomania that Sergius
Nilus published his book introducing the “Protocols” in Russia.

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE OF TITLE PAGE OF LUTOSTANSKY’S BOOK PUBLISHED IN 1907
CONTAINING ANTI-JEWISH AND ANTI-BRITISH ATTACKS.]

[Transcription:
ТАЛМУДЪ и ЕВРЕИ

Талмудъ есть религіозный катехизисъ.

Евреи и дѣянія ихъ по ученію талмуда.


Компиляція изъ разныхъ талмудовъ и комментаріевъ члена-сотрудника
Императорскаго Православнаго Палестинскаго Общества

Дворянина отставного учителя класс. гимназіи.

_И. Лютостанскаго._

КНИГА ШЕСТАЯ.

ИЗДАНІЕ ТРЕТЬЕ

исправленное и значительно дополненное.


ИЗДАТЕЛЬ

А. Н. Першинъ.

С.-ПЕТЕРБУРГЪ

Типографія Т-ва „СВѢТЪ“, Невскій, 136.

1907.
]

[Transliteration:
TALMUD i EVREI

Talmud est' religioznyj katehizis.

Evrei i dejanija ih po ucheniju talmuda.


Kompiljacija iz raznyh talmudov i kommentariev chlena-sotrudnika
Imperatorskago Pravoslavnago Palestinskago Obshhestva

Dvorjanina otstavnogo uchitelja klass. gimnazii.

_I. Ljutostanskago._

KNIGA SHESTAJA.

IZDANIE TRET'E

ispravlennoe i znachitel'no dopolnennoe.


IZDATEL'

A. N. Pershin.

S.-PETERBURG

Tipografija T-va „SVET“, Nevskij, 136.

1907.
]

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE FROM LUTOSTANSKY’S BOOK, “THE TALMUD AND THE JEWS,” PUBLISHED
IN 1907, SHOWING THE PASSAGE USED BY NILUS IN HIS BOOK CONTAINING THE
PROTOCOLS.]

[Transcription:
Объясненіе сіонскаго символическаго змѣя.


[Illustration: П]редставленный политическій планъ
въ образѣ змія, очень древній, былъ
измышленъ іудейскими мудрецами въ
теоріи, по мѣрѣ же историческихъ событій
разрабатываемъ и дополняемъ просвѣщенными
въ этомъ послѣдователями.
Эти мудрецы рѣшили мирно завоевать
міръ для Cioнa, съ хитростью символическаго
змія. Глава змія изображаетъ
мудрецовъ сіонскихъ, а—туловище народъ
іудейскій. Проползая въ государственныя
нѣдра, змій этотъ подтачиваетъ или пожираетъ
всѣ не іудейскія государственныя
силы, по мѣрѣ ихъ роста на разныхъ
континентахъ, но особенно въ Европѣ,
что онъ долженъ дѣлать и въ будущемъ,
при точномъ слѣдованіи по предначертаніямъ
плана, до тѣхъ поръ, пока циклъ пройденнаго
имъ пути не сомкнется возвратомъ главы змія на
Сіонъ, то есть пока этотъ змій не заключитъ въ сферѣ
своего круга всю Европу, а черезъ нее весь міръ. Первымъ
дѣломъ стараются внести вездѣ безвѣріе и упадокъ нравственности,
пользуясь всѣми завоеванными экономическимъ
]

[Transliteration:
Ob'jasnenie sionskago simvolicheskago zmeja.


[Illustration: P]redstavlennyj politicheskij plan
v obraze zmija, ochen' drevnij, byl
izmyshlen iudejskimi mudrecami v
teorii, po mere zhe istoricheskih sobytij
razrabatyvaem i dopolnjaem prosveshhennymi
v etom posledovateljami.
Eti mudrecy reshili mirno zavoevat'
mir dlja Ciona, s hitrost'ju simvolicheskago
zmija. Glava zmija izobrazhaet
mudrecov sionskih, a—tulovishhe narod
іudejskij. Propolzaja v gosudarstvennyja
nedra, zmij etot podtachivaet ili pozhiraet
vse ne iudejskija gosudarstvennyja
sily, po mere ih rosta na raznyh
kontinentah, no osobenno v Evrope,
chto on dolzhen delat' i v budushhem,
pri tochnom sledovanii po prednachertanijam
plana, do teh por, poka cikl projdennago
im puti ne somknetsja vozvratom glavy zmija na
Sion, to est' poka etot zmij ne zakljuchit v sfere
svoego kruga vsju Evropu, a cherez nee ves' mir. Pervym
delom starajutsja vnesti vezde bezverie i upadok nravstvennosti,
pol'zujas' vsemi zavoevannymi ekonomicheskim
]

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE FROM LUTOSTANSKY’S BOOK, “THE TALMUD AND THE JEWS,” PUBLISHED
IN 1907, SHOWING THE PASSAGE USED BY NILUS IN HIS BOOK CONTAINING THE
PROTOCOLS.]

[Transcription:

iv

путемъ силами, чтобы завлечь въ сферу своего цикла остальные
континенты. Такъ какъ возвратъ главы змія могъ совершиться
лишь по сглаженнымъ развалинамъ государственной
мощи всѣхъ европейскихъ странъ, черезъ паденіе этой мощи,
отъ экономическаго разстройства и разоренія, всюду вносимаго
Сіономъ черезъ нравственный упадокъ. Растлѣніе,
вносимое съ помощью жидовокъ, выдающихъ себя за француженокъ
и итальянокъ, которыя даже фиктивно принимаютъ
и крещеніе, потомъ дѣлаются женами важныхъ лицъ,
на подобіе библейской Есфири, а при нихъ всегда сопутствуютъ
Мардохеи и производятъ свою политику въ
пользу жидовства. Эти-то мнимыя француженки и итальянки
являются самыми лучшими носительницами распутства
нравовъ съ мѣста на мѣсто. Эти женщины служатъ для
тѣхъ, которые, благодаря имъ, всегда нуждаются въ деньгахъ,
а потому охотно торгуютъ совѣстью, чтобы добыть
денегъ во что бы то ни стало. Деньги же только
ссужаются такимъ торговцамъ совѣсти, что быстро возвращаются
въ руки, ссужавшія ихъ, потому что съ помощью
тѣхъ же женщинъ растрачиваются скоро послѣ
ихъ полученія. Сіонскія сѣти разставлены на всѣхъ путяхъ
„гоевъ“ и циклъ змія подвигается въ XX столѣтіи
быстротой курьерскаго движенія къ намѣченной своей цѣли.

Полное изложеніе всѣхъ таинственныхъ протоколовъ
Сіонскихъ жидовскихъ мудрецовъ, весь планъ завоевания
всего міра, будетъ помѣщено въ VII-мъ слѣдующемъ томѣ
„Талмудъ и евреи“. Къ дѣйствіямъ тайнаго сіонскаго змія
относится и клевета наглая, взведенная на уважаемаго
во всей Россіи о. протоіерея Іоанна Кронштадтскаго. Все
это дѣйствіе жидовъ, обнаглѣвшихъ въ послѣднее время
для подрыва православной религіи и поколебанія вѣры народовъ,
уваженія святости церкви и преданности Царю
и отечеству. Всѣ газеты, печать и книжная торговля находятся
уже въ жидовскихъ рукахъ, чего же имъ больше?
Вся Г. Дума была уже подъ жидовской командою. Теперь
остается только поколебать, а потомъ опрокинуть хри-
]

[Transliteration:

iv

putem silami, chtoby zavlech' v sferu svoego cikla ostal'nye
kontinenty. Tak kak vozvrat glavy zmija mog sovershit'sja
lish' po sglazhennym razvalinam gosudarstvennoj
moshhi vseh evropejskih stran, cherez padenie etoj moshhi,
ot ekonomicheskago razstrojstva i razorenija, vsjudu vnosimago
Sionom cherez nravstvennyj upadok. Rastlenie,
vnosimoe s pomoshh'ju zhidovok, vydajushhih sebja za francuzhenok
i ital'janok, kotoryja dazhe fiktivno prinimajut
i kreshhenie, potom delajutsja zhenami vazhnyh lic,
na podobie biblejskoj Esfiri, a pri nih vsegda soputstvujut
Mardohei i proizvodjat svoju politiku v
pol'zu zhidovstva. Eti-to mnimyja francuzhenki i ital'janki
javljajutsja samymi luchshimi nositel'nicami rasputstva
nravov s mesta na mesto. Eti zhenshhiny sluzhat dlja
teh, kotorye, blagodarja im, vsegda nuzhdajutsja v den'gah,
a potomu ohotno torgujut sovest'ju, chtoby dobyt'
deneg vo chto by to ni stalo. Den'gi zhe tol'ko
ssuzhajutsja takim torgovcam sovesti, chto bystro vozvrashhajutsja
v ruki, ssuzhavshija ih, potomu chto s pomoshh'ju
teh zhe zhenshhin rastrachivajutsja skoro posle
ih poluchenija. Sionskija seti razstavleny na vseh putjah
„goev“ i cikl zmija podvigaetsja v XX stoletii
bystrotoj kur'erskago dvizhenija k namechennoj svoej celi.

Polnoe izlozhenie vseh tainstvennyh protokolov
Sionskih zhidovskih mudrecov, ves' plan zavoevanija
vsego mira, budet pomeshheno v VII-m sledujushhem tome
„Talmud i evrei“. K dejstvijam tajnago sionskago zmija
otnositsja i kleveta naglaja, vzvedennaja na uvazhaemago
vo vsej Rossii o. protoiereja Ioanna Kronshtadtskago. Vse
eto dejstvie zhidov, obnaglevshih v poslednee vremja
dlja podryva pravoslavnoj religii i pokolebanija very narodov,
uvazhenija svjatosti cerkvi i predannosti Carju
i otechestvu. Vse gazety, pechat' i knizhnaja torgovlja nahodjatsja
uzhe v zhidovskih rukah, chego zhe im bol'she?
Vsja G. Duma byla uzhe pod zhidovskoj komandoju. Teper'
ostaetsja tol'ko pokolebat', a potom oprokinut' hri-
]

In my investigation I naturally examined the works of the Russian arch
anti-Semite, Ippolit Lutostansky, who first accused the Jews of the most
despicable crimes, and then, in 1882, after the occurrence of the
pogroms in the south of Russia, wrote a volume retracting all his
previous anti-Jewish accusations, and declaring anti-Semitism to be
nothing but an outgrowth of ignorance and malice. Several years later he
resumed his anti-Semitic agitation and became one of the most vicious
vilifiers of the Jewish people on the eve of the notorious Beilis affair
which was staged by the Russian government for the purpose of
discrediting the Jews and of justifying the Russian governmental
anti-Jewish policy before the world. After the collapse of the Beilis
prosecution, which involved the absurd charge of ritual murder,
Lutostansky approached several prominent wealthy Jews with an offer to
retract his new charges against the Jews, provided they would pay him a
certain amount of money for his book. The Jews declined to have anything
to do with the charlatan who had caused so much harm to the Jews of
Russia by his monstrous accusations. His works attracted special
attention because of the fact that they were endorsed and supported by
Russian Grand Dukes and by the Dowager Empress of Russia.

While examining one of his books entitled, “The Talmud and the Jews,”
published in 1907, in which he promised the publication of “the
Protocols of the Wise Men of Zion” in his forthcoming volume, I came
upon an amazing passage in his introduction, outlining an alleged secret
plan of the Jews to gain world domination, which I find reproduced,
word for word, with but a few phrases changed, in the epilogue of “the
Russian mystic,” Sergius Nilus. Did Sergius Nilus plagiarize
Lutostansky? Or was it Lutostansky who plagiarized Nilus? Or were they
one and the same person? At any rate, both served the purposes of the
“Black Hundreds” against the Jews, and both employed the same weapons.

Here is a translation of Lutostansky’s introduction:

     From Lutostansky’s Introduction, 1907

     EXPLANATION OF THE ZIONIST SYMBOLIC SNAKE

     “The political plan represented in the form of a snake is very old
     and was devised by the Judaean sages in theory, and in the course
     of historical developments it is elaborated and augmented by their
     initiated followers. These sages decided to conquer the world
     peacefully for Zion, by the cunning of the symbolic snake. The head
     of the snake represents the sages of Zion, and the body—the Judaean
     nation. Crawling into the bosoms of governments, this snake
     undermines eats away all non-Judaean governmental forces, as they
     grow on various continents, but especially in Europe, which it is
     to do also in the future, carefully following the outlined plan,
     until the cycle of the road travelled by it is completed by the
     return of the head of the snake to Zion,—that is until this snake
     will include within the sphere of its circle the whole of Europe,
     and through Europe the whole world. First of all they are
     endeavoring to introduce everywhere irreligion and moral decadence,
     utilizing all forces they have won economically in order to drag
     the other continents into the sphere of their cycle. As the return
     of the head of the snake could be accomplished only over the razed
     ruins of the governmental power of all European countries, through
     the collapse of this power, through economic disorganization and
     ruin, introduced by Zion everywhere by means of moral decadence.
     Corruption is introduced with the aid of Jewesses under the guise
     of French or Italian women, who even undergo fictitious baptism for
     these purposes and then become the wives of prominent men, like the
     biblical Esther, and they are always accompanied by their
     Mordecais, and make their politics for the good of the Jews. These
     so-called French and Italian women are the best carriers of
     immorality from place to place. These women are used for those who,
     because of them, are always in need of money, and therefore
     willingly barter their conscience to secure money at any cost. The
     money is reality only loaned to such conscience-barterers, for it
     quickly comes back to the hands of those loaned the money, as it
     is squandered with the aid of these women soon after they receive
     it. The Zionist nets are spread out on all the roads of the goyim
     (gentiles) and the cycle of the snake is moving along in the
     Twentieth century with the speed of an express train towards its
     goal.

     “The complete outline of all the secret protocols of the Zionist
     Jewish sages, the entire plan of the conquest of the whole world,
     will be included in the next (seventh) volume of ‘The Talmud and
     the Jews.’”

And this is a facsimile reproduction and translation of Sergius Nilus’s
epilogue taken from the copy of the “Protocols” in the British Museum,
from which the American translation was made.

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE OF PAGE OF SERGE NILUS’S BOOK CONTAINING THE PROTOCOLS SHOWING
THE SAME PASSAGE AS IN LUTOSTANSKY’S BOOK.]

[Transcription:
     —395—

     торыя въ Малой Азіи будутъ поддерживаемы французской
     дипломатіей.

     Конечно, это требованіе льготы не касается католическихъ
     учрежденій, изгоняемыхъ изъ Франціи нѣсколькими
     послѣдними составами ея правительства, а доказываетъ лишь,
     что Дрейфусаровская дипломатія выступаетъ за интересы
     Сіона и открываетъ путь для колонизаціи французскими евреями
     Малой Азіи.

     Сіонъ всегда завоевывалъ себѣ мѣста и вліяніе черезъ
     свой рабочій скотъ съ человѣческими лицами, какъ называетъ
     Талмудъ все не-еврейское человѣчество.

     По даннымъ тайнаго еврейскаго Сіонизма, Соломономъ и
     другими Іудейскими мудрецами еще за 929 лѣтъ до Рождества
     Христова былъ измышленъ въ теоріи политическій
     планъ мирнаго завоеванія для Сіона вселенной. По мѣрѣ
     развитія историческихъ событій, планъ этотъ былъ разрабатываемъ
     и пополняемъ посвященными въ это дѣло послѣдователями[1].

     Эти мудрецы рѣшили мирно завоевать міръ для Сіона
     хитростью Символическаго Змія, главу котораго должно было
     составлять посвященное въ планы мудрецовъ правительство
     евреевъ (всегда замаскированные даже отъ своего народа),
     а туловище—народъ Іудейскій. Проникая въ нѣдра встрѣчаемыхъ
     имъ на пути государствъ, Змій этотъ подтачивалъ
     и пожиралъ (свергая ихъ) всѣ государственныя, не-еврейскія,
     силы, по мѣрѣ ихъ роста. Это же долженъ онъ дѣлать
     и въ будущемъ при точномъ слѣдованіи предначертаніямъ
     плана, до тѣхъ поръ, пока циклъ пройденнаго имъ пути
     не сомкнется возвратомъ Главы его на Сіонѣ и пока, такимъ
     образомъ, Змій не заключитъ, не сосредоточитъ въ
     сферѣ своего круга всей Европы, а черезъ нее и
     остальной міръ, пользуясь всѣми силами—завоеваніемъ и
     экономическимъ путемъ, чтобы подчинить своему вліянію,
     вліянію своего цикла, и остальные контингенты. Возвратъ

     [Footnote 1: Ап. Павелъ, какъ одинъ изъ наиболѣе даровитыхъ учениковъ фарисейской
     школы, не могъ не быть посвященъ въ эту „тайну беззаконія,
     находившуюся въ дѣйствіи“ и въ его время. Отсюда особая злоба
     гоненія на него со стороны воинствующаго Израиля.]
]

[Transliteration:
     -395-
     toryja v Maloj Azii budut podderzhivaemy francuzskoj
     diplomatiej.

     Konechno, eto trebovanie l'goty ne kasaetsja katolicheskih
     uchrezhdenij, izgonjaemyh iz Francii neskol'kimi
     poslednimi sostavami eja pravitel'stva, a dokazyvaet lish',
     chto Drejfusarovskaja diplomatija vystupaet za interesy
     Siona i otkryvaet put' dlja kolonizacii francuzskimi evrejami
     Maloj Azii.

     Sion vsegda zavoevyval sebe mesta i vlijanie cherez
     svoj rabochij skot s chelovecheskimi licami, kak nazyvaet
     Talmud vse ne-evrejskoe chelovechestvo.

     Po dannym tajnago evrejskago Sionizma, Solomonom i
     drugimi Iudejskimi mudrecami eshhe za 929 let do Rozhdestva
     Hristova byl izmyshlen v teorii politicheskij
     plan mirnago zavoevanija dlja Siona vselennoj. Po mere
     razvitija istoricheskih sobytij, plan etot byl razrabatyvaem
     i popolnjaem posvjashhennymi v eto delo posledovateljami[1].

     Eti mudrecy reshili mirno zavoevat' mir dlja Siona
     hitrost'ju Simvolicheskago Zmija, glavu kotorago dolzhno bylo
     sostavljat' posvjashhennoe v plany mudrecov pravitel'stvo
     evreev (vsegda zamaskirovannye dazhe ot svoego naroda),
     a tulovishhe—narod Iudejskij. Pronikaja v nedra vstrchaemyh
     im na puti gosudarstv, Zmij etot podtachival
     i pozhiral (svergaja ih) vse gosudarstvennyja, ne-evrejskija,
     sily, po mere ih rosta. Eto zhe dolzhen on delat'
     i v budushhem pri tochnom sledovanii prednachertanijam
     plana, do teh por, poka cikl projdennago im puti
     ne somknetsja vozvratom Glavy ego na Sione i poka, takim
     obrazom, Zmij ne zakljuchit, ne sosredotochit v
     sfere svoego kruga vsej Evropy, a cherez nee i
     ostal'noj mir, pol'zujas' vsemi silami—zavoevaniem i
     ekonomicheskim putem, chtoby podchinit' svoemu vlijaniju,
     vlijaniju svoego cikla, i ostal'nye kontingenty. Vozvrat

     [Footnote 1: Ap. Pavel, kak odin iz naibolee darovityh uchenikov farisejskoj
     shkoly, ne mog ne byt' posvjashhen v etu „tajnu bezzakonija,
     nahodivshujusja v dejstvii“ i v ego vremja. Otsjuda osobaja zloba
     gonenija na nego so storony voinstvujushhago Izrailja.]
]

     From the Nilus Epilogue, 1917

     “According to secret Jewish Zionism, a political plan was devised
     in theory for the peaceful conquest of the world for Zion, by
     Solomon and other sages already 929 years before the birth of
     Christ. In the course of historical developments, the plan was
     elaborated and augmented by their followers initiated in this
     affair. These sages decided to conquer the world peacefully for
     Zion, by the cunning of the symbolic snake, whose head should
     constitute the government of the Jews initiated in the plans of the
     sages (always masked even from their own people) and the body—the
     Judean nation. Penetrating the bosoms of the governments
     encountered on the way, this snake has undermined and eaten away
     (overthrowing) all governments, non-Jewish forces according to
     their growth.

     “This it should also do in the future, carefully following the
     outlined plan, until the cycle of the road travelled by it is
     completed by the return of the head of the snake to Zion, and until
     the snake will thus include and concentrate in the sphere of its
     circle the whole of Europe, and through Europe the rest of the
     world, utilizing all forces of conquest and by economic means in
     order to subject also the other continents to its influence, to the
     influence of its cycle. The return of the head of the snake could
     be accomplished only over the razed plains of the governmental
     power of all the European countries,—that is through economic
     disorganization and ruin, introduced by Zion everywhere by means of
     spiritual decadence and moral turpitude, chiefly, with the aid of
     Jewish women under the guise of French, Italian and Spanish women,
     the best introducers of immorality into the conduct of the rulers
     of nations. Women in the hands of Zion serve as bait for those, who
     owing to them are always in need of money, and therefore barter
     their conscience in order to get money at any cost. This money, in
     fact, is only loaned to them, for it quickly comes back to the
     hands of bribing Zion through these very women, and at the same
     time they have secured slaves for Zion.”

A comparison of these pages shows that Nilus merely added to
Lutostansky’s version the statement to be found in Butmi’s version that
the political plan for the peaceful conquest of the world for Zion, was
devised in theory by Solomon and other sages _929 years before the birth
of Christ_. Lutostansky said in 1907 that “the head of the snake
represents the sages of Zion, and the body—the Judean nation,” while
Nilus said that the “head should constitute the government of the Jews
initiated in the plans of the sages (always masked even from their own
people) and the body—the Judean nation.” Thus the sages of Zion were
transformed by Nilus into “the government of the Jews” in order to
connect the “political plan” all the more closely with the “protocols.”
The American editors have omitted this part of the Nilus epilogue,
evidently because it seemed even to them too absurd for American
consumption.

All of the literature about the “protocols” that appeared in various
parts of the world in 1920 is based on the “documents” vouched for by
the mysterious Sergius Nilus, and fortified by the irresponsible
Jew-baiter and intellectual pervert Ippolit Lutostansky.

That the Nilus-Lutostansky-Butmi campaign was just what the Tsarist
government desired may be seen from the photographic reproduction of
the letter sent to Lutostansky by Grand Duke Michael, who was regarded
as the most liberal among the Russian Grand Dukes. The letter appears
together with other letters of congratulation from members of the
Imperial family in the volume containing the passages quoted above.

[Illustration: Cyrillic

LETTER OF THANKS SENT BY GRAND DUKE MICHAEL TO LUTOSTANSKY FOR HIS
ANTI-SEMITIC WORK.]

[Transcription:
Состоящій при
Его Императорскомъ Высочествѣ
Государѣ Наслѣдникѣ
и
великомъ князѣ
Михаилѣ Александровичѣ

7 Ноября 1902 г.
№ 1443.
С.-Петербургъ.

Его Высокоблагородію
И. І. Лютостанскому.

Копія.

Милостивый Государь

Ипполитъ Іосифовичъ.

ЕГО ИМПЕРАТОРСКОЕ ВЫСОЧЕСТВО
ГОСУДАРЬ НАСЛѢДНИКЪ и ВЕЛИКІЙ
КНЯЗЬ МИХАИЛЪ АЛЕКСАНДРОВИЧЪ
соизволилъ благосклонно принять
поднесенный Вами трудъ „Талмудъ и евреи“,
причемъ ЕГО ВЫСОЧЕСТВУ благоугодно
было поручить мнѣ передать Вамъ ЕГО
искреннюю признательность за Ваше поднесеніе.

Благоволите принять и мою личную
глубокую признательность за присланный
мнѣ экземпляръ Вашей книги.

Прошу Васъ принять увѣреніе въ совершенномъ
моемъ уваженіи и искренней
преданности.

Всегда готовый къ услугамъ Д. Дашковъ.
]

[Transliteration:
Sostojashhij pri
Ego Imperatorskom Vysochestve
Gosudare Naslednike
i
velikom knjaze
Mihaile Aleksandroviche

7 Nojabrja 1902 g.
№ 1443.
S.-Peterburg.

Ego Vysokoblagorodiju
I. I. Ljutostanskomu.

Kopija.

Milostivyj Gosudar'

Ippolit Iosifovich.

EGO IMPERATORSKOE VYSOCHESTVO
GOSUDAR' NASLEDNIK I VELIKIJ
KNJAZ' MIHAIL ALEKSANDROVICH
soizvolil blagosklonno prinjat'
podnesennyj Vami trud „Talmud i evrei“,
prichem EGO VYSOCHESTVU blagougodno
bylo poruchit' mne peredat' Vam EGO
iskrennjuju priznatel'nost' za Vashe podnesenie.

Blagovolite prinjat' i moju lichnuju
glubokuju priznatel'nost' za prislannyj
mne ekzempljar Vashej knigi.

Proshu Vas prinjat' uverenie v sovershennom
moem uvazhenii i iskrennej
predannosti.

Vsegda gotovyj k uslugam D. Dashkov.
]

For the benefit of the antisemitic agitators in England, such as the
editors of The Morning Post, The New Witness, The Spectator, Blackwood’s
Magazine, and a number of irresponsible publications needless to name,
it will prove instructive and interesting to reproduce a few additional
passages from the same volume, in order that they may know and
appreciate not only what that authority said concerning the Jews but
also what he thought of the English.

On pages 279, 282 and 283 of volume six of “The Talmud and the Jews,”
after outlining the alleged Jewish plot to gain world dominion,
Lutostansky wrote, in 1907:

     “The English are typical pure-blooded Israelites. In ancient times
     they were all red-headed, as we see from the descriptions in the
     Bible and the New Testament. The characteristic of the Israelites
     is known to the whole world under the sun. The characteristic of
     the English, if we follow it closely, does not differ from the
     Jewish in the slightest degree. Who are the English? This question
     has long occupied the minds of many people in Europe, as well as in
     England itself. The universal trading traits of the sons of Albion,
     their looting politics, based on unfair business, and many other
     characteristic traits of the nation which are not peculiar to any
     of the other European nations that are even less cultured and
     civilized that the English—all these have long seemed very
     suspicious and have drawn attention to a certain kinship between
     the Anglo-Saxons and the Jews. During the past two decades, in
     England and America, also on the European continent, particularly
     in France, a whole literature has been created, proving on the
     basis of many facts, suppositions and historical references, that
     the origin of the Anglo-Saxon race is not Germanic, but Semitic,
     that the English are the direct descendants of the Israelites,
     thrown by historic fate to the shores of the distant Albion....

     “Indeed, the lion of Judah, has become the British lion and adorns
     the coat of arms of the King of England. The harp of King David to
     this day represents the coat of arms of Ireland....

     “But not only are the kings of England the direct descendants of
     Jewish Kings, they are even seated on the throne of David, on which
     the ancient Jewish kings were married. This throne, on which Jacob
     fell asleep on that night when he dreamt of the ladder and when the
     Lord promised the kingdom to his posterity. This stone, called ‘the
     Stone of Fate,’ which served for the weddings of Jewish Kings, was
     brought to Ireland by the prophet Jeremiah. Tergus (?) transferred
     it to Scotland, whence it was taken to London.

     “It is curious to note that many prophecies about this fate of
     Israel fit England absolutely, as for instance, the prophesy that
     Israel will become a great nation, a kingdom on islands, ruling
     over large colonies.

     “North America is inhabited by the tribe of Menasseh of whom it was
     said in ancient prophesy that he will become a ‘separate great
     nation.’ The very word _saxon_ is derived from _Isaacson_, that is
     the son of Israel....

     “As one of the signs of kinship between the population of England
     and ancient Israel, we cannot help pointing out the close
     similarity between the English and Jewish tribes, the similarity in
     their manner of speech, and above all, trading as the fundamental
     characteristic of both nations....

     “The particular reverence in which the English hold the Bible
     smacks of the Old Testament of the Jews. Even the preference on the
     part of the English for long clothes indicates something
     Asiatic....

     “Arousing of late the unanimous indignation of the whole civilized
     world, the English at the same time call forth amazement at their
     traits, instincts and aspirations which positively make them a
     monster in the family of cultured and civilized European nations.
     As the proverb says, there is no family without a black sheep.
     Every monstrosity, however, is to be explained—Jews come from
     Jews.”

       *       *       *       *       *

This interesting information is taken from Lutostansky’s book. Nilus and
other writers of the Black Hundred camp pictured England in the same
manner immediately after 1905. It was then the Russian governmental
policy to discredit England and the Jews in the eyes of the Russian
people, and the Black Hundreds were employed by the Tsar as the medium
through which to carry on this agitation.

The “Black Hundreds” started their campaign in 1905, but their work was
so venomous, so absurd and so steeped in ignorance that there were few
people even in Russia who paid any attention to it.

That the Nilus protocols which were published by the Black Hundreds were
not taken seriously in Russia by the reactionaries or even by the Black
Hundreds who sought every means of discrediting the Jews, may be
gathered from the fact that in the most stupendous anti-Jewish plot ever
devised by the Russian government to justify Jewish massacres,—the
notorious Beilis case,—the protocols published eight years previously
were never used by the prosecution, even though it resorted to every
foul means that could be conjured up of slandering and vilifying the
Jewish people. The very persons who were instrumental in spreading the
“protocols” in Russia in 1905 seemed to have realized that the false
accusations which they contained were too transparent and too clumsy to
deceive even the most credulous, and so they were discarded.

But suddenly, after the armistice, a new edition of the Nilus book
containing the “protocols,” dated 1917, made its appearance as suitable
to the chaotic conditions that prevailed in Russia and during the past
two years, as has been shown, it was reproduced in various countries.
This time the antisemitic propagandists are trying to connect the
“protocols” directly with Theodore Herzl and the Zionist movement. The
war, the peace treaty and bolshevism are characterized as the
fulfillment of these “protocols” which they say had been devised no less
than 929 years before the birth of Christ, by Solomon and other Sages.
The present “protocols” have been elaborated from the
“Retcliffe-Goedsche” versions by the Russian secret police department
and the Black Hundreds who ascribed all the evils in the world to the
Jews.

The Black Hundred writer, G. Butmi, whose book “Enemies of the Human
Race,” containing the fabricated speech by a “famous Rabbi” side by side
with the “protocols,” gives several characteristic passages in his
introduction that will convey to the reader a clear conception of the
type of men who have stood behind the movement to discredit the Jews
through the so-called “protocols.”

On page 36 of this volume, Butmi wrote:

     “The French Revolution, which ended in the execution of Louis XVI
     in 1793, was engineered by England with the aid of the Jews and the
     Judaized Masons. Only the Jews profited by the French Revolution,
     even as they profited by the English Revolution, attaining in the
     general turmoil equal rights with the native population of France.”

Discussing the traits of the English people and finding a similarity
between them and the Jews, Butmi said on page 38:

     “The British traits are well known all over the world—their
     exceptional selfishness, their inhuman cruelty to foreigners, their
     inherent instinct of exploitation, their theoretical stupidity are
     mingled with practical shrewdness and utter brazenness.”

On page 39 he said:

     “Meanwhile the Britons have not distinguished themselves in
     anything, if we are not to take into consideration the fact that
     being thoroughly incapable of creating their own language, they
     have by their talent to distort languages given to the present
     English people a repulsive Judeo-Carthaginian imprint through their
     shameless self-satisfaction, arrogance and treacherous
     inclinations.”

On page 41 he said:

     “In 1843 the first lodge of the new Jewish union ‘Bnai Brith’ was
     organized in New York. Gradually this Jewish ‘Bnai Brith’
     concentrates in its hands the direction of all Masonic lodges in
     America, and through them it directs American politics.”

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE OF A NILUS PROTOCOL PUBLISHED IN 1905. PHOTOGRAPHED FROM THE
BOOK IN THE BRITISH MUSEUM.]

[Transcription:
—364—

Кто заподозритъ тогда, что всѣ эти проблемы были подстроены
нами по политическому плану, котораго никто не
раскусилъ въ теченіи многихъ вѣковъ?!. ....


Еще протоколъ.

Когда мы воцаримся намъ не желательно будет существованіе
другой религіи, кромѣ нашей о Единомъ Богѣ,
съ Которымъ наша судьба связана его избраніемъ и Которымъ
та же наша судьба объединена съ судьбами міра.
Поэтому мы должны разрушить всякія вѣрованія.
Если отъ этого родятся современные атеисты, то, какъ переходная
ступень это не помѣшаетъ нашимъ видамъ, а послужитъ
примѣромъ для тѣхъ поколѣній, которыя будутъ
слушать проповѣди наши о религіи Моисея,
приведшей своей стойкой и обдуманной системой
къ покоренію намъ всѣхъ народовъ. Въ этомъ мы
подчеркнемъ и мистическую ея правду, въ которой, скажемъ
мы, основывается вся ея воспитательная сила.... .
Тогда при каждом случаѣ мы будемъ публиковать статьи,
въ которыхъ будемъ сравнивать наше благое правленіе съ
прошлыми. Благодѣянія покоя, хотя и вынужденнаго вѣками
волненій, послужатъ къ новому рельефу сказаннаго блага.
Ошибки гоевскихъ администрацій будутъ описываться нами
въ самыхъ яркихъ краскахъ. Мы посѣемъ такое къ нимъ
отвращеніе, что народы предпочтутъ покой въ крѣпостномъ
состояніи правамъ пресловутой свободы, столь
ихъ измучившимъ и истощившимъ самые источники человѣческаго
существованія, которые эксплоатировались толпою
проходимцевъ, не вѣдавшихъ, что творятъ...... Безполезныя
перемѣны правленій, къ которымъ мы подбивали гоевъ,
когда подкапывали ихъ государственныя зданія, до того надоѣдятъ
къ тому времени народамъ, что они предпочтутъ
терпѣть отъ насъ все, лишь бы не рисковать переиспытывать
пережитыя волненія и невзгоды. Мы же особенно будемъ
подчеркивать историческія ошибки гоевскихъ правленій,
столько вѣковъ промучившихъ человѣчество отсутствіемъ

—365—

сообразительности во всемъ, что касается истиннаго его
блага, въ погонѣ за фантастическими проектами соціальныхъ
благъ, не замѣчая, что эти проекты все болѣе ухудшали,
а не улучшали положеніе всеобщихъ отношеній, на которыхъ
основывается человѣческая жизнь...

Вся сила нашихъ принциповъ и мѣропріятій будетъ заключена
въ томъ, что они нами выставятся и истолкуются,
какъ яркій контрастъ разложившимся старымъ порядкамъ
общественнаго строя.

Наши философы будутъ обсуждать всѣ недостатки гоевскихъ
вѣрованій, но никто никогда не станетъ обсуждать
нашу вѣру съ ея истинной точки зрѣнія, такъ какъ ее
никто основательно не узнаетъ, кромѣ нашихъ, которые
никогда не посмѣютъ выдать ея тайны..

Въ странахъ, называемыхъ передовыми, мы создали
безумную, грязную, отвратительную литературу.
Еще нѣкоторое время послѣ вступленія нашего
во власть мы станемъ поощрять ея существованіе,
чтобы она рельефнѣе обрисовала контрастъ
рѣчей, программъ, которыя раздадутся съ высотъ
нашихъ....... Наши умные люди, воспитанные для
руководства гоями, будутъ составлять рѣчи, проекты,
записки, статьи, которыми мы будемъ вліять на
умы, направляя ихъ къ намѣченнымъ нами понятіямъ
и знаніямъ.


Еще протоколъ.

Когда мы, наконецъ окончательно воцаримся при помощи
государственныхъ переворотовъ, всюду подготовленныхъ
къ одному и тому же дню, послѣ окончательнаго признанія
негодности всѣхъ существующихъ правительствъ (а
до этого пройдетъ еще не мало времени, можетъ быть и
цѣлый вѣкъ), мы постараемся, чтобы противъ насъ уже не
было заговоровъ. Для этого мы немилосердно казнимъ всѣхъ
кто встрѣтитъ наше воцареніе съ оружіемъ въ рукахъ. Всякое
новое учрежденіе какого-либо тайнаго общества будетъ
]

[Transliteration:
-364-

Kto zapodozrit togda, chto vse eti problemy byli podstroeny
nami po politicheskomu planu, kotorago nikto ne
raskusil v techenii mnogih vekov?!. ....


Eshhe protokol.

Kogda my vocarimsja nam ne zhelatel'no budet sushhestvovanie
drugoj religii, krome nashej o Edinom Boge,
s Kotorym nasha sud'ba svjazana ego izbraniem i Kotorym
ta zhe nasha sud'ba ob'edinena s sud'bami mira.
Poetomu my dolzhny razrushit' vsjakija verovanija.
Esli ot etogo rodjatsja sovremennye ateisty, to, kak perehodnaja
stupen' eto ne pomeshaet nashim vidam, a posluzhit
primerom dlja teh pokolenij, kotoryja budut
slushat' propovedi nashi o religii Moiseja,
privedshej svoej stojkoj i obdumannoj sistemoj
k pokoreniju nam vseh narodov. V etom my
podcherknem i misticheskuju eja pravdu, v kotoroj, skazhem
my, osnovyvaetsja vsja eja vospitatel'naja sila.... .
Togda pri kazhdom sluchae my budem publikovat' stat'i,
v kotoryh budem sravnivat' nashe blagoe pravlenie s
proshlymi. Blagodejanija pokoja, hotja i vynuzhdennago vekami
volnenij, posluzhat k novomu rel'efu skazannago blaga.
Oshibki goevskih administracij budut opisyvat'sja nami
v samyh jarkih kraskah. My poseem takoe k nim
otvrashhenie, chto narody predpochtut pokoj v krepostnom
sostojanii pravam preslovutoj svobody, stol'
ih izmuchivshim i istoshhivshim samye istochniki chelovecheskago
sushhestvovanija, kotorye eksploatirovalis' tolpoju
prohodimcev, ne vedavshih, chto tvorjat...... Bezpoleznyja
peremeny pravlenij, k kotorym my podbivali goev,
kogda podkapyvali ih gosudarstvennyja zdanija, do togo nadoedjat
k tomu vremeni narodam, chto oni predpochtut
terpet' ot nas vse, lish' by ne riskovat' pereispytyvat'
perezhityja volnenija i nevzgody. My zhe osobenno budem
podcherkivat' istoricheskija oshibki goevskih pravlenij,
stol'ko vekov promuchivshih chelovechestvo otsutstviem

-365-

soobrazitel'nosti vo vsem, chto kasaetsja istinnago ego
blaga, v pogone za fantasticheskimi proektami social'nyh
blag, ne zamechaja, chto eti proekty vse bolee uhudshali,
a ne uluchshali polozhenie vseobshhih otnoshenij, na kotoryh
osnovyvaetsja chelovecheskaja zhizn'...

Vsja sila nashih principov i meroprijatij budet zakljuchena
v tom, chto oni nami vystavjatsja i istolkujutsja,
kak jarkij kontrast razlozhivshimsja starym porjadkam
obshhestvennago stroja.

Nashi filosofy budut obsuzhdat' vse nedostatki goevskih
verovanij, no nikto nikogda ne stanet obsuzhdat'
nashu veru s eja istinnoj tochki zrenija, tak kak ee
nikto osnovatel'no ne uznaet, krome nashih, kotorye
nikogda ne posmejut vydat' eja tajny.

V stranah, nazyvaemyh peredovymi, my sozdali
bezumnuju, grjaznuju, otvratitel'nuju literaturu.
Eshhe nekotoroe vremja posle vstuplenija nashego
vo vlast' my stanem pooshhrjat' eja sushhestvovanie,
chtoby ona rel'efnee obrisovala kontrast
rechej, programm, kotoryja razdadutsja s vysot
nashih....... Nashi umnye ljudi, vospitannye dlja
rukovodstva gojami, budut sostavljat' rechi, proekty,
zapiski, stat'i, kotorymi my budem vlijat' na
umy, napravljaja ih k namechennym nami ponjatijam
i znanijam.


Eshhe protokol.

Kogda my, nakonec okonchatel'no vocarimsja pri pomoshhi
gosudarstvennyh perevorotov, vsjudu podgotovlennyh
k odnomu i tomu zhe dnju, posle okonchatel'nago priznanija
negodnosti vseh sushhestvujushhih pravitel'stv (a
do etogo projdet eshhe ne malo vremeni, mozhet byt' i
celyj vek), my postaraemsja, chtoby protiv nas uzhe ne
bylo zagovorov. Dlja etogo my nemiloserdno kaznim vseh
kto vstretit nashe vocarenie s oruzhiem v rukah. Vsjakoe
novoe uchrezhdenie kakogo-libo tajnago obshhestva budet
]

[_Translation of the Nilus Protocol published in Russia in 1905._]

“When we become rulers, we shall regard as undesirable the existence of
any religion except our own, proclaiming one God with Whom our fate is
tied as the Chosen People, and by Whom our fate has been made one with
the fate of the world. For this reason we must destroy all other
religions. If thereby should emerge contemporary atheists, then, as a
transition step, this will not interfere with our aims. It will serve as
an example to coming generations who will listen to the teachings of the
Mosaic religion. By its sound and reasonable system, we have achieved
the subjugation of all nations. We shall emphasize its mystic law in
which we will say lies all power.

“On every occasion we will publish articles in which we will compare our
beneficent rule with the past. The benefits of peace, though achieved
through centuries of turmoil, will stand out in relief in this era of
blessings. The shortcomings of the Gentile administrations will be
pictured by us in the darkest colors. We will sow such antipathy toward
their governments that the masses will prefer peace in a condition of
servitude to the rights of the so-called liberty which so tormented them
and destroyed the very springs of human existence and which were
exploited by a host of adventures, not realizing what they were doing.
The masses will become so satiated with the endless changes of
administration, which we instigated among the Gentiles when we were
undermining their governmental institutions, that they will tolerate
anything from us rather than risk undergoing again such struggle and
hardships. We will especially emphasize the historical mistakes of the
Gentile administrations which caused mankind to suffer for many
centuries through lack of real understanding in all that concerned its
true welfare, pursuing fantastic projects of social welfare and not
noticing that these projects made worse instead of better the state of
general relationships which are the basis of human existences.

“The chief strength of our principles and measures will lie in that they
are put forward and interpreted by us as a sharp contrast to the old and
decayed order of society.

“Our philosophers will discuss all the shortcomings of the Gentile
religions, but no one will be allowed to discuss our religion from the
true point of view except our own people. We shall have a fundamental
knowledge of it and will never dare to disclose its secrets.

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE OF THE SAME PROTOCOL CHANGED BY BUTMI IN 1907.]

[Transcription:

75

№ 17.

(по рукописи протоколъ 16-й).


Когда мы воцаримся, мы будемъ при каждомъ удобномъ случаѣ
сравнивать Наше благое Правленіе съ прошлыми безалаберными
администраціями... Ошибки гоевскихъ царствъ будутъ описываться
нами въ самыхъ яркихъ краскахъ: мы посѣемъ такое
презрѣніе и отвращеніе къ нимъ, что народы предпочтутъ покой
и миръ въ крѣпостномъ состояніи правамъ пресловутой свободы,
столь измучившей ихъ въ теченіе вѣковъ, истощивъ самые
источники существованія, попираемые проходимцами, не вѣдающими,
что творятъ.

Безполезныя, де факто, перемѣны правленій, на которыя мы
ихъ подбивали, когда подкапывали ихъ строй, до того имъ надоѣдятъ
до тѣхъ поръ, что они предпочтутъ принять все то, что
мы имъ навяжемъ, лишь бы не рисковать переиспытать пережитыя
невзгоды и волнения, тѣмъ болѣе, что мы будемъ, публичною
критикой, особенно подчеркивать ошибки управленія гоевскихъ
правленій, столько вѣковъ промучившихъ человѣчество
недостаткомъ сообразительности на истинныя блага, въ погонѣ за
фантастическими соціальными улучшеніями, не замѣчая,что, улучшая
бытъ нѣкоторыхъ, мѣры эти ухудшали всеобщія отношенія
и порядокъ строя, на которомъ основывается человѣческая жизнь.

Наши принципы и мѣры будутъ имѣть въ свою пользу то, что
они будутъ истолкованы и выставлены, какъ контрастъ съ разложившимся
старымъ порядкамъ общественнаго строя.

Наши философы будутъ обсуждать и критиковать всѣ недостатки
гоевскихъ вѣpoваній, въ чемъ они намъ отвѣтить не могутъ
по отношенію Нашей Вѣры, потому что никто ея тайнъ не
знаетъ, кромѣ нашихъ талмудистовъ и раввиновъ, а они никогда
не выдадутъ ихъ, потому что на нихъ основана сила управленія
паствою нашей.

Мы создали безумную, грязную, отвратительную литературу,
особенно въ странахъ, называемыхъ передовыми. Послѣ вступленія
нашего во власть мы нѣкоторое время не запретимъ ея, но
будемъ ее искоренять строгою критикой, чтобы она, какъ остатокъ
гоевскихъ руинъ, рельефнѣе обрисовывала контрастъ того,
что раздаваться будетъ съ Нашей Высоты, съ тѣмъ, что исходило
изъ грязнаго болота гоевскихъ царствъ.
]

[Transliteration:

75

№ 17.

(po rukopisi protokol 16-j).


Kogda my vocarimsja, my budem pri kazhdom udobnom sluchae
sravnivat' Nashe blagoe Pravlenie s proshlymi bezalabernymi
administracijami... Oshibki goevskih carstv budut opisyvat'sja
nami v samyh jarkih kraskah: my poseem takoe
prezrenie i otvrashhenie k nim, chto narody predpochtut pokoj
i mir v krepostnom sostojanii pravam preslovutoj svobody,
stol' izmuchivshej ih v techenie vekov, istoshhiv samye
istochniki sushhestvovanija, popiraemye prohodimcami, ne vedajushhimi,
chto tvorjat.

Bezpoleznyja, de fakto, peremeny pravlenij, na kotoryja my
ih podbivali, kogda podkapyvali ih stroj, do togo im nadoedjat
do teh por, chto oni predpochtut prinjat' vse to, chto
my im navjazhem, lish' by ne riskovat' pereispytat' perezhityja
nevzgody i volnenija, tem bolee, chto my budem, publichnoju
kritikoj, osobenno podcherkivat' oshibki upravlenija goevskih
pravlenij, stol'ko vekov promuchivshih chelovechestvo
nedostatkom soobrazitel'nosti na istinnyja blaga, v pogone za
fantasticheskimi social'nymi uluchshenijami, ne zamechaja, chto, uluchshaja
byt nekotoryh, mery eti uhudshali vseobshhija otnoshenija
i porjadok stroja, na kotorom osnovyvaetsja chelovecheskaja zhizn'.

Nashi principy i mery budut imet' v svoju pol'zu to, chto
oni budut istolkovany i vystavleny, kak kontrast s razlozhivshimsja
starym porjadkam obshhestvennago stroja.

Nashi filosofy budut obsuzhdat' i kritikovat' vse nedostatki
goevskih verovanij, v chem oni nam otvetit' ne mogut
po otnosheniju Nashej Very, potomu chto nikto eja tajn ne
znaet, krome nashih talmudistov i ravvinov, a oni nikogda
ne vydadut ih, potomu chto na nih osnovana sila upravlenija
pastvoju nashej.

My sozdali bezumnuju, grjaznuju, otvratitel'nuju literaturu,
osobenno v stranah, nazyvaemyh peredovymi. Posle vstuplenija
nashego vo vlast' my nekotoroe vremja ne zapretim eja, no
budem ee iskorenjat' strogoju kritikoj, chtoby ona, kak ostatok
goevskih ruin, rel'efnee obrisovyvala kontrast togo,
chto razdavat'sja budet s Nashej Vysoty, s tem, chto iskhodilo
iz grjaznago bolota goevskih carstv.
]

     “In countries that are called advanced, we have created a
     senseless, filthy, and disgusting literature. For a short time
     after our entrance into power, we shall encourage its existence so
     that it may show in great relief the contrast between it and the
     written and spoken announcements which will emanate from our
     exalted position. Our wise men, educated for leadership of the
     Gentiles, will prepare speeches, plans, notes, and articles,
     through which we shall influence their minds, directing them along
     the lines of knowledge and understanding which we intend them to
     follow.”

[_Translation of the same Protocol published by Butmi in Russia in 1907,
showing the changes made in the Protocols within two years._]

     “When we become rulers, we shall at each suitable occasion compare
     our beneficent rule with the former unsystematic
     administrations.... The mistakes of the administrations of the
     Gentiles will be pictured by us in the most lurid colors: we will
     sow such antipathy and hatred toward these governments that the
     masses will prefer peace and quiet in a condition of servitude to
     the rights of the so-called liberty which for many ages had so
     tormented them and destroyed the very springs of human existence
     and which were exploited by adventurers, who did not realize what
     they were doing.

     “The masses will become so satiated with the useless changes of
     administration, which we instigated when we were undermining their
     institutions, that they will accept anything that we may give them
     rather than risk undergoing again such struggle and disorder....
     Moreover, we will, through public criticism, especially emphasize
     the mistakes of the Gentile administrations which caused mankind to
     suffer for many centuries through lack of real understanding in all
     that concerned its true welfare, pursuing fantastic projects of
     social welfare and not noticing that these projects made worse
     instead of better the state of general relationships which are the
     basis of human existence.

     “Our principles and faith will be especially useful inasmuch as
     they will be put forward and interpreted by us as a contrast to the
     old and decayed order of society.

     “Our philosophers will discuss and criticise the shortcomings of
     the Gentile religions, but the latter will not be able to answer
     with regard to our faith, for no one is acquainted with its
     mysteries except our Rabbis and Talmudists, and they will never
     reveal it, for on them depends the power of guiding our flock.

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE OF NILUS PROTOCOL WHICH WAS PUBLISHED IN 1905 AND CHANGED BY
BUTMI IN 1907.]

[Transcription:
—345—

хитростью и пронырливостью во время переговоровъ и соглашеній,
но въ томъ, что называется „офиціальнымъ языкомъ“,
мы будемъ держаться противоположной тактики и
будемъ казаться честными и сговорчивыми. Такимъ образомъ
народы и правительства гоевъ, которыхъ мы пріучили
смотрѣть только на показную сторону того, что мы имъ
представляемъ, примутъ насъ еще за благодѣтелей и спасителей
рода человѣческаго.

На каждое противодѣйствіе мы должны быть
въ cocтояніи отвѣтить войной съ сосѣдями той
странѣ, которая осмѣлится намъ противодѣйствовать,
но, если и сосѣди эти задумаютъ стать
коллективно противъ насъ, то мы должны дать
отпоръ всеобщей войной.

Главный успѣхъ въ политикѣ заключается въ тайнѣ ея предпріятій:
слово не должно согласоваться съ дѣйствіями дипломата.

Къ дѣйствіямъ въ пользу широко задуманнаго нами
плана, уже близящагося къ вожделѣнному концу, мы должны
вынуждать гоевскія правительства якобы общественнымъ
мнѣніемъ, втайнѣ подстроеннымъ нами
при помощи такъ называемой „великой державы“—печати,
которая, за немногими исключеніями,
съ которыми считаться не стоитъ,—вся
уже въ рукахъ нашихъ.

Однимъ словомъ, чтобы резюмировать нашу систему обузданія
гоевскихъ правительствъ въ Европѣ мы одному изъ
нихъ покажемъ свою силу покушеніями, т.е. терроромъ,
а всѣмъ, если допустить ихъ возстаніе противъ нась, мы
отвѣтимъ Американскими или Китайскими, или
Японскими пушками.


Слѣдующій протоколъ.

Мы должны заручиться для себя всѣми орудіями, которыми
наши противники могли бы воспользоваться противъ
насъ. Мы должны будемъ выискивать въ самыхъ тонкихъ
выраженіяхъ и загвоздкахъ правового словаря оправданія
]

[Transliteration:
-345-

hitrost'ju i pronyrlivost'ju vo vremja peregovorov i soglashenij,
no v tom, chto nazyvaetsja „oficial'nym jazykom“,
my budem derzhat'sja protivopolozhnoj taktiki i
budem kazat'sja chestnymi i sgovorchivymi. Takim obrazom
narody i pravitel'stva goev, kotoryh my priuchili
smotret' tol'ko na pokaznuju storonu togo, chto my im
predstavljaem, primut nas eshhe za blagodetelej i spasitelej
roda chelovecheskago.

Na kazhdoe protivodejstvie my dolzhny byt'
v sostojanii otvetit' vojnoj s sosedjami toj
strane, kotoraja osmelitsja nam protivodejstvovat',
no, esli i sosedi eti zadumajut stat'
kollektivno protiv nas, to my dolzhny dat'
otpor vseobshhej vojnoj.

Glavnyj uspeh v politike zakljuchaetsja v tajne eja predprijatij:
slovo ne dolzhno soglasovat'sja s dejstvijami diplomata.

K dejstvijam v pol'zu shiroko zadumannago nami
plana, uzhe blizjashhagosja k vozhdelennomu koncu, my dolzhny
vynuzhdat' goevskija pravitel'stva jakoby obshhestvennym
mneniem, vtajne podstroennym nami
pri pomoshhi tak nazyvaemoj „velikoj derzhavy“—pechati,
kotoraja, za nemnogimi iskljuchenijami,
s kotorymi schitat'sja ne stoit,—vsja
uzhe v rukah nashih.

Odnim slovom, chtoby rezjumirovat' nashu sistemu obuzdanija
goevskih pravitel'stv v Evrope my odnomu iz
nih pokazhem svoju silu pokushenijami, t.e. terrorom,
a vsem, esli dopustit' ih vozstanie protiv nas', my
otvetim Amerikanskimi ili Kitajskimi, ili
Japonskimi pushkami.



Sledujushhij protokol.

My dolzhny zaruchit'sja dlja sebja vsemi orudijami, kotorymi
nashi protivniki mogli by vospol'zovat'sja protiv
nas. My dolzhny budem vyiskivat' v samyh tonkih
vyrazhenijah i zagvozdkah pravovogo slovarja opravdanija
]

     “We have created a senseless, filthy and disgusting literature,
     especially in the so-called advanced countries. For a short time
     after our entrance into power we will not prohibit this literature,
     but will weed it out by means of destructive criticism, in order
     that, as a remnant of the Gentile ruins, there should be a stronger
     contrast between the literature that will come down from Our Height
     and that which emanated from the filthy mud of the Gentile
     governments.”

[Illustration: Cyrillic

FACSIMILE OF BUTMI PROTOCOL PUBLISHED IN 1907, SHOWING THE CHANGE MADE
AFTER THE REVOLUTION.]

[Transcription:
52

Для достиженія этого, по всей Европѣ, а съ помощью ея отношеній
и на другихъ континентахъ, мы должны создать броженія,
пререканія, раздоры и вражду. Въ этомъ—двоякая польза: во
первыхъ, мы держимъ въ страхѣ всѣ страны, хорошо вѣдающія,
что мы властны произвести по желанію безпорядки или водворить
порядокъ въ нихъ. Онѣ привыкли видѣть въ насъ необходимое
давленіе: _мы запутали всѣ нити, протянутыя въ Государственные
Кабинеты всемірною политикой, экономическими договорами
или долговыми обязательствами_. Для достиженія этого
послѣдняго обстоятельства намъ надо было вооружиться большою
хитростью и даже пронырливостью во время переговоровъ и соглашеній:
но въ томъ, что называется оффиціальнымъ языкомъ,
мы должны были казаться сговорчивыми и правдивыми. Такимъ
образомъ гои, _которыхъ мы пріучили смотрѣтъ только на показную
сторону того, что мы имъ представляемъ_, принимаютъ
насъ еще за благодѣтелей и спасителей  рода человѣческаго.

На каждое противодѣйствіе мы готовы отвѣтить противодѣйствующей
Странѣ войною съ сосѣдями, а если многіе задумаютъ
коллективно дѣйствовать противъ насъ, то мы завяжемъ узелъ
всеобщей войны, и незамѣтно для нихъ подобьем ихъ на это...

Главный успѣхъ въ политике заключается въ тайнѣ ея предпріятій:
слова не должны согласоваться съ дѣйствіями дипломатовъ.

[Transcriber's Note: The following paragraph is circled.]
_Мы успѣшно вынуждали не разъ къ войнѣ гоевскія правительства,
якобы общественнымъ мнѣніемъ, въ тайнѣ подстроеннымъ
нами. Одному изъ нихъ мы доказывали свои силы въ покушеніяхъ—въ
террорѣ, а всѣмъ, если допустить ихъ возстаніе,
мы отвѣтимъ Американскими, Китайскими или Японскими пушками,
которыя всецѣло въ нашемъ распоряжѣніи._


№ 5.

(по рукописи протоколъ 2-й).

Намъ необходимо, чтобы войны не давали территориальныхъ
выгодъ. Это перенесетъ войну на экономическую почву, на которой
націи убѣдятся въ томъ, что преобладаніе зависитъ отъ
нашей помощи, а такое положеніе вещей отдастъ обѣ стороны въ
распоряженіе нашей интернаціональной агентуры, обладающей
милліонами глазъ, взоровъ, не прегражденныхъ никакими границами...
Тогда наши интернаціональныя права сотрутъ всѣ народныя
права и будутъ ими править такъ, какъ гражданское
]

[Transliteration:
52

Dlja dostizhenija etogo, po vsej Evrope, a s pomoshh'ju eja otnoshenij
i na drugih kontinentah, my dolzhny sozdat' brozhenija,
prerekanija, razdory i vrazhdu. V etom—dvojakaja pol'za: vo
pervyh, my derzhim v strahe vse strany, horosho vedajushhija,
chto my vlastny proizvesti po zhelaniju bezporjadki ili vodvorit'
porjadok v nih. One privykli videt' v nas neobhodimoe
davlenie: _my zaputali vse niti, protjanutyja v Gosudarstvennye
Kabinety vsemirnoju politikoj, ekonomicheskimi dogovorami
ili dolgovymi objazatel'stvami_. Dlja dostizhenija etogo
poslednjago obstojatel'stva nam nado bylo vooruzhit'sja bol'shoju
hitrost'ju i dazhe pronyrlivost'ju vo vremja peregovorov i soglashenij:
no v tom, chto nazyvaetsja official'nym jazykom,
my dolzhny byli kazat'sja sgovorchivymi i pravdivymi. Takim
obrazom goi, _kotoryh my priuchili smotret' tol'ko na pokaznuju
storonu togo, chto my im predstavljaem_, prinimajut
nas eshhe za blagodetelej i spasitelej roda chelovecheskago.

Na kazhdoe protivodejstvie my gotovy otvetit' protivodejstvujushhej
Strane vojnoju s sosedjami, a esli mnogie zadumajut
kollektivno dejstvovat' protiv nas, to my zavjazhem uzel
vseobshhej vojny, i nezametno dlja nih podob'em ih na eto...

Glavnyj uspeh v politike zakljuchaetsja v tajne eja predprijatij:
slova ne dolzhny soglasovat'sja s dejstvijami diplomatov.

[Transcriber's Note: The following paragraph is circled.]
_My uspeshno vynuzhdali ne raz k vojne goevskija pravitel'stva,
jakoby obshhestvennym mneniem, v tajne podstroennym
nami. Odnomu iz nih my dokazyvali svoi sily v pokushenijah—v
terrore, a vsem, esli dopustit' ih vozstanie,
my otvetim Amerikanskimi, Kitajskimi ili Japonskimi pushkami,
kotoryja vsecelo v nashem rasporjazhenii._

№ 5.

(po rukopisi protokol 2-j).

Nam neobhodimo, chtoby vojny ne davali territorial'nyh
vygod. Eto pereneset vojnu na ekonomicheskuju pochvu, na kotoroj
nacii ubedjatsja v tom, chto preobladanie zavisit ot
_nashej pomoshhi_, a takoe polozhenie veshhej otdast obe storony v
rasporjazhenie nashej internacional'noj agentury, obladajushhej
millionami glaz, vzorov, ne pregrazhdennyh nikakimi granicami...
Togda nashi internacional'nyja prava sotrut vse narodnyja
prava i budut imi pravit' tak, kak grazhdanskoe
]

Thus it is seen that Butmi, publishing his version of the “protocols” in
1907, two years after the Nilus version had appeared, changed the text
to suit his purposes. In 1905, before the first Russian revolution, the
Nilus version of the “protocols” said “_we will show one of them our
strength by means of violence, that is, by terrorism_.” After the
revolution, Butmi changed this sentence to read “_We have shown one of
these governments our powers by assassination, by terrorism_.”

And now the introducers of the “protocols” in this country and in Europe
are pointing to bolshevism as the fulfillment of the “documents” which
have been concocted, elaborated and changed by antisemites to serve the
devious political purposes of their masters and their own.

The “protocols” came into the world with the trademark, “made in
Germany” and were elaborated under the auspices of the “Russian Black
Hundreds” in their efforts to save the dying Russian autocracy. When the
Russian autocracy was overthrown and members of the “Black Hundreds”
were scattered in various lands, their financial and “moral” support
shattered, they set out in quest of new sources of income. They are now
resorting to their old discredited methods in a new environment and thus
the poison of the Russian Black Hundreds is being spread in England,
Germany, France, the Scandinavian countries, Japan, and even in this
country. The voice is the voice of dead despotic Russia, and the hand is
the hand of the same “Black Hundreds.”

And now cowardly anonymous writers are embellishing the “protocols,”
adding new lies to the old ones, making accusations against the Jews
that even Nilus-Lutostansky-Butmi dared not make in darkest Russia.
Perhaps some day these new legends and absurd, malicious myths may
evolve into a new and revised edition of secret Jewish “protocols.”

In periods of turmoil and unrest such venomous fabrications may gain
credence among the ignorant and may poison their minds. But, like all
anti-semitic myths of old, the new anti-Jewish legends are bound to
destroy themselves. A lie shuns the sunlight. It thrives in darkness. It
cannot survive analysis. The truth will prevail.

Israel has no secret protocols, no hidden designs. After all its
tribulations, its dream is still of peace, of justice and of human
brotherhood. After all the centuries the word that came from Sinai and
the message of the prophets of old are still enshrined in its heart.
Indeed as has been aptly said: “The Holy Scriptures are the only
authentic protocols of the Wise Men of Zion.”

THE END




Books                                From
translated by    HERMAN BERNSTEIN    the Russian


=RESURRECTION. By Count Leo Tolstoi.= (Published 1900.) It depicts with
a master hand the ocean of life rocked by storm and lulled to sleep and
ease. In the splash of every wave is heard the story of human emotions,
misery, disenchantment, suffering, crime, and life, that is true—even in
art. Illustrated. Cloth bound. Price, $1.00; postpaid.


=“FOMA GORDEYEV.” By Maxim Gorky.= (Published 1901.) This book made
Gorky’s literary reputation in Russia, Germany and France. It is a most
remarkable novel. The New York _Evening Post_ says:

     “Maxim Gorky, the young Russian poet of the vagabond and the
     proletariat, the most ardent worshipper at the shrine of Nietzsche
     and his ideal ‘Over-Man,’ owes much of his sudden popularity to his
     personality. The son of a poor upholsterer, Gorky was thrown upon
     his own resources at the age of nine and since then has experienced
     a wide range of human emotions, struggles, depravity and misery.
     Shoemaker, apple peddler, painter, dock-hand, railroad workman,
     baker and tramp, this unique author had a thousand and one similar
     occupations, and had even made more than one attempt to take his
     own life.”

This version of =Foma Gordeyev=, is in no way abridged, giving the exact
reproduction of the thought and expression of the author. Cloth bound.
Price, $1.00; postpaid.


=THE SEVEN WHO WERE HANGED. By Leonid Andreyev.= (Published 1909.) What
reviewers say:

     “It is by reason of its art even more real, more horrifying, more
     impressive than any other Russian fiction translated in a long
     time. Under the crystal simplicity of Andreyev’s style each spirit
     reveals itself, stripped of its bodily covering, in its inmost
     truth.”—=New York Times.=

     “Grewsome because it is fearfully real. But it is compelling for
     the same reason.”—=New York World.=

     “It is not a mere morbid probing into the abnormal and horrible. It
     has its mission. It is a grim and terrible picture, and it is
     painted with tremendous art—the art of a Dore.”—=Chicago
     Inter-Ocean.=

Cloth bound. Price, $1.00; postpaid.


=THE FORGED COUPON. By Count Leo Tolstoi.= (Published 1912.) This story
shows the successive evil and wrong resulting from the forging of a bank
note by a student in need of money. Numerous crimes succeed each other
as a result of this first wrong act, until the wave of crime is checked
by a poor, ignorant woman and a lame tailor, who follow the real
teaching of Christ. The book contains also =After the Ball=, a story of
love and military life; =Korney Vasilyev=, a story of peasant life;
=Tolstoi’s Vital Humanitarian Ideas=, giving the very essence of the
fountain-spring and incentive of all the literary work ever written by
this wonderful man—a peep, as it were, at the power-works of his
thinking machine. Cloth bound. Price, $1.00; postpaid.

       *       *       *       *       *

=J. S. OGILVIE PUBLISHING COMPANY, 57 Rose Street, NEW YORK=


[Transcriber's note: The following apparent misprints were
corrected for this electronic edition.

"answered the learned Polish Jew"
    --was "answerd"
"reactionary Chernsk nobility made"
    --was "Chersnk"
"Constantinople!"
    --was "Constaninople"
"Our nation is ostentatious and greedy..."
    --was missing opening single quote
"sole possessors of all the gold to be found on earth"
    --were two blank lines between "all the gold" and "to be found"
"free-thinking, scepticism, and conflicts."
    --was "scepticsm"
"tremendous capital which is in their possession"
    --was "possesson"
"Russia adopted a definite, anti-Jewish policy of vengeance"
    --was "vengenance"
"less cultured and civilized that the English"
    --left as printed (unverifiable translation)
"mysteries except our Rabbis and Talmudists"
    --was "Tadmudists"
"historical mistakes of the Gentile"
    --was "Gentle"
"must try to humiliate it, we must instil into it free-thinking"
    --left as printed
"The name of the notorious Alexey Nikolayevitch Sukhotin"
    --was "Nikolayevtich"
Any misprints in Cyrillic facsimile pages are left uncorrected.
The capitalization and hyphenation of anti-Semitic (and variants)
is inconsistent throughout, and left as printed.]





End of Project Gutenberg's The History of a Lie, by Herman Bernstein

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE HISTORY OF A LIE ***

***** This file should be named 19200-0.txt or 19200-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/1/9/2/0/19200/

Produced by Suzanne Lybarger, Jonathan Niehof, the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net,
Nikola Smolenski, cinnabar, and Distributed Proofreaders
Europe at http://dp.rastko.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
