The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Old Songs We Used to Sing, '61 to
'65, by Osbourne H. Oldroyd

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Good Old Songs We Used to Sing, '61 to '65

Author: Osbourne H. Oldroyd

Release Date: May 22, 2007 [EBook #21566]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD OLD SONGS ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Linda Cantoni, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.) Music transcribed
by Linda Cantoni, from The Civil War Songbook (Dover
Publications, 1977), and from 19th-Century sheet music in
the Library of Congress Civil War and Historic Sheet Music
Collections (http://www.loc.gov).









The Good Old Songs

We Used to Sing--'61 to '65


PRICE, TEN CENTS


[Illustration: GENERAL ULYSSES S. GRANT

PHOTO FROM LIFE, 1864]

O.H. OLDROYD
Washington, D.C.
Nineteen Hundred and Two

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

The Good Old

SONGS

WE USED TO SING

'61 to '65.


DEDICATED TO THE VETERANS OF THE WAR OF THE REBELLION.

FIRST PUBLISHED IN 1882.


TEN CENTS.


SENT POSTPAID UPON RECEIPT OF PRICE.

[Illustration: THE UNION FOREVER]

COPYRIGHTED BY
O.H. OLDROYD, PUBLISHER
WASHINGTON, D.C.
1902.




SHERMAN'S MARCH TO THE SEA.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons, owners of the copyright.)


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN'L W.T. SHERMAN.]

Our camp fires shone bright on the mountain
  That frowned on the river below,
While we stood by our guns in the morning,
  And eagerly watched for the foe,
When a rider came out from the darkness
  That hung over mountains and tree,
And shouted, "Boys, up and be ready,
  For Sherman will march to the sea."

When cheer upon cheer for bold Sherman
  Went up from each valley and glen,
And the bugle re-echoed the music
  That came from the lips of the men,
For we knew that the stars on our banner
  More bright in their splendor would be,
And that blessings from Northland would greet us
  As Sherman marched down to the sea.

Then forward, boys, forward, to battle,
  We marched on our wearysome way,
And we strewed the wild hills of Resaca--
  God bless those who fell on that day.
Then Kennesaw, dark in its glory,
  Frowned down on the flag of the free;
But the East and the West bore our standard
  As Sherman marched down to the sea.

Still onward we pressed till our banner
  Swept out from Atlanta's grim walls,
And the blood of the patriot dampened
  The soil where traitor's flag falls.
But we paused not to weep for the fallen
  Who slept by each river and tree;
Yet we twined them wreaths of the laurel
  As Sherman marched down to the sea.

Proud, proud was our army that morning
  That stood by the cypress and pine
When Sherman said, "Boys, you are weary;
  This day fair Savannah is thine,"
Then sang we a song for our chieftain
  That echoed o'er river and lea,
And the stars on our banner shone brighter
  When Sherman marched on to the sea.




MARCHING THROUGH GEORGIA.

Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.


[Illustration: 2D CORPS.]

Bring the good old bugle, boys, we'll sing another song,
Sing it with the spirit that will start the world along,--
Sing it as we used to sing it, fifty thousand strong,
    While we were marching through Georgia.

CHORUS.

  "Hurrah! hurrah! we bring the Jubilee!
Hurrah! hurrah! the flag that makes you free!"
  So we sang the chorus from Atlanta to the sea
While we were marching through Georgia.

How the darkies shouted when they heard the joyful sound!
How the turkeys gobbled which our commissary found!
How the sweet potatoes even started from the ground,
    While we were marching through Georgia!--CHORUS.

Yes, and there were Union men who wept with joyful tears
When they saw the honored flag they had not seen for years;
Hardly could they be restrained from breaking forth in cheers
    While we were marching through Georgia.--CHORUS.

"Sherman's dashing Yankee boys will never reach the coast!"
So the saucy rebel said, and 'twas a handsome boast;
Had they not forgotten, alas! to reckon with the host,
    While we were marching through Georgia.--CHORUS.

So we made a thoroughfare for Freedom and her train,
Sixty miles in latitude,--three hundred to the main,
Treason fled before us, for resistance was in vain,
    While we were marching through Georgia.--CHORUS.

[Illustration]




A THOUSAND YEARS.

KEY OF C.


[Illustration: SOLID SHOT.]

Lift up your eyes, desponding freemen!
  Fling to the winds your needless fears!
He who unfurled your beauteous banner
  Says it shall wave a thousand years.

CHORUS.

"A thousand years!" my own Columbia!
  'Tis the glad day so long foretold!
'Tis the glad morn whose early twilight
  Washington saw in times of old.

What if the clouds one little moment
  Hid the blue sky where morn appears
When the bright sun that tints them crimson
  Rises to shine a thousand years!--CHORUS.

Tell the great world these blessed tidings!
  Yes, and be sure the bondman hears;
Tell the oppress'd of ev'ry nation
  Jubilee lasts a thousand years.--CHORUS.

Envious foes beyond the ocean!
  Little we heed your threat'ning sneers;
Little will they--our children's children
  When you are gone a thousand years.--CHORUS.

Rebels at home! go hide your faces--
  Weep for your crimes with bitter tears;
You could not bind the blessed daylight,
  Though you should strive a thousand years.--CHORUS.

Back to your dens, ye secret traitors!
  Down to your own degraded spheres!
Ere the first blaze of dazzling sunshine
  Shortens your lives a thousand years.--CHORUS.

Haste thee along, thou glorious noonday!
  Oh! for the eyes of ancient seers!
Oh! for the faith of Him who reckons
  Each of His days a thousand years.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: SHERIDAN'S CAVALRY CORPS.]




HAIL COLUMBIA.

Copyrighted.


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN'L JOHN A. M'CLERNAND.]

Hail Columbia! happy land!
Hail, ye heroes! heaven-born band!
  Who fought and bled in Freedom's cause,
  Who fought and bled in Freedom's cause,
And when the storm of war was gone
Enjoyed the peace your valor won.
Let Independence be our boast,
Ever mindful what it cost;
Ever grateful for the prize,
Let its altar reach the skies.
  Firm united let us be,
  Rallying round our liberty;
  As a band of brothers joined,
  Peace and safety we shall find.

Immortal patriots, rise once more,
Defend your rights, defend your shore,
  Let no rude foe, with impious hand,
  Let no rude foe, with impious hand,
Invade the shrine where sacred lies,
Of toil and blood the well-earned prize.
While offering peace sincere and just,
In heaven we place a manly trust,
That truth and justice will prevail,
And every scheme of bondage fail.
  Firm united let us be, etc.

Sound, sound the trump of fame!
Sound Washington's great name,
  Ring through the world with loud applause,
  Ring through the world with loud applause;
Let every clime to Freedom dear
Listen with a joyful ear;
With equal skill and godlike power,
He governed in the fearful hour
Of horrid war! or guides with ease
The happier times of honest peace,
  Firm united let us be, etc.

[Illustration: 19TH CORPS.]




JUST BEFORE THE BATTLE, MOTHER.

Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.

KEY OF B.


[Illustration: BRIG. GEN'L M.M. CROCKER.]

Just before the battle, mother,
  I am thinking most of you,
While upon the field we're watching,
  With the enemy in view.
Comrades brave are round me lying,
  Fill'd with tho'ts of home and God,
For well they know that on the morrow
  Some will sleep beneath the sod.

CHORUS.

Farewell, mother, you may never
  Press me to your heart again;
But oh, you'll not forget me, mother,
  If I'm numbered with the slain.

Oh, I long to see you, mother,
  And the loving ones at home;
But I'll never leave our banner
  Till in honor I can come.
Tell the traitors, all around you,
  That their cruel words we know
In every battle kill our soldiers
  By the help they give the foe.--CHORUS.

Hark! I hear the bugle sounding,
  'Tis the signal for the fight!
Now, may God protect me, mother,
  As He ever does the right.
Hear the "Battle Cry of Freedom,"
  How it swells upon the air!
Oh, yes, we'll rally round the standard,
  Or we'll perish nobly there.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: 6TH CORPS.]




WE'VE DRUNK FROM THE SAME CANTEEN.

By Maj. Charles G. Halpine (Private Miles O'Riley), 47th N.Y. Vol.
Inf.

KEY OF C.


[Illustration: ENGINEERS AND MECHANICS.]

There are bonds of all sorts in this world of ours,
Fetters of friendship and ties of flowers,
  And true lovers' knots, I ween.
The boys and the girls are bound by a kiss,
But there's never a bond, old friend, like this:
  We have drunk from the same canteen!

The same canteen, my soldier friend,
  The same canteen;
There's never a bond like this:
  We have drunk from the same canteen!

It was sometimes water and sometimes milk,
Sometimes apple-jack as fine as silk;
  But, whatever the tipple has been,
We shared it together in bane or in bliss,
And I warn you, friend, when I think of this:
  We have drunk from the same canteen.

We've shared our blankets and tents together,
And marched and fought in all kinds of weather,
  And hungry and full we've been;
Had days of battle and days of rest,
But this memory I cling to and love the best:
  We've drunk from the same canteen.

For when wounded I lay on the outer slope,
With my blood flowing fast and but little hope
  On which my faint spirit might lean,
Oh! then, I remember, you crawled to my side,
And bleeding so fast it seemed both must have died,
  We have drunk from the same canteen!




THE STAR SPANGLED BANNER.

KEY OF C.


[Illustration]

Oh! say, can you see by the dawn's early light
  What so proudly we hailed at the twilight's last gleaming--
Whose broad stripes and bright stars through the perilous flight,
  O'er the ramparts we watched, were so gallantly streaming!
And the rockets' red glare, the bombs bursting in air,
Gave proof through the night that our flag was still there;
Oh! say, does that Star Spangled Banner yet wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!

On that shore dimly seen through the mists of the deep,
  Where the foe's haughty host in dread silence reposes,
What is that which the breeze, o'er the towering steep,
  As it fitfully blows, now conceals, now discloses!
Now it catches the gleam of the morning's first beam,
In full glory reflected, now shines on the stream;
'Tis the Star Spangled Banner, oh! long may it wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!

And where is that band who so vauntingly swore
  That the havoc of war and the battle's confusion
A home and a country should leave us no more?
  Their blood has washed out their foul footsteps' pollution.
No refuge could save the hireling and slave
From the terror of flight or the gloom of the grave;
And the Star Spangled Banner in triumph doth wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave.

Oh! thus be it ever when freemen shall stand
  Between their loved homes and the war's desolation,
Blest with victory and peace, may the heaven-rescued land
  Praise the power that hath made and preserved us a nation.
Then conquer we must, when our cause it is just,
And this be our motto--"In God is our trust"--
And the Star Spangled Banner in triumph shall wave
O'er the land of the free and the home of the brave!

[Illustration: FOURTEENTH CORPS.]




OLD SHADY.

KEY OF B.


[Illustration: SHELTER TENT.]

Oh, yah! yah! darkies laugh wid me,
  For the white folks say Old Shady's free,
So don't you see that the Jubilee
  Is coming, coming, hail, mighty day!

CHORUS.

Den away, away, for I can't wait any longer!
Hooray! hooray! I'm going home.

Oh! massa got scared, and so did his lady,
  Dis chile breaks for Uncle Aby,
Open the gates, out here's Old Shady
  A coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.

Good-bye, Massa Jeff; good-bye, Miss'r Stephens,
  'Scuse dis nigger for takin' his leavens;
'Spect pretty soon you'll hear Uncle Abram's
  Coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.

Good-bye, hard work, wid neber any pay,
  I's gwine up North where de good folks say
Dat white wheat bread an' a dollar a day
  Are a coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.

Oh! I've got a wife, and I've got a baby,
  Living up yonder in upper Canaday;
Won't dey laugh when dey see Old Shady
  Coming, coming, hail, mighty day.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: SEVENTH CORPS.]




COLUMBIA, THE GEM OF THE OCEAN,

OR

RED, WHITE, AND BLUE.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)

KEY OF G.


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN'L JAMES B. M'PHERSON.]

[Illustration: SEVENTEENTH CORPS.]

Oh! Columbia, the gem of the ocean,
  The home of the brave and the free,
The shrine of each patriot's devotion,
  The world offers homage to thee.
Thy mandates make heroes assemble,
  When Liberty's form stands in view;
Thy banners make tyranny tremble
  When borne by the Red, White, and Blue.

CHORUS.

When borne by the Red, White, and Blue,
When borne by the Red, White, and Blue,
Thy banners make tyranny tremble,
When borne by the Red, White, and Blue.

When war waged its wide desolation,
  And threatened the land to deform,
The ark then of Freedom's foundation,
  Columbia, rode safe through the storm,
With her garlands of vict'ry around her,
  When so proudly she bore her brave crew,
With her flag proudly floating before her,
  The boast of the Red, White, and Blue.--CHORUS.

That banner, that banner bring hither,
  Tho' rebels and traitors look grim;
May the wreaths it has won never wither,
  Nor the stars of its glory grow dim!
May the service united ne'er sever,
  But they to their colors prove true!
The Army and Navy forever,
  Three cheers for the Red, White, and Blue.--CHORUS.




THE ARMY BEAN.

Air--"SWEET BYE AND BYE."


[Illustration: ELEVENTH CORPS.]

There's a spot that the soldiers all love,
  The mess-tent is the place that we mean,
And the dish that we like to see there
  Is the old-fashioned, white Army bean.

CHORUS.

'Tis the bean that we mean,
  And we'll eat as we ne'er ate before
The Army bean, nice and clean;
 We will stick to our beans evermore.

Now, the bean in its primitive state
  Is a plant we have all often met,
And, when cooked in the old army style,
  It has charms we can never forget.

[Illustration: FOURTH CORPS.]

CHORUS.

The German is fond of sauer kraut,
  The potato is loved by the Mick,
But the soldiers have long since found out
  That thro' life to our beans we should stick.--CHORUS.

REFRAIN.

Air--"TELL AUNT RHODA."

Beans for breakfast,
Beans for dinner,
Beans for supper,
Beans! Beans!! Beans!!!

[Illustration: 23D CORPS.]




BRAVE BOYS ARE THEY.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons, owners of the copyright.)

KEY OF A FLAT.


[Illustration: 18TH CORPS.]

Heavily falls the rain,
  Wild are the breezes tonight;
But 'neath the roof the hours as they fly
  Are happy, and calm, and bright.
Gathering round our firesides,
  Tho' it be summer time,
We sit and talk of brothers abroad,
  Forgetting the midnight chime.

CHORUS.

Brave boys are they!
  Gone at their country's call;
And yet, and yet we cannot forget
  That many brave boys must fall.

[Illustration: MINIE BALL.]

Under the homestead roof,
  Nestled so cozy and warm,
While soldiers sleep with little or naught
  To shelter them from the storm.
Resting on grassy couches,
  Pillow'd on hillocks damp,
Of martial fare how little we know
  Till brothers are in camp.--CHORUS.

Thinking no less of them,
  Loving our country the more,
We sent them forth to fight for the flag
  Their fathers before them bore.
Though the great teardrops started,
  This was our parting trust:
"God bless you, boys! we'll welcome you home
When rebels are in the dust."--CHO.

May the bright wings of love
  Guard them wherever they roam;
The time has come when brothers must fight
  And sisters must pray at home.
Oh! the dread field of battle!
  Soon to be strewn with graves!
If brothers fall, then bury them where
  Our banner in triumph waves.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: 22D CORPS.]




BATTLE HYMN OF THE REPUBLIC.

(By Mrs. Julia Ward Howe.)

Air--"JOHN BROWN."

     As sung by Chaplain C.C. McCabe while a prisoner in Libby,
     after hearing Old Ben (the colored paper-seller in Richmond)
     cry out, "_Great news by the telegraph! Great battles at
     Gettysburg! Union soldiers gain the day!_" Upon hearing such
     glorious news Chaplain McCabe sung this soul-stirring hymn,
     all the prisoners joining heartily in the chorus, making the
     old prison walls ring--"Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!"

[Illustration: SIXTEENTH CORPS.]

Mine eyes have seen the glory of the coming of the Lord;
He is tramping out the vintage where the grapes of wrath are stored;
He has loosed the fateful lightning of His terrible quick sword;
     His truth is marching on.

CHORUS.--Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!

I have seen Him in the watch-fires of a hundred circling camps;
They have builded Him an altar in the evening dews and damps;
I have read His righteous sentence by the dim and flaring lamps;
     His day is marching on.

CHORUS.--Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!

I have read a fiery gospel, writ in burnished rows of steel,
"As ye deal with my contemners, so with my grace shall deal;
Let the hero born of woman crush the serpent with his heel,
     Since God is marching on."

CHORUS.--Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!

He has sounded forth the trumpet that shall never call retreat;
He is sifting out the hearts of men before His judgment seat;
Oh! be swift, my soul, to answer Him! be jubilant, my feet;
     Our God is marching on.

CHORUS.--Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!

In the beauties of the lillies Christ was born across the sea
With a glory in His bosom that transfigures you and me;
As He died to make men holy, _let us die to make men free_,
     While God is marching on.

CHORUS.--Glory, Glory, Hallelujah!




HOME, SWEET HOME.

(By John Howard Payne.)

KEY OF E FLAT.


[Illustration]

'Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,
Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home;
A charm from the skies seems to hallow us there,
Which, seek thro' the world, is ne'er met with elsewhere.
    Home, home, sweet, sweet home; there's no place like home
    Oh, there's no place like home.

I gaze on the moon as I tread the drear wild,
And feel that my mother now thinks of her child
As she looks on that moon from our own cottage door
Thro' the woodbine whose fragrance shall cheer me no more.
    Home, home, sweet, sweet home, etc.

An exile from home, splendor dazzles in vain;
Oh, give me my lowly thatched cottage again;
The birds, singing gaily, that came at my call;
Give me them, and that peace of mind, dearer than all.
    Home, home, sweet, sweet home, etc.

[Illustration]




WHO WILL CARE FOR MOTHER NOW.

KEY OF B FLAT.


[Illustration: BRIG. GEN'L JOS. A. MOWER.]

Why am I so weak and weary?
  See how faint my heated breath;
All around to me seems darkness;
  Tell me, comrades, is this death?
Ah! how well I know your answer;
  To my fate I meekly bow,
If you'll only tell me truly
  Who will care for mother now?

CHORUS.

Soon with angels I'll be marching,
 With bright laurels on my brow;
I have for my country fallen;
 Who will care for mother now?

Who will comfort her in sorrow?
  Who will dry the falling tear,
Gently smooth her wrinkled forehead?
  Who will whisper words of cheer?
Even now I think I see her
  Kneeling, praying for me! how
Can I leave her in anguish?
  Who will care for mother now?--CHORUS.

Let this knapsack be my pillow,
  And my mantle be the sky;
Hasten, comrades, to the battle!
  I will like a soldier die.
Soon with angels I'll be marching,
  With bright laurels on my brow;
I have for my country fallen;
  Who will care for mother now?--CHORUS.

[Illustration: 25TH CORPS.]




WHEN THIS CRUEL WAR IS OVER.

(Used by permission.)

KEY OF C.


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN'L FRANK P. BLAIR.]

Dearest love, do you remember!
  When we last did meet,
How you told me that you loved me,
  Kneeling at my feet?
Oh! how proud you stood before me,
  In your suit of blue,
When you vowed to me and country
  Ever to be true.

CHORUS.

Weeping, sad and lonely,
  Hopes and fears how vain;
When this cruel war is over,
  Praying that we meet again.

When the summer breeze is sighing,
  Mournfully along!
Or when autumn leaves are falling,
  Sadly breathes the song.
Oft in dreams I see thee lying
  On the battle plain,
Lonely, wounded, even dying;
  Calling, but in vain.--CHORUS.

If amid the din of battle
  Nobly you should fall,
Far away from those who love you,
  None to hear you call,
Who would whisper words of comfort,
  Who would soothe your pain?
Ah! the many cruel fancies
  Ever in my brain.--CHORUS.

But our country called you, darling,
  Angels cheer your way,
While our nation's sons are fighting
  We can only pray.
Nobly strike for God and liberty,
  Let all nations see
How we love our starry banner,
  Emblem of the free.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: SIGNAL CORPS.]

[Illustration: CANISTER.]




WE ARE COMING, FATHER ABRAHAM.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons, owners of the copyright.)


[Illustration: LINCOLN.]

We are coming, Father Abraham--three hundred thousand more,
From Mississippi's winding stream and from New England's shore;
  We leave our plows and workshops, our wives and children dear,
  With hearts too full for utterance, with but a silent tear;
We dare not look behind us, but steadfastly before--
We are coming, Father Abraham--three hundred thousand more!

If you look across the hill-tops that meet the northern sky,
Long moving lines of rising dust your vision may descry;
  And now the wind, an instant, tears the cloud veil aside,
  And floats aloft our spangled flag in glory and in pride;
And bayonets in the sunlight gleam, and bands brave music pour--
We are coming, Father Abraham--three hundred thousand more!

If you look all up our valleys, where the growing harvests shine,
You may see our sturdy farmer-boys fast forming into line,
  And children from their mothers' knees are pulling at the weeds,
  And learning how to reap and sow, against their country's needs;
And a farewell group stands weeping at every cottage door--
We are coming, Father Abraham--three hundred thousand more!

You have called us, and we're coming, by Richmond's bloody tide,
To lay us down for freedom's sake, our brothers' bones beside.
  Or from foul treason's savage grasp to wrench the murderous blade,
  And in the face of foreign foes its fragments to parade.
Six hundred thousand loyal men and true have gone before--
We are coming, Father Abraham--three hundred thousand more!

[Illustration]




TENTING ON THE OLD CAMP GROUND.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons, owners of the copyright.)

KEY OF A.


[Illustration: 20TH CORPS.]

We're tenting tonight on the old camp ground;
    Give us a song to cheer
Our weary hearts; a song of home
    And friends we love so dear.

CHORUS.

Many are the hearts that are weary tonight,
    Wishing for the war to cease;
Many are the hearts looking for the right,
    To see the dawn of peace;
Tenting tonight, tenting tonight,
Tenting on the old camp ground.

We've been tenting tonight on the old camp ground,
    Thinking of days gone by,
Of loved ones at home who gave us the hand
    And the tear that said good-bye.--CHORUS.

We're tired of the war on the old camp ground;
    Many are dead and gone
Of the brave and true who have left their homes;
    Others been wounded long.--CHORUS.

We've been fighting today on the old camp ground;
    Many are lying near;
Some are dead and some are dying,
    Many are in tears.

CHORUS.

Many are the hearts that are weary tonight,
    Wishing for the war to cease;
Many are the hearts looking for the right,
    To see the dawn of peace;
Dying tonight, dying tonight,
Dying on the old camp ground.

[Illustration: SIBLEY TENT.]




JOHN BROWN'S SONG.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)


[Illustration: TENTH CORPS.]

John Brown's body lies a mouldering in the grave,
John Brown's body lies a mouldering in the grave,
John Brown's body lies a mouldering in the grave,
    His soul's marching on!

CHORUS.

Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
    His soul's marching on!

He's gone to be a soldier in the army of our Lord,
He's gone to be a soldier in the army of our Lord,
He's gone to be a soldier in the army of our Lord,
    His soul's marching on!

CHORUS.

Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
    His soul's marching on!

John Brown's knapsack is strapped upon his back,
John Brown's knapsack is strapped upon his back,
John Brown's knapsack is strapped upon his back,
    His soul's marching on!

CHORUS.

Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
    His soul's marching on!

His pet lamps will meet him on the way,
His pet lamps will meet him on the way,
His pet lamps will meet him on the way,
    They go marching on!

CHORUS.

Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
    They go marching on!

They will hang Jeff Davis to a sour apple tree!
They will hang Jeff Davis to a sour apple tree!
They will hang Jeff Davis to a sour apple tree!
    As they march along!

CHORUS.

Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
    As they march along!

Now, three rousing cheers for the Union!
Now, three rousing cheers for the Union!
Now, three rousing cheers for the Union!
    As we are marching on!

CHORUS.

Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
Glory Hally, Hallelujah!
    Hip, hip, hip, hip, Hurrah!

[Illustration: GRAPE.]




BATTLE CRY OF FREEDOM.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)

KEY OF G FLAT.


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN. JOHN A. LOGAN.]

Yes, we'll rally round the flag, boys, we'll rally once again,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom;
We'll rally from the hillside, we'll gather from the plain,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom.

CHORUS.

The Union forever, hurrah! boys, hurrah!
Down with the traitor, up with the star,
While we rally round the flag, boys, rally once again,
Shouting the battle cry of freedom.

We are springing to the call of our brothers gone before,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom;
And we'll fill the vacant ranks with a million freemen more,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom.--CHORUS.

We will welcome to our ranks the loyal, true, and brave,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom;
And altho' they may be poor, not a man shall be a slave,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom.--CHORUS.

So we're springing to the call from the East and from the West,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom,
And we'll hurl the rebel crew from the land we love the best,
  Shouting the battle cry of freedom.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: FIFTEENTH CORPS.]




BONNIE BLUE FLAG.


[Illustration: NINTH CORPS.]

We are a band of patriots,
  Who each leave home and friend
Our noble Constitution
  And banner to defend;
Our Capitol was threatened,
  And the cry rose near and far
To protect our country's glorious flag
  That glitters with many a star.

CHORUS.

Hurrah, hurrah, for the Union, boys, hurrah!
Hurrah for our forefathers' good old flag
That glitters with many a star.

Much patience and forbearance
  The North has always shown
Toward her Southern brethren,
  Who had each way their own;
But when we made our President
  A man whom we desired
Their wrath was roused, they mounted guns,
  And on Fort Sumter fired.--CHORUS.

They forced the war upon us,
  For peaceful men are we;
They steal our money, seize our forts,
  And then as cowards flee;
False to their vows and to the flag
  That once protected them,
They sought the Union to dissolve,
  Earth's noblest, brightest gem.--CHORUS.

We're in the right and will prevail,
  The Stars and Stripes must fly,
The "bonnie blue flag" be hauled down,
  And every traitor die;
Freedom and peace enjoyed by all
  As ne'er was known before,
Our Spangled Banner wave on high,
  With stars just thirty-four.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: BRIG. GEN. ISAAC F. QUINBY.]




AMERICA.

KEY OF F.


[Illustration: FIFTH CORPS.]

My country, 'tis of thee,
Sweet land of liberty,
  Of thee I sing;
Land where my fathers died,
Land of the pilgrim's pride,
From every mountain side
  Let freedom ring.

My native country, thee,
Land of the noble, free,
  Thy name I love;
I love thy rocks and rills,
Thy woods and templed hills;
My heart with rapture thrills
  Like that above.

Let music swell the breeze,
And ring from all the trees,
  Sweet freedom's song;
Let mortal tongues awake,
Let all that breathe partake,
Let rocks their silence break,
  The sound prolong.

Our father's God, to thee,
Author of liberty,
  To thee I sing;
Long may our land be bright
With freedom's holy light;
Protect us by thy might,
  Great God our King.

[Illustration: GEN. PETER J. OSTERHAUS.]

[Illustration: COMBINATION KNIFE, FORK, AND SPOON.]




KINGDOM COMING.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons, owners of the copyright.)

KEY OF C.


[Illustration: BRIG. GEN. ALBERT L. LEE.]

Say, darkies, hab you seen old massa,
  Wid de muffstash on his face,
Go long de road some time dis mornin',
  Like he gwine to leave de place?
He seen a smoke way up de ribber
  Whar de Linkum gunboats lay;
He took his hat an' left berry sudden,
  An' I 'spect he's run'd away!

CHORUS.

De massa run, ha, ha!
  De darky stay! ho, ho!
It mus' be now de kingdom comin'
  An' de year of Jubilo!

He is six foot one way, four foot tudder,
  An' he weigh tree hundred pounds;
His coat so big he couldn't pay de tailor,
  An' it wouldn't go half way round;
He drill so much dey call him Cap'n,
  An' he get so drefful tanned,
I 'spects he'll try an' fool dem Yankees
  For to tink he's contraband.--CHORUS.

De darkies feel so lonesome libbing
  In de log house on de lawn
Dey move dar tings to massa's parlor
  For to keep it while he's gone.
Dar's wine an' cider in de kitchen,
  An' de darkies dey'll hab some;
I s'pose dey'll all be confiscated
  When de Linkum soldiers come.--CHO.

De oberseer he make us trubble,
  An' he dribe us round a spell;
We lock him up in de smoke-house cellar,
  Wid de key trown in de well;
De whip is lost, de han'cuff broken;
  But de massa'll habe his pay;
He's ole enough, big enough, ought to know better
  Dan to went and run away.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: BRIG. GEN. JOHN M'ARTHUR.]




THE VACANT CHAIR.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)

KEY OF A FLAT.


[Illustration: GEN. ALVIN P. HOVEY.]

We shall meet, but we shall miss him;
  There will be one vacant chair;
We shall linger to caress him
  While we breathe our evening prayer.
When, a year ago, we gathered
  Joy was in his mild blue eye;
But a golden cord is severed,
  And our hopes in ruin lie.

CHORUS.

We shall meet, but we shall miss him;
  There will be one vacant chair;
We shall linger to caress him
  When we breathe our evening prayer.

At our fireside, sad and lonely,
  Often will the bosom swell
At remembrance of the story
  How our noble Willie fell;
How he strove to bear our banner
  Through the thickest of the fight,
And upheld our country's honor
  In the strength of manhood's might.--CHORUS.

True, they tell us wreaths of glory
  Evermore will deck his brow;
But this soothes the anguish only
  Sweeping o'er our heart strings now.
Sleep, today, O early fallen!
  In thy green and narrow bed;
Dirges from the pine and cypress
  Mingle with the tears we shed.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: GEN. NATHAN KIMBALL.]




NEARER, MY GOD, TO THEE.

KEY OF G.


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN. E.O.C. ORD.]

Nearer, my God, to Thee,
  Nearer to Thee!
E'en though it be a cross
  That raiseth me!
Still all my song shall be,
Nearer my God, to Thee,
  Nearer to Thee!

Though, like a wanderer,
  The sun gone down,
Darkness be over me,
  My rest a stone,
Yet in my dreams I'd be
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
  Nearer to Thee!

There let the way appear
  Steps unto heaven;
All that Thou sendest me
  In mercy given;
Angels to beckon me
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
  Nearer to Thee!

Then, with my waking thoughts
  Bright with Thy praise,
Out of my stony griefs
  Bethel I'll raise;
So by my woes to be
Nearer, my God, to Thee,
  Nearer to Thee!

[Illustration: ADMIRAL DAVID D. PORTER.]

[Illustration: SHRAPNEL CONTAINING 80 MUSKET BALLS.]




TRAMP, TRAMP, TRAMP.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)

KEY OF B FLAT.


[Illustration: BRIG. GEN. EUGENE A. CARR.]

In the prison cell I sit, thinking, mother, dear, of you,
  And our bright and happy home so far away,
And the tears they fill my eyes, spite of all that I can do,
  Tho' I try to cheer my comrades and be gay.

CHORUS.

Tramp, tramp, tramp, the boys are marching;
  Cheer up, comrades, they will come,
And beneath the starry flag
  We shall breathe the air again
Of the Free-land in our own beloved home.

[Illustration: FIRST CORPS.]

In the battle front we stood when the fiercest charge was made,
  And they swept us off a hundred men or more;
But before we reached their lines they were beaten back dismayed,
  And we hear the cry of victory o'er and o'er.--CHORUS.

So within the prison cell we are waiting for the day
  That shall come to open wide the iron door,
And the hollow eye grows bright and the poor heart almost gay
  As we think of seeing friends and home once more.--CHORUS.

[Illustration: MAJ. GEN. FRED'K STEELE.]




WHEN JOHNNY COMES MARCHING HOME.

(Used by permission of S. Brainard's Sons.)

KEY OF B FLAT.


[Illustration: WILSON'S CAVALRY CORPS.]

When Johnny comes marching home again,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
We'll give him a hearty welcome then,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
The men will cheer, the boys will shout,
The ladies they will all turn out,
And we'll all feel gay
  When Johnny comes marching home.

The old church bell will peal with joy,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
To welcome our darling boy,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
The village lads and lassies say
With roses they will strew the way,
And we'll all feel gay
  When Johnny comes marching home.

Get ready for the Jubilee,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
We'll give the hero three times three,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
The laurel wreath is ready now
To place upon his loyal brow,
And we'll all feel gay
  When Johnny comes marching home.

Let love and friendship on that day,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
Their choicest treasures then display,
  Hurrah, hurrah!
And let each one perform some part
To fill with joy the warrior's heart,
And we'll all feel gay
  When Johnny comes marching home.

[Illustration]

[Illustration: THIRD CORPS.]




I'SE GWINE BACK TO DIXIE.


[Illustration: 11TH AND 12TH CORPS.]

I'se gwine back to Dixie,
  I'se gwine no more to wander,
My heart's turned back to Dixie,
  I can't stay here no longer;
I've left the old plantation,
  My home and my relation,
My heart's turned back to Dixie
  And I must go.

CHORUS.

I'se gwine back to Dixie,
I'se gwine back to Dixie,
  I'se gwine where the orange blossoms grow,
For I hear the children calling,
I see their sad tears falling,
Me heart's turned back to Dixie,
  And I must go.

I've hoed in fields of cotton,
  I've worked upon the river,
I used to say if I got off
  I'd go back there, no never;
But time has changed the old man,
  His head is bending low,
His heart's turned back to Dixie,
  And he must go.--CHORUS.

I'se traveling back to Dixie,
  My step is slow and feeble,
I pray the Lord to help me,
  And keep me from all evil;
And should my strength forsake me,
  Then kind friends come and take me;
My heart's turned back to Dixie,
  And I must go.--CHORUS.

[Illustration]




FRATERNITY.

In mustering a recruit, sing after--"They have been so examined and
found worthy."

Air--"AULD LANG SYNE."


[Illustration: MAJ. GEN. MANNING F. FORCE.]

Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
  And never brought to mind;
Should auld acquaintance be forgot,
  And days of auld lang syne?

CHORUS.

For auld land syne, my boys,
For auld land syne,
We'll ne'er forget when first we met,
In days of auld lang syne.




CHARITY.

Sing after the words--"But the greatest of these is Charity."


Meek and lowly, pure and holy,
  Chief among the blessed three;
Turning sadness into gladness,
  Heaven-born art thou Charity.
Pity dwelleth in thy bosom,
  Kindness reigneth o'er thy heart;
Gentle thoughts alone can sway thee,
  Judgment with thee hath no part.

CHORUS.

Meek and lowly, pure and holy,
  Chief among the blessed three;
Turning sadness into gladness,
  Heaven-born art thou, Charity.

[Illustration: CAVALRY CORPS, ARMY OF THE POTOMAC.]




LOYALTY.

Sing after the words--"The crowning principle of loyalty."

Air--"AMERICA."

KEY OF F.


[Illustration]

My country, 'tis of thee,
Sweet land of liberty,
  Of thee I sing;
Land where our comrades died,
Land of the pilgrims' pride,
From every mountain side
  Let freedom ring.

Our fathers' God to thee,
Author of liberty,
  To thee we sing;
Long may our land be bright
With freedom's holy light;
Protect us with thy might,
  Great God, our King.




ODE ON PRESENTATION OF BADGE.

Air--"HOLD THE FORT."

Sing while the badge is being pinned on.


Comrades, take this badge of freedom
  Our Grand Army gives;
Let it be the sign of honor
  Every loyal lives.

CHORUS.

Wear the badge and keep it shining
  All life's journey through,
Ever as the glorious emblem
  Of the work we do.

Then, proud eagle, still soar sunward;
  Flag, your folds swing loose;
Love shall shield the helpless orphan,
  Fill the widow's cruse.--CHORUS.




GREETING ODE.

Sing while the recruit is signing the roll.

Air--"GLORY HALLELUJAH."


[Illustration]

Warm be the welcome and glad be the cheer
Greeting our comrades who join with us here--
Warm as in days when with never a fear
  We all went marching on.

CHORUS.

Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah!
Glory, glory, hallelujah!
  We all go marching on.

Held by fraternity in bonds that are sure,
Drawn close in charity by ties that are pure,
Filled with a loyalty that ever shall endure,
  We still go marching on.

CHORUS.--Glory, glory, hallelujah, etc.

Elbow to elbow we stood through the fight,
Elbow to elbow we stand here tonight,
Elbow to elbow till heaven is in sight,
  We all go marching on.

CHORUS.--Glory, glory, hallelujah, etc.

[Illustration: EIGHTH CORPS.]




CLOSING ODE.

Air--"AULD LANG SYNE."


Shall we forget those far-off days
  Which made us comrades all?
Shall we forget how swift the feet
  That ran at duty's call?
Shall we forget the honored dead
  That sleep beneath the sod,
Who gave their lives for liberty,
  Our country, and our God?

[Illustration: 24TH CORPS.]




BOOKS PUBLISHED BY O.H. OLDROYD

516 TENTH ST. N.W., WASHINGTON, D.C.

[The house in which Lincoln died]


The Good Old Songs We Used to Sing

These song books will be sent on receipt of _Ten Cents_, in coin or
stamps. _75c per doz._ or _$5.00 per 100_. Just the book for Camp Fires,
Reunions, or Post Rooms.

The Assassination of Abraham Lincoln, the Flight,
Pursuit, Capture, and Punishment
of the Conspirators

_With Eighty-two Halftone Illustrations, half of them never before
published_

By OSBORN H. OLDROYD

Editor and compiler "Words of Lincoln"

With an introduction by Bvt. Maj. Gen. T.M. HARRIS

Member of the Commission that Tried the Conspirators

_12mo, cloth, 323 pages, with portrait of Lincoln never before
published_, _$1.00_

A straightforward account of this dreadful tragedy which still stands
out in the annals of assassination. It contains much valuable
information.--_Louisville (Ky.) Courier Journal._

LINCOLN'S MURDERERS.--This is a patiently wrought out narrative of the
most tragic event in American history. One merit of the book is its
many illustrations, taken from original photographs and
drawings.--_Boston Journal._

STORY OF LINCOLN'S DEATH.--"The Assassination of Abraham Lincoln," by
O.H. Oldroyd, is a book that will be found to possess a distinct value
of its own. The qualifications of the author for a work of this kind
are shown to be exceptional.--_Chicago (Ill.) Post._

The historical importance of this volume it would be difficult to
estimate. As absorbing as a novel and as accurate as the report of a
statistician, it will attract the attention of every class of readers
and remain a source of reference to old and young.--_Public Ledger,
Phila., Pa._


Words of Lincoln

Consisting of beautiful extracts from over two hundred different
orations, speeches, debates, letters, etc., chronologically arranged,
dating from 1832 to 1865, making practically a life of Lincoln in his
own words, together with 230 beautiful tributes by eminent men, giving
their opinion of his life and character. An admirable book for school
work, giving the scholar an insight to his wise and inspiring sayings,
and familiarizing them with the prominent men of our country.
Handsomely illustrated, bound in best silk cloth, heavy paper, gold
stamping, _price $1.00._

Sent upon receipt of price. Address

O.H. OLDROYD, Publisher
516 TENTH STREET N.W., WASHINGTON, D.C.

Agents wanted for sale of above books.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]

PRESS OF JUDD & DETWEILER, WASHINGTON, D.C.








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Good Old Songs We Used to Sing,
'61 to '65, by Osbourne H. Oldroyd

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE GOOD OLD SONGS ***

***** This file should be named 21566.txt or 21566.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/1/5/6/21566/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Linda Cantoni, and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
book was produced from scanned images of public domain
material from the Google Print project.) Music transcribed
by Linda Cantoni, from The Civil War Songbook (Dover
Publications, 1977), and from 19th-Century sheet music in
the Library of Congress Civil War and Historic Sheet Music
Collections (http://www.loc.gov).


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
