The Project Gutenberg EBook of Explanation of Terms Used in Entomology, by 
John. B. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Explanation of Terms Used in Entomology

Author: John. B. Smith

Release Date: September 23, 2007 [EBook #22748]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TERMS USED IN ENTOMOLOGY ***




Produced by Jon Richfield






EXPLANATION OF TERMS USED IN ENTOMOLOGY

PREPARED BY JOHN B. SMITH, Sc.D.
Professor of Entomology in Rutgers College, &c.

PUBLISHED BY THE BROOKLYN ENTOMOLOGICAL SOCIETY
BROOKLYN, N. Y.
1906

PRESS OF THE NEW ERA PRINTING COMPANY
LANCASTER, PA.

{Scanner's note: This book is about a century old at the time of
scanning.  I found it in the discard pile of a local university library.  I
find the book to be of exceptional historical interest in the insights it
gives into the development of early modern entomological science.  It
also is of practical value as a source for terms that are obscure to
modern users because they are no longer current.

I have edited the text as well as I could and I think it is by now very
usable, but do treat any really suspicious looking passages with
reserve.  I have avoided the use of non-alphabetic symbols as far as I
could, for example Greek letters and male, female and hermaphroditic
symbols, but if you encounter difficulties you might find the
problem there.  Also, the colour table at the end is not really much
good for anything beyond general impressions; not only are the paper
and ink old, but between my scanner and your screen or printer, there
is room for too much misinterpretation of precise colour, for anyone to
take it seriously.

In any case, enjoy.  The book is a valuable product of serious workers
in an age of exploration.}



FOREWORD.

When, some time since, in consequence of continuing demands, the
Brooklyn Entomological Society resolved to publish a new edition of
its Explanation of Terms used in Entomology, and entrusted the
writer and two associates with the task of preparing the same, it was
believed that a little revision of definitions, the dropping of a few
obsolete terms and the addition of a few lately proposed, would be all
that was necessary. It was to be a light task to fill idle time in
summer, report to be made in fall. Two years have passed since that
time; the associates have dropped by the way; the manuscript
contains five times the number of terms in the original "Explanation."
and if it is published now, it is not because I believe it to be complete;
but because I do not believe it can be made complete except as the
result of criticism and voluntary addition by specialists throughout
the country.

It is twenty-six years since the original list was published and nothing
can better illustrate the advances made than a comparison between
the old and the new Glossary. No one realizes better than I the fact
that as students have increased in each order, each has followed an
independent line of research, absolutely without regard to the work
done elsewhere. In consequence, we have several terms for the same
thing in many cases and, in an equal number, several meanings to the
same term. As no one man can now-a-days cover the entire field of
Entomology, it goes without saying that I was compelled to rely partly
upon books and partly upon the good nature of correspondents to
make the work even approximately complete.

The first notable contribution came from Professor Justus W. Folsom,
of Urbana, Illinois, who sent me over 2000 cards of terms collected by
himself and his assistants, and these added materially at the
beginning of the work.  A number of correspondents were good enough
to send in lists of terms in Coleoptera, Lepidoptera, Orthoptera,
Hemiptera and Neuroptera, and to refer me to literature where
explanations of other special terms could be found.

After the cards were so far advanced as to warrant a preliminary
manuscript, Dr. Philip P. Calvert of the University of Pennsylvania.
Mr. Nathan Banks of Washington, D.C., and Mr. C. W. Johnson of
the Boston Society of Natural History went carefully over the entire
work and by their criticisms and additions contributed materially to
such merit as it possesses. To these gentlemen and to the many
others not specifically mentioned I give thanks for their assistance,
and if there have not been more co-workers it has been only because
of the time element that seems to demand the best that is ready,
rather than a delay to secure perfection.

It would be interesting to go at length into the history of the
correspondence to determine what sort of terms should or should not
be included and to bring out the hopeless divergencies existing; but
all that is important here is to state briefly what has been included
and what omitted.

Common English terms even if descriptive, when used in their
ordinary dictionary sense, have not been included as a rule; but this
is subject to many exceptions. Latin terms and derivatives, even if
used in their usual sense have been generally included; but
compounds made up of adequately defined descriptive terms are
generally omitted. Adverbial or adjective forms have been omitted
whenever it has been considered safe, and so have terms prefixed by
sub-, supra- and the like, indicating degree or position. In doubtful
cases the terms have been included and defined. All terms of venation
are, so far as possible, reduced to the Comstock system which is the
only one that has been satisfactorily worked out for all orders, and a
series of figures is added to explain this system so far as seems
necessary. It has not been considered feasible to determine the proper
use of terms applied differently in different orders or families; that is
scarcely within the scope of a work of this kind.

Terms used in embryological and histological study have been
included only so far as seemed necessary to an understanding of the
general works, and no attempt has been made to cover the terms
applied to musculature and other details of microscopic structure:
this has seemed rather to be outside of the scope of the present essay.

All color terms are reduced so far as possible to terms of the
Windsor and Newton system of water colors which are standard in the
English-speaking world, and the color plate shows solid blocks of
those colors that seem necessary to explain all modifications except
metallics, blacks and whites. {Scanner's note: color plate may be
excluded, partly because it is in poor condition.}

The figures illustrating body structures and other details have been
drawn under my supervision by Mr. John A. Grossbeck, and are
meant to be guides merely - else the glossary would exceed its scope.

In the admission that the work is incomplete, no apology is intended
for its publication; it is merely a statement of fact to encourage
constructive rather than destructive criticism. It is hoped that those
who note errors or omissions will communicate them to the writer so
that when another edition is needed, as it will be before many years
are past, a standard work may be possible.



JOHN B. SMITH, Sc.D.

New Brunswick,  N.J.  April 1906




EXPLANATORY.

Definitions of general application are as a rule given first, where
more than one is necessary; next those of limited use, and finally
the specific meaning in each order in which there is any notable
difference.

Where a word has more than one ending, the difference is given after a
hyphen which represents the stem word: e.g. ametabola -ous; the
latter in place of ametabolous, which indicates the possession of the
characters peculiar to the ametabola. Where there is an English and a
Latin ending, the former is usually given with the word and the other
is added: e.g. aequilate -us, instead of aequilatus, there being no
difference in the application. Usually the singular form of the word
is first given, and the plural ending is added; e.g.

     antenna -ae,

     cenchrus -ri,

     desideratum -ata;

but occasionally, when the plural is more commonly used, e.g.
epimera -eron, this is reversed and the singular ending is added: when
the two are different in form, e.g. foot and feet, the words are given
separately, and so when there is a difference in the application, as in

     uncus and unci.

In the definition of color terms the words in brackets [ ] refer to the
equivalent color as named on the plate, or the combination needed to
produce it.

The names in parentheses ( ) are those of the writers whose definitions
are used, or who have used the term in the sense defined. In the
terms of venation, these parentheses occur most frequently.

Most of the signs and abbreviations are those in common use

     :=     equal to, or the same as;

     q.v.   which see;

     pl.    plural;

     abb.   abbreviated.

The abbreviated names are: Comst. for Comstock; Coq. for
Coquillett; Meig. for Meigen; Nort. for Norton: O. S. for
Osten-Sacken: and Will. for Williston.


A

A: prefix, is privative; wanting or without.

Ab: off; away from.

Abbreviated: cut short; not of usual length.

Abdomen: the third or posterior division of the insect body: consists
normally of nine or ten apparent segments, but actual number is a
mooted question: bears no functional legs in the adult stage.

Abdominal: belonging or pertaining to the abdomen.

Abdominal feet: see pro-legs.

Abdominal groove: the concave lobe of the inner margin of secondaries
enveloping the abdomen beneath, in some butterflies.

Abdominal pouch: in female Parnassiids, a sac-like ventral cavity,
formed by material secreted during copulation.

Abductor: applied to muscles that open out or extend an appendage or
draw it away from the body: see adductor.

Abductor mandibulae: the muscle that opens the mandibles.

Aberrant: unusual; out of the ordinary course.

Aberration: a form that departs in some striking way from the normal
type; either single or occurring rarely, at irregular intervals.

Abiogenesis: spontaneous generation.

Abnormal: outside the usual range or course; not normal.

Aborted: a structure developed so as to be unfit for its normal function
obsolete or atrophied.

Abraded: scraped or rubbed.

Abrupt: suddenly or without gradation.

Abscissus: cut off squarely, with a straight margin.

Absconditus: hidden, concealed; retracted into another.

Acalyptrata: those muscid flies in which alulae are absent or
rudimentary.

Acanthus: a spine, spur or prickle.

Acaudal -ate: without a tail.

Accessory: added, or in addition to.

Accessory carinae: in Orthoptera the lateral carinae of the face.

Accessory cell: a cell not commonly present in the group; in some
orders of definite location as, e.g. in Lepidoptera, usually a small cell
at the end of the subcosta, giving rise directly or indirectly to veins 7
to 10:= 1st radius 2 (Comst.); = areole.

Accessory glands: any glands opening into the ducts of the
reproductive system.

Accessory sac: a glandular structure of the female reproductive
system containing a sticky secretion.

Accessory subcostal vein: the vein given off from the subcosta and
branching toward the apex of the wing in Perlidae.

Aceous or aceus: suffix; similar to, or of the nature of.

Acephalous: without a head.

Acerata: arthropods without true antennae Arachnids and Limulus

Acetabular caps: Hemiptera; the coxal cavity.

Acetabuliform: like a shallow saucer with more or less incurved sides.

Acetabulum: the cavity into which an appendage is articulated;
specifically the coxal cavity, - q.v.; also applied to a
cup-like cavity in the sucking mouth of maggots.

Achreioptera: ordinal term proposed for the coleopterous family
Platypsyllidae.

Achromatic: free from color; tissue that does not stain readily.

Acicular: needle-shaped; with a long, slender point.

Aciculate: a surface that appears as if scratched with a needle.

Acidotheca: the pupal sheath of the ovipositor.

Acini: granulations, like those on a blackberry: the terminal secreting
tubes of glands.

Acinose -ous: a surface set with acini.

Acone: applied to compound eyes in which the individual ocelli  have
no crystalline cone or lens; see eucone. {Scanner's note: this is no
longer a valid usage for the word "ocelli".  Currently the term is.  See
"ocellus" and "ommatidium".}

Acoustic nerve: connects the auditory pits or other organs of hearing
with special ganglia.

Acridophagus: preying and feeding on grasshoppers.

Acrostichal bristles: Diptera; two rows of bristles on the middle of the
dorsum; specifically, minute peculiar bristles on the dorso-central
region of Dolichopodidae.

Aculeata: Hymenoptera; the stingers, including bees and wasps.

Aculeate: prickly; armed with short, sharp spines; specifically, in
Hymenoptera furnished with a sting which is a modified ovipositor
and connected with a poison sac.

Aculeus -ei: a prickle; a small sharp point; specifically, an ovipositor,
especially when sting-like, as in Hymenoptera; in male Tipulidae a
slender, horny, often curved and pointed piece, projected when the
forceps is open.

Acuminate: tapering to a long point.

Acupunctate: a surface with fine punctures as if made with a needle.

Acutangulate: forming, or meeting in an acute angle.

Acute: pointed: terminating in or forming less than a right angle.

Acutilingual: with a sharp pointed tongue or mouth structure, as in
some bees.

Acutilingues: bees with a short pointed tongue: see obtusilingues.

Addorsal: close to but not quite on the middle of the dorsum.

Addorsal line: in caterpillars, is longitudinal, a little to one
side of the dorsal and between it and the subdorsal line.

Adductor: applied to muscles that draw an appendage to the body
or bring parts into apposition: see abductor.

Adductor mandibulae: the muscle that draws in or closes
the mandible.

Adeloceratous: with concealed antennae: see cryptocerata.

Adephagous: belonging to the Adephaga: pentamerous, predatory,
terrestrial beetles with filiform antennae and predatory habits: see
hydradephagous.

Adherent: attached or clinging to.

Adipose: fat or fatty: see fat-body.

Adiscota: insects that develop into adults without forming imaginal
discs; see discota.

Adminicula: supports or props: the spinous processes on the
abdomen of boring and burrowing pupae.

Adnate: adjoining; adhering or growing together: closely connected.

Adpressed: laid or pressed to; contiguous.

Adsperse -us: with markings of closely crowded small spots.

Adsternal: situated next or close to the sternum.

Adult: the stage when an insect is sexually mature and ready to
reproduce normally.

Aduncate -cus, -catus: a part gradually bent through its whole extent.

Adventitious: occurring accidentally, out of the ordinary course,
without apparent reason.

Adventral line: in caterpillars, extends along the under side between
the middle and the base of legs.

Adventral tubercle: on the abdominal segments of caterpillars on the
inner base of the leg, and correspondingly on the apodal segments;
constant: is number VIII of the abdominal series (Dyar).

Aeneous -eus: shining bronze or brassy.

Aenescent: becoming or appearing bronzed or brassy.

Aequale: equal.

Aequilate-us: of equal breadth throughout.

Aerial: living in the air; applied to flying insects.

Aeriductus: a spiracle: the tracheal, gill-like structures of aquatic
larvae: more specifically the tail-like extensions of rat-tailed maggots
and some aquatic Hemiptera.

Aeroscepsin: an indefinite sense of perception supposed to be located
in the antenna.

Aeroscepsy: The faculty of observing atmospheric changes: supposed
to be located in the antenna.

Aerostats: a pair of large air sacs at base of abdomen in Diptera.

Aeruginose -us: the color of verdigris [blue green].

Aestival: occurring in summer.

Aestivation: applied to summer dormancy.

Afferent: carrying inwardly or toward the centre.

Affinis: related to: similar in structure or development.

Afternose: a triangular piece below antennae and above clypeus: see
postclypeus.

Agamic -ous: reproducing without union with a male.

Agamogenesis: reproduction without fertilization by a male: see
parthenogenesis; gamogenesis.

Agglomerate: heaped or massed together.

Agglutinate: stuck or glued together; welded into one mass.

Aggregated: crowded together as closely as possible.

Agnathous: without jaws; specifically applied to those Neuropteroid
series in which the mouth structures are obsolescent.

Aileron: the scale covering the base of primaries in some insects; see
tegulae in Diptera = alula and squama, q.v.

Air-sacs or vesicles: pouch-like expansions of tracheal tubes in heavy
insects, capable of inflation and supposed to lessen specific gravity.

Air-tube: a respiratory siphon.

Ala -ae: a wing or wings.

Alar appendage: see alulet.

Alar frenum: a small ligament crossing the supra-alar groove toward
the root of the wing: Hymenoptera.

Alary: relating to the wings: applied also to the wing muscles of heart.

Alate -us: winged; with lobes similar to wings in appearance though
not necessarily in function.

Albi, albus: white.

Albicans: formed or made of white.

Albidus: white with dusky tinge.

Albinic: of the character of an albino.

Albinism: that condition in which there is an absence of color or a
whitening in a form usually colored.

Albino: a colorless individual of a species that is normally colored.

Albumen: the white of egg or the substances in the tissues which have
the same characteristics.

Albumin: the characteristic substance forming the white of egg.

Albuminoid: like or of the character of albumen.

Alimentary canal: the digestive tract as a whole; begins at the mouth
and extends through the body to the anus.

Alitrunk: that part of the thorax to which the wings are attached: in
many Hymenoptera, includes the 1st abdominal segment.

Alizarine: a transparent, orange red [alizar crimson].

Alleghanian faunal area: is that part of the transition zone comprising
the greater part of New England, s. e. Ontario, New York,
Pennsylvania, Michigan, Wisconsin, Minnesota, eastern N. Dakota, n.
e. S. Dakota, and the Alleghanies from Pennsylvania to Georgia.

Alligate -us: fastened or suspended by a thread;
like the chrysalis of Papilio, etc.

Alliogenesis: when the development includes an alternation of
generations (q.v.), as in Cynipids.

Alluring glands: glandular structures diffusing an odor supposed to be
attractive to the opposite sex.

Allux: next to the last joint of tarsus; in Rhynchophora.

Alpine zone: = arctic zone, q.v.

Alternation of generations: where a species that occurs in both sexes
periodically produces only parthenogenetic females; the latter, in
turn, producing the sexed form; occurs in Cynipidae and some
Homoptera: see heterogeny.

Altus: above: applied to a part raised above the usual level.

Alulae: Diptera; a pair of membranous scales above the halteres,
behind the root of the wing, one above or before the other; the
anterior attached to the wing and moving with it, the posterior
fastened to the thorax and stationary; see calyptra; squama;
squamula; lobulus; axillary lobe; aileron; scale; tegulae: Coleoptera;
a membranous appendage of the elytra which prevents dislocation.

Alulet: Diptera: the lobe at basal posterior part of wing; = alar
appendage; posterior lobe: and has been used as = alula.

Alutaceous: rather pale leather brown [burnt sienna]: covered with
minute cracks, like the human skin.

Alveolate: furnished with cells: deeply pitted.

Alveolus: a cell, like that of a honeycomb.

Amber: a transparent, clear, pale yellowish brown; of the color of
amber [a mixture of pale cadmium yellow and a little burnt umber].

Ambient vein: Diptera; the costal vein when it extends beyond the
apex and practically margins the wing.

Ambrosia: bee-bread: the food cultures of certain Scolytid beetles.

Ambulatoria: that series of Orthoptera in which the legs are fitted for
walking only; Phasmids.

Ambulatorial: fitted for walking or making progress on the surface.

Ambulatorial setae: specialized hairs or bristles, situated on the
ventral segments of the abdomen of some Coleoptera.

Ambulatory: moves by walking; formed for walking.

Ametabola -ous: insects without obvious metamorphoses, in which
the larvae usually resemble the adult and the pupae are active.

Ametabolion: an insect that has no distinct metamorphoses.

Amethystine -us: bright blue with a reddish admixture; clear like an
amethyst [between mauve and lilac].

Amnion: the inner of the two membranes enveloping the embryo.

Amnion cavity: a tube-like insinking from the ventral plate of the
embryo, extending cephalad.

Amnion fold: the extensions of the amnion which close the mouth of
the amnion cavity in the embryo.

Amnios: the first cast skin of the larva when a moult occurs almost
immediately after emergence from the egg.

Amoebiform: having the appearance or properties of an amoeba.

Amoeboid: applied to movements similar to those of an amoeba.

Amphibiotica: those pseudoneuropterous insects whose larvae are
aquatic but whose imagos are aerial; stone-flies; May-flies;
dragonflies.

Amphimixis: the mingling of the germ plasm of two individuals.

Amphiodont: applied to those forms of male Lucanids bearing
mandibles of medium size, between teleodont and priodont;
=mesodont.

Amphipneustic: applied to larvae which have the spiracles confined to
the anterior and terminal segments.

Ample: broad; large; sufficient in size.

Amplected: when the head is received into a concavity
of the prothorax; e.g. Hister.

Ampliate -us: moderately dilated.

Amplificatus: dilated; enlarged.

Ampulla: Orthoptera; an extensile sac between head and prothorax
used by the young in escaping from oötheca, and later, in molting:
Heteroptera; a blister-like enlargement at the middle of the anterior
margin of the pro-thorax.

Ampulla-like: flask-shaped; applied to a vascular sac at base of
antennae which aids in the blood circulation of head and its
appendages.

Amygdaliform: almond-shaped.

Anabolic: the constructive change from food material to animal tissue:
see katabolic.

Anal: pertaining or attached to the last segment of the abdomen; the
point or angle of any wing or other appendage that is near to or at any
time reaches the tip of the abdomen.

Anal angle: on the secondaries is that angle nearest the end of the
abdomen when the wings are expanded: the angle between the inner
and outer margin of any wing; = hind angle of primaries.

Anal appendages: generally; applied to the external genital parts.

Anal area: Orthoptera and Neuroptera; the hinder or anal portion of a
wing within the anal vein = axillary area.

Anal cells: the spaces between the anal veins (Comst.): in Diptera,
anal cell (Will.), the space nearest the body, inclosed by the 5th and
6th veins sometimes called the third basal cell (Coq.) = 1st anal
(Comst.).

Anal field: Orthoptera; that area on the tegmina corresponding to the
anal area of the secondaries.

Anal filaments: see caudal setae.

Anal fork: applied to the cerci of Coleopterous larvae.

Anal foot: applied to the tip of the body in larval Chironomids, which
is modified to serve as a hold-fast.

Anal furrow: in wings, lies between the cubitus and 1st anal vein.

Anal glands: appendages of the alimentary canal, opening into it near
the posterior extremity, secreting either a lubricant, a silk-gum, or
some other specialized material.

Anal horns: in Collembola, are small processes borne on the last
abdominal segment.

Anal lobes: in Lecaniinae, a pair of small, triangular, hinged processes
forming a valve which covers the anal orifice.

Anal loop: Odonata; the loop formed by the angulations of 1st anal
vein.

Analogous: similar in function; but differing in origin and structure:
e.g. the wings of birds and insects: see homologous.

Anal operculum: the dorsal arch of the 10th abdominal segment; in
caterpillars = supra-anal plate, q.v.

Anal organs: Collembola; the two modified hairs arising
from a tubercle ventro-cephalad of the anus and
usually curving caudo-dorsad.

Anal orifice: see anus.

Anal papilla: Collembola; see anal tubercle.

Anal plate: in caterpillars, the shield-like covering of the dorsum of the
last segment: in the embryonic larva the 11th tergite.

Anal ring: a chitinous ring encircling the anus in many Coccidae.

Anal scale: one of the lateral processes of the ovipositor in Cynipidae,
lying outside and below the lateral scale.

Anal siphon: the anal breathing tube of Culicid larvae.

Anal style: a slender process on or within the terminal segment of the
abdomen in Homoptera.

Anal tubercle: Collembola; the tubercle bearing the anal organs: =
anal papilla.

Anal tubercles: a pair of prominent, rounded or conical processes,
situate one on each side of the anus in certain Coccids.

Anal valves: see podical plates.

Anal veins: those longitudinal unbranched veins extending from base
to outer margin below the cubitus; the first anal, also termed vena
dividens, q.v., is the 6th of the series starting from the base, and it
may be followed by several others which are numbered in order to the
inner margin.

Anastomosing: inosculating or running into each other.

Anastomosis: a running together; usually applied to wing veins, often
to markings; sometimes used like stigma, q.v.; also in Neuroptera, a
series of cross-veinlets nearly in one row; a connecting series of
veinlets.

Anceps: two-edged; similar to ensiform, q.v.

Ancestral: primitive; inherited from an earlier form or ancestor.

Anchor process: = breastbone, q.v.

Anchylosed: grown together at a joint.

Ancipital: with two opposite edges or angles.

Androconia: specialized, usually small scales of peculiar form,
found localized on some male butterflies.

Androgynous: uniting the characters of both sexes.

Aneurose: a wing without veins except near costa.

Angle: of tegmina, "is the longitudinal ridge formed along the
interno-median by the sudden flexure from the horizontal
to the vertical portion when closed."

Angular area: Hym.; the posterior of the three areas on the
metanotum between the lateral and pleural
carinae; = 3rd pleural area.

Angulate: forming an angle; when two margins meet in an angle.

Angulose: having angles.

Angulus: forming an angle: = angulate.

Angustatus: narrowed; narrowly drawn out.

Anisoptera: that division of the Odonata in which the hind wings are
wider, especially at base, than the front wings.

Annectent: applied to connecting or intermediate forms.

Annelet or annellus: Hym.; small ring-joints between scape and
funicle.

Annulate: ringed or marked with colored bands.

Annulet: a small or narrow ring or annulus.

Annuliform: in the form of rings or segments.

Annulus: a ring encircling a joint, segment, spot or mark; sometimes
applied to the inner ring encircling the mouth opening.

Annulus antennalis: the ring sclerite of the head into which the basal
segment of the antennae is inserted; = antennal sclerite.

Anomalous: unusual; departing widely from the usual type.

Anoplura: wingless species without metamorphosis, habits epizoötic,
thoracic segments similarly developed: a composite aggregation which
includes both the biting and sucking lice.

Ante: before; used as a prefix.

Ante-alar sinus: Odonata; a grooved area extending transversely
immediately in front of the base of each front wing.

Ante-apical: just before the apex.

Ante-clypeus: Odonata; the lower of the two divisions of the
clypeus; the inferior half of the clypeus whenever there is any
apparent line of demarcation: = clypeus-anterior; infra-clypeus;
rhinarium; second clypeus.

Ante-coxal piece: Coleoptera; that portion of the metasternum lying
in front of the posterior coxae, often passing between them and
meeting the abdomen of mandible, is the lateral sclerite of the
clypeus; - one on each side.

Ante-cubital: see ante-nodal, cross veins and spaces.

Ante-furca: an internal forked process from the prosternum, to which
muscles are attached.

Ante-humeral: relating to the space just before origin of wings.

Ante-humeral stripe: Odonata; a discolored stripe, approximately
parallel to, but to the inner side of the humeral suture, q.v.

Antemedial line: = t. a. line, q.v.

Antemedian: Diptera; applied to leg-bristles situated before the
middle.

Antenna -ae: two jointed, sensory organs, borne, one on each side of
the head, commonly termed horns or feelers.

Antenna-cleaner: a fringed excavation on the interior base of the 1st
segment of the anterior tarsi of Hymenoptera which, when covered by
the movable process from the end of the tibia, forms an opening
through which the antennae may be drawn: similar structures are on
the fore tibiae of Carabid beetles: tarsal claws are also used by
various insects to clean antennae.

Antennal appendage: in Mallophaga, a projecting process of the 1st or
3rd segment in the male.

Antennal formula: in Coccidae; made by enumerating the antennal
joints in the order of their length, beginning with the longest and
bracketing together those of the same length.

Antennal fossa -w: grooves or cavities in which antennae are located
or concealed: = a. grooves: antennary fossa.

Antennal fovea: Diptera; a groove or grooves in the middle of the face
as though for the lodgment of the antennae; bounded on the sides by
the facial ridges.

Antennal foveolae: Orthoptera; the pits between frontal costa and
lateral carinae, in which the antennae are inserted.

Antennal grooves: see antennal fossa.

Antennal lobes: of brain, see deuto-cerebrum.

Antennal organs: in Collembola are sensory structures on the distal
segment.

Antennal process: Diptera; the frontal protuberance upon which the
antennae are inserted.

Antennal sclerite: see annulus antennalis.

Antennal segment: the second or deutocerebral segment of head.

Antennary fossa: see antennal fossa.

Antennary furrow: in Mallophaga, grooves on the under side of the
head in which the antennae lie.

Antenniferous: bearing antennae.

Antenniform: made up like, or having the appearance of antennae.

Antennule: a small antennae or feeler-like process.

Antenodal cells: Odonata; in Agrionidae the cells included between the
short sector (M 4 Comst.) and the upper sector of the triangle (Cu 1,
Comst.), and between the quadrilateral (or quadrangle) and the vein
descending from the nodus.

Antenodal cross veins: Odonata; extend between costa and sub-costa,
and between sub-costa and media, from the base to the nodus,
forming the ante-nodal or ante-cubital cells: = ante-cubital.

Antenodal costal spaces: Odonata; the cells between costa and
subcosta, from the base to the nodus: = ante-cubitals.

Anteocular: the region just before the eye; specifically applied in
Collembola to a peculiar structure of undefined function situated in
front of the eyes: = prostemmatic.

Antepectus: the lower surface of the prothorax.

Antepenultimate: the last but two.

Anterior: in front; before; in Dip., that face of the leg which is visible
from the front when the leg is laterally extended and bristles on that
face are anterior.

Anterior branch of third vein, in Diptera (Will.), = radius 4 (Comst.).

Anterior field: Orthoptera; of tegmina, see costal field.

Anterior intercalary vein: Diptera; = media 2 (Comst.); of Loew =
discoidal vein.

Anterior lamina: Odonata; the anterior sternal border of abdominal
segment 2, modified to form the front margin of the genital pocket.

Anterior lobe: Orthoptera; see lobes.

Anterior squama: = antisquama; q.v.

Anterior stigmatal tubercle: on thoracic and abdominal segment of
caterpillars; varies from substigmatal to stigmatal anterior;
sometimes united to IV: it is V of the abdominal series, IV of the
thorax (Dyar).

Anterior trapezoidal tubercle: on thoracic and abdominal segment of
caterpillars addorsal, anterior, always present, rarely united with II: it
is I of the abdominal series, la of the thorax (Dyar).

Antero: to the front; anteriorly.

Antero-dorsal: Diptera; applied to leg bristles at the meeting of
anterior and dorsal face.

Antero-ventral: Diptera; applied to leg bristles at the meeting of
anterior and ventral face.

Anthobian: feeding on flowers; applied to certain lamellicorn
Coleoptera in which the labium extends beyond the mentum.

Anthophila: Hymenoptera; species in which the basal joint of the hind
tarsus is dilated and pubescent; the bees.

Anthracine -us: coal black; black with a bluish tinge.

Anti: over against; opposite; contrary: (prefix).

Anticus: frontal; belonging to or directed toward the front.

Antigeny: opposition or antagonism of the sexes; embracing all forms
of secondary sexual diversity.

Antipodal costal spaces: Odonata; the cells between costa and
subcosta, from the base to the modus; = antecubitals.

Antisquama: Diptera; the upper of the two which moves with the
wings; = antitegula; see also squama.

Antitegula: see antisquama.

Antlia: the spiral tongue or haustellum of Lepidoptera.

Antliata: insects with a sucking mouth; originally applied to
Lepidoptera and Diptera, later and more specifically to Diptera.

Antrorse -sum: directed toward the front.

Anus: the end of the digestive tract, through which the food remnants
are passed: the posterior part of the individual: specifically, in
Coccidae, a more or less circular opening on the dorsal surface of the
pygidium, varying in location as regards the circumgenital gland
orifices: = anal orifice.

Aorta: the anterior, narrow part of the heart, opening into the head.

Apex: that part of any joint or segment opposite the base by which it is
attached; that point of a wing furthest removed from base or at the
end of the costal area.

Aphaniptera: indistinctly winged; see Siphonaptera.

Aphideine: see aphidilutein.

Aphidilutein: a yellowish fluid found in plant lice, changed to a rich
violet by alkaline reagents.

Apical: at, near or pertaining to the apex; usually of a wing.

Apical area: see petiolar area.

Apical areas: apical cells in some Homoptera.

Apical cell: a cell near or at the apex of a wing; in Hymenoptera
(Norton) = medial (Comst.); outer apical cell = 2d medial 2 (Comst.);
inner apical cell = medial 3 (Comst.).

Apical cells or cellules: Trichoptera; the series of cells along the outer
margin of wing from pterostigma to arculus.

Apically: toward or directed toward the apex.

Apical sector: one of the longitudinal veins in the apical part of wing of
Neuroptera.

Apical transverse carina: Hymenoptera; crosses the metanotum
behind middle and separates the median from the posterior cells or
areas.

Apiculis: an erect, fleshy short point.

Apiculate: covered with fleshy, short points.

Apivorous: devouring bees.

Apneustic: without an open tracheal system; respiration is through
the skin or through tracheal gills.

Apocrita: = petiolate, q.v.

Apodal: with single, simple tubercles instead of feet, in larvae;
without feet = apodous.

Apode: one that has no feet.

Apodema: a conspicuous transverse band crossing the thorax in front
of the scutellum in male Coccidae.

Apodeme: an inwardly directed process to which a muscle is attached.

Apodous: without feet; see apodal.

Apolar: without differentiated poles; without apparent radiating
processes applied to cells.

Apophysis: the lower of the two joints of trochanter in ditrocha
trochanterellus; the dorso-lateral metathoracic spines in
Hymenoptera; also used as synonymous with ento-thorax.

Apophystegal plates: Orthoptera; flattened blade or plate-like sclerites
covering the gonapophyses.

Apotypes: = hypotypes; q.v.

Appendage -es: any part, piece or organ attached by a joint to the
body or to any other main structure.

Appendice -es: any attached body or small process; an appendix.

Appendicial: supplementary: relating to appendices.

Appendicle: a small appendix: in some bees, a small sclerite at tip of
labrum.

Appendiculate: bearing appendages; said of antennae where the
joints have articulated appendages; of tarsal claws that have
membranous processes at base.

Appendiculate cell: Hymenoptera; is on costa just beyond 2d radius 1
and 2.

Appendigerous: bearing appendages.

Appendix: a supplementary or additional piece or part, added to or
attached to another: in Heteroptera; = cuneus, q.v.

Appress -ed: to press against; closely applied to.

Approximate: near to; applies to antennae inserted close together.

Aptera: those that have no wings: an ordinal term formerly employed
for fleas, lice and other wingless forms now distributed in other orders:
 later used for the simplest or lowest insects, including the Thysanura
and Collembola.

Apterodicera: wingless, with two antennae.

Apterous: without wings.

Apterygogenea: those insects that are wingless in all stages and
presumed to be descended from ancestors which never were winged:
see pterygogenea.

Apterygota: = apterygogenea; see pterygote.

Aquamarine -us: sea green: pale green with predominant blue and a
little gray [nile green].

Aquatic: living wholly in water.

Aquatilia: cryptocerous Hemiptera of truly aquatic habit.

Arachnoideous: resembling or similar to a cobweb.

Araneiform: spider-like in appearance.

Arboreal: living in, on, or among trees.

Arborescent: branching like the twigs of a tree.

Archaic: ancient; no longer dominant; of the olden time.

Archiptera: those Neuroptera with incomplete metamorphosis =
Pseudo-neuroptera.

Arctic Zone: is that part of the boreal region above the limit of tree
growth in the U. S. is restricted to the area above timber line on the
summits of high mountains: = alpine.

Arcuate: curved like a bow: = arcuate.

Arcuato-emarginate: with a bow-like or curved excision.

Arculus: Odonata; a small cross vein between radius and cubitus near
the base, leaving an elongate triangle between them: Trichoptera; a
point, often hyaline, on the forewing where the cubitus (or post
cubitus) runs into the margin: in Homoptera; a cross-veinlet nearly
reaching posterior margin at same point as in Trichoptera: in other
orders applied to a cross-vein in similar position, apparently giving
rise to the median.

Arcus: a bow; part of a circle; but less than one half.

Area mediastinal, scapularis and ulnaris: the areas in front of the
mediastinal, the scapular, and the ulnar veins in Orthoptera.

Areae or Areolae: wing cells or spaces between veins.

Arenicolous: applied to species frequenting sandy areas.

Arenose: a surface that is sandy or gritty.

Areola: a small cell on the wings of certain Hemiptera: see also areae
Hymenoptera; the central of three median areas on the metanotum: =
2d median area; upper median area.

Areolate: with small defined areas, like a network.

Areole: Lepidoptera; see accessory cell, cell and cellule.

Areolet: one of the small spaces between veins of net-veined insects.

Argentate: shining, silvery white.

Argenteous: silvery.

Argillaceous: of the texture, appearance or color of clay.

Arid: Applied to regions in which the normal rainfall is insufficient to
produce ordinary farm crops without irrigation, and in which desert
conditions prevail: see humid.

Arid transition area: comprises the western part of the Dakotas,
northern Montana east of the Rockies, southern Assiniboia, small
areas in southern Manitoba and Alberta, the higher parts of the Great
Basin and the plateau region generally, the eastern base of Cascade
Sierras and local areas in Oregon and California.

Arista: a specialized bristle or process on antennae of certain Diptera.

Aristate: Diptera; that type of antennae that bears an arista: =
athericerous.

Aristiform: of the form or appearance of an arista.

Armature: applied to the spinous or chitinous processes on the legs,
body or wings; or the corneous parts of genitalic structures.

Armatus: set with spines, claws or other chitinous processes.

Armillate: with a ring or annulus of raised or different tissue.

Arolium -ia: cushion-like pads on the tarsi of many insects: one of the
lobes of the pulvillus; in Orthoptera, used only for the terminal pad
between the claws: see empodium; pulvillus; palmula; plantula;
onychium, paronychium, pseudonychium.

Arquate: see arcuate.

Arrhenotokous: capable of producing male offspring only, as in worker
bees and some saw-flies.

Arrhenotoky: parthenogenetic reproduction when the progeny are all
males: see thelyotoky and deuterotoky.

Arthrium: Coleoptera; the minute, concealed tarsal joint in
pseudotetramera and trimera.

Arthroderm: the outer skin or covering of articulates.

Arthrodial: an articulation that permits motion in any direction.

Arthromere: a body segment or ring: = somite.

Arthropleure: the side piece of an arthromere.

Arthropods: all those articulates having jointed legs.

Article: a joint or segment.

Articular pan: the cup or dish-like depression forming the socket into
which an articulation is fitted.

Articulate: that branch of the animal kingdom whose members are
made up of rings, segments or articulations.

Articulate: divided into joints or segments.

Articulated apex: see clasp filament.

Articulation: the point or place where two parts or segments are
joined: also applied to an individual joint or segment.

Articulatory epideme: the partly chitinized membrane by which the
wings are attached to the thorax.

Artus: the organs of locomotion generally.

Asexual: applied where the reproductive organs are incompletely
developed and eggs or young are produced by cell-budding: =
parthenogenetic.

Ash-gray: a mixture of black and white, with a faint orange tinge: like
ashes of anthracite coal.

Aspect: indicates the direction to which a surface faces or in which it
is viewed; it may be dorsal, ventral, caudal, cephalic or lateral.

Asperities: surface roughenings or dot-like elevations.

Aspersus: rugged, with distinct elevated dots.

Assembling: gathering together; applied when a virgin female is
exposed to attract such males as may be near, either to secure a
pairing or merely to obtain specimens; also called sembling.

Assurgent: down-curved at base, then upcurved to an erect position.

Asymmetrical: not alike on the two sides; not symmetrical.

Asymmetry: a state of unlikeness in lateral development; absence of
symmetry in form or in the development of members.

Ater: deep black; not shining.

Aterimus: the deepest black.

Athericerous: see aristate.

Atom -us: a minute dot or point.

Atomarius: with minute dots or points.

Atrachelia: Coleoptera in which there is no visible constriction
between head and prothorax: Rhynchophora and some Heteromera.

Atrium: a chamber just within the spiracle and before the occluding
structure to the trachea.

Atrocoeruleus: very deep, blackish, sky-blue.

Atrophied: wasted away; unfit for use.

Atropurpureus: dark purplish, nearly black [an admixture of mauve
and black].

Atrous: jet black.

Atrovelutinus: velvety black.

Atrovirens: dark green, approaching blackish [prussian green].

Attenuated: drawn out; slender; tapering.

Attingent: touching.

Atus: suffix; denotes possession of a quality or structure.

Atypic -ical: off type; not of the usual form.

Auchenorhynchus: with the beak issuing from the inferior portion of
head, as in Homoptera.

Auditory: relating to the sense of hearing.

Auditory organs: Orthoptera; specialized structures covered by a tense
membrane, on the anterior tibia or base of abdomen; any structure
that functions as an ear.

Aurantiacus: orange colored; a mixture of yellow and red [chrome
orange].

Aurate: with ears or ear-like expansions: also = auratus.

Auratus: golden yellow [pale cadmium yellow].

Aurelia: = chrysalis or pupa; specifically of butterflies.

Aurelian: a lepidopterist.

Aureolate: with a diffused colored ring.

Aureole: a ring of color which is usually diffuse outwardly.

Aureous -eus: gold-colored.

Aurichalceous: brassy yellow.

Auricle -cula: an appendage resembling a little ear; in Odonata the
tumescent area at the sides of the second abdominal segment: in
Andrenidae, a short membranous process placed laterally on the
ligula.

Auricular: applied to the space or cavity surrounding the dorsal
vessel.

Auriculate: with an ear-like appendage or, in antennae, with the basal
joint distended into a concave, plate-like ear which envelops the rest
of the structures.

Auriculo-ventricular: the outer valves of the heart between the
auricular space and the chamber.

Auriculo-ventricular openings: are the lateral openings into the heart
by means of which the blood is admitted into it.

Auritus: with two ear-like spots or appendages.

Auroral spot: applied to the bright orange colored spot at the apical
area of Anthocharis.

Auroreous -eus: red, like the aurora borealis [crimson lake].

Austral: is that faunal region which covers the whole of the United
States and Mexico except the boreal mountains and tropical lowlands:
 divided into transition, upper, lower and gulf strip: see boreal and
tropical.

Austroriparian faunal area: that part of lower austral zone covering
the greater part of the South Atlantic and Gulf States. Begins near
mouth of Chesapeake Bay, covers half or more of Virginia, North and
South Carolina, Georgia, Florida, Alabama, all of Mississippi and
Louisiana, east Texas, nearly all of Indian Territory, more than half of
Arkansas and parts of Oklahoma, s. e. Kansas, so. Missouri, so.
Illinois, s. w. corner of Indiana and bottom lands of Kentucky and
Tennessee.

Autotype: any specimen identified by the describer as an illustration
of his species and compared with the type or co-type.

Auxiliary: additional, or supplementing.

Auxiliary vein: in Diptera (Will.), = subcosta (Comst.).

Axillae: two small, subtriangular sclerites at the lateral basal angles of
the meso-scutellum in Proctytripidae.

Axillary: placed in the crotch or angle of origin of two bodies; arising
from the angle of ramification.

Axillary area: see anal area.

Axillary calli: see calli axillary.

Axillary cell: in Diptera (Will.), = 2d anal (Comst.).

Axillary excision: = a. incision, q.v.

Axillary incision: Diptera; an incision on inner margin of wing, near
base, which separates the alula from the main part.

Axillary lobe: the sclerite covering the base of the wing in Diptera; see
also alula and posterior lobe.

Axillary vein: one or two longitudinal veins toward the inner margin
from the anal vein (Ephemeridae); a group of several (10-20) radiate
veins that occupy the anal field in Orthoptera.

Axis: a small process at base of elytron, upon which it turns.

Azure -eus: clear sky-blue [cobalt blue].

Azygos: unpaired; a structure without a fellow; sometimes applied to
an unpaired oviduct specifically the enlarged portion of the vagina at
the junction of the oviducts and thus = uterus.






B

Baccate -us: berry-like: applied to bladder-like ovaries from the
surface of which the short ovarian tubes arise.

Back: the dorsum or upper surface.

Baculiform: rod or staff-like.

Badius: liver-brown; clearer and lighter than
castaneus [dragon's blood].

Baenomere: a leg-bearing (thoracic) segment.

Baenopoda: the thoracic legs.

Baenosome: the thorax.

Balancers: see halteres.

Bald: without hair or other surface vestiture: see bare.

Band: a transverse marking broader than a line.

Bar: a short, straight band of equal width.

Barb: a spine armed with teeth pointing backward.

Barbate: furnished with barbs; hair with spines or spurs directed
backward.

Barbated: bearded; in antennae with tufts or fascicles of hair or short
bristles on each side of each joint; = brush-like: on the abdomen,
with flat tufts at the sides or tip.

Barbule: a small barb, beard or filiform appendage.

Bare: without clothing of any kind: see bald.

Basad: in the direction of or toward the base.

Basal: at or pertaining to the base or point of attachment to or nearest
the main body.

Basal area: in wings: that space nearest the point where they are
attached to the body: on the metanotum of Hymenoptera, the anterior
of the three median cells or areas = 1st median area.

Basal cell: Diptera; st (Will.), = radial 2 (Comst.); 2d (Will.), = media
(Comst.); Trichoptera; one, two or three cells enclosed by the
branches that form-the post-costal or anal vein: Odonata; an elongate
cell between radius and cubitus, just before the arculus.

Basalis: the principal mandibular sclerite, when sclerites are
distinguishable, to which all other parts are jointed; corresponds to
the stipes in the maxilla.

Basal line: in many Lepidoptera; a transverse line extending half way
across the primaries very close to base.

Basal lobe: of culicid genitalia, see claspette.

Basal post-costal vein: in Agrioninae, one of the cubito-anal
cross-veins.

Basal segment of clasp: see side piece.

Basal space: that area on the primaries of certain Lepidoptera,
between the base and t. a. line (q.v.).

Basal streak: in Noctuid moths, extends from base, through the
submedian interspace to the t. a. line.

Basal transverse carina: on the metanotum of Hymenoptera, crosses
before middle and separates the anterior from the median areas.

Base: that part of any appendage that is nearest the body: on the
thorax that portion nearest the abdomen; on the abdomen that
portion nearest the thorax.

Basement membrane: that thin layer of tissue upon which the
epithelium rests.

Basilar: of or pertaining to the base.

Basilar cross-vein: Odonata; crosses the basilar space.

Basilar membrane: a thin membrane separating the cones and rods
from the optic tract.

Basilar space: Odonata; that area at base of wings, between media
and cubitus.

Basi-proboscis: basal third of the flexed proboscis of muscid flies.

Batesian mimicry: see mimicry.

Bathmis: see pterostigma.

Bave: the fluid silk as it is spun by caterpillars.

Beak: any notable prolongation of the front of the head: the snout in
Rhynchophora: specifically, the jointed structure covering the lancets
in the hemipterous mouth.

Bearded: fringed with hair: see barbated.

Belly: venter; under side of abdomen.

Belonoid: needle-like.

Bi: prefix, means two.

Bi-alar: two-winged; applied to Diptera.

Biarcuate: twice curved.

Biareolate: with two cells or areoles: see bilocular.

Bicaudate: having two tails or anal processes.

Bicolored: with two colors that contrast to some extent.

Bicornute: with two horns or cephalic processes.

Bicuspidate: ending in two points or cusps.

Bidactylate: with two fingers or finger-like processes.

Bidentate: two-toothed.

Biemarginate: twice emarginate; with two excisions.

Bifarious: pointing in opposite directions.

Bifasciate: with two bands or fascia.

Bifid: divided into two parts; split; applied in Coleoptera to tarsal
claws which are divided so that the claws lie side by side: see
biparted.

Biflabellate: antennae with fan-like process on two sides.

Bifurcate: divided, not over half its length, into two dull points; forked.

Bifurcation: a forking or division into two: the point at which a
forking occurs.

Biguttate: with two drop-like spots.

Bijugum: in two pairs.

Bilamellar: divided into two lamina or plates.

Bilateral -eriter: with two equal or symmetrical sides.

Biliary vessels: see malpighian tubules.

Bilineate -us: with two lines.

Bilobate -ed: divided into two lobes.

Binocular: having two cells or compartments: see biareolate.

Bimaculate: with two spots or maculae.

Binate: in pairs: consisting of a single pair.

Binotate: with two rounded spots.

Binus: paired: doubled.

Biogenesis: the production of life from antecedent life.

Biomorphotica: those neuropterous insects in which the pupa is
active.

Bionomics: the habits, breeding and adaptations of living forms.

Biophore: an ultimate constituent of germ plasm or hereditary
substance.

Bioplasm: formative living matter.

Biparted: profoundly divided into two parts: see bifid.

Bipectinate: antennae having comb-like teeth or processes on Beach
side of each joint.

Bipupillate: an ocellate spot with two pupils, of the same or different
in color.

Biradiate: consisting of, or with two rays or spokes.

Biramose -ous: having two branches or doubled appendages.

Biseriately: arranged in double rows or series.

Biserrate: doubly saw-toothed; with a saw tooth on each side of each
antennal joint.

Bisetose -ous: with two bristle-like or setaceous appendages.

Bisinuate: a margin or line with two sinuations or incisions.

Bituberculate: with two distinct tubercles.

Biuncinnate: with two hooks.

Bivalve -ed: applied to mouth parts consisting of two parts or valves
united to form a tube.

Bivittate: with two longitudinal stripes or vittae.

Blade: of maxilla, see lacinia.

Blastem: a nucleated protoplasmic layer preceding the blastoderm.

Blastoderm: the germinal membrane from which the organs of the
embryo are formed.

Blastodermic cells: are those forming the blastoderm.

Blastogenic: relating to or inherent in the germ or blast.

Blastophore: the primitive mouth of the embryo.

Blind: without eyes: applied also to an ocellate spot without a pupil.

Bloom: a fine violet dusting similar to that on plums. {Scanner's note:
See Pruinous.}

Blotch: a large irregular spot or mark: large whitish membrane
between abdomen and thorax in certain saw-flies.

Blunt: not sharp; obtuse at the edge or tip.

Body: the trunk: usually applied to the thorax only; rarely to the
abdomen alone; sometimes to thorax and abdomen combined.

Bombifrons: front of head with a blister-like protuberance.

Bombous: blister-like; spherically enlarged or dilated.

Bombycinous: a very pale yellow like fresh spun silk.

Boreal: from or belonging to the north: is that faunal region that
extends from the polar sea southward to near the northern boundary
of the United States and farther south occupies a narrow strip along
the Pacific Coast and the higher parts of the Sierra-Cascade, Rocky
and Alleghany Mountain ranges; divided into Arctic, Hudsonian and
Canadian: see austral and tropical.

Borer: applied to an insect or larva that burrows or makes channels in
woody or other vegetable tissue.

Botryoidal: clustered like a bunch of grapes.

Bouclier: the pronotum, q.v.

Bouton: a button; the terminal lappet-like process at the tip of the
ligula in bees: = spoon.

Brachelytra: with abbreviated wing covers or elytra.

Brachia: the arms: has been applied to raptorial fore-legs.

Brachial: relating to an arm; arm-like.

Brachial cells: Hymenoptera; 1st (Nort.), = costal and sub-costal
(Comst.) 2d (Nort.), = medial (Comst.); 3d (Nort.), = cubital (Comst.);
4th (Nort.), = 2d anal (Comst.).

Brachial veins: of primaries in Hymenoptera, originate at base, run
parallel to inner edge toward anal angle; often connected with the
cubital cellules by means of recurrent venules.

Brachium: the fore tibia.

Brachycerous: Diptera; with short, 3-jointed antennae.

Brachypterous: with short or abbreviated wings.

Brachyostomata: brachycerous Diptera with short proboscis.

Brain: that ganglion of the nervous system which lies in the head
above the oesophagus; formed of the first three primitive ganglia: see
supra-oesophageal.

Branchiae: air tubes or gill-like processes of aquatic larva;.

Branchial: relating to the gills or branchiae.

Branchiate: supplied with gills or bronchia.

Brassy: yellow, with the lustre of metallic brass.

Breast: the under surface of thorax or sternum.

Breast-bone: in Cecidomyid larvae; a horny, more or less elongate
process of the under side behind the mouth opening, supposed to
represent the labium = anchor process.

Breathing pores: see spiracle.

Brevis: short.

Brides: Homoptera; two pieces on the face, one each side of clypeus
and lower part of front.

Bridge: Odonata; a secondary longitudinal vein connecting the radial
sector (Comst.) with Mi + 2, apparently forming a continuous part of
the radial sector; it is the proximal portion of the subnodal sector of
de Selys and Hagen.

Bridge cross veins: Odonata; those cross veins, one or more in
number, extending between M1 + 2 and the bridge (in de Selys
between principal and subnodal sectors) proximal to the oblique vein.

Brin: the fluid silk thread from each salivary gland.

Bristle: a stiff hair, usually short and blunt.

Broken: interrupted in continuity; as a line or band.

Bronze: the color of old brass.

Brood: all the specimens that hatch at about one time, from eggs laid
by one series of parents and which normally mature at about the
same time.

Brunneus: a pure reddish dark brown [indian red].

Brush-like: antennae with the joints laterally produced and tufted
with short hair or bristles: see barbated.

Buccal: relating to the mouth cavity; rarely to the cheeks.

Buccal appendages: the mouth parts excluding the labrum: see
trophi. Buccal cavity: the mouth: = oral cavity.

Buccal fissure: the mouth slit or opening: the opening on each side of
the mentum.

Buccate: blown up, distended; especially the cheeks.

Bucculae: little cheeks or distended areas.

Budding: applied to that form of agamic reproduction found in plant
lice.

Bulla: a blister or blister-like structure: the shield-like sclerite that
closes the opening to the trachea in lamellicorn larvae: in Ephemerida
a part of the costal area of the fore wing toward the tip, which is
slightly swollen forward and furnished with more cross veins than
elsewhere; practically the stigma, q.v.

Bullate: blistered.

Bullule: a small blister.

Bursa: a pouch or sac: a wing pouch in male caddice flies and in
connection with a stalked hair pencil.

Bursa copulatrix: the copulatory pouch of the female in some orders;
a modification of the vagina.






C

Caducous-us: deciduous; easily detached or shed.

Caecal tubes or pouches: sac, or blind tube-like structures
surrounding the chylific ventricle at its junction with the crop, and
secreting a digestive ferment.

Caecum: a blind sac or tube-like structure serving as one of the caecal
tubes or pouches: see coecum.

Caelate: a surface with plane elevations of varying forms.

Caeruleus -eous: light sky-blue [between lavender and cobalt blue] =
coeruleus.

Caerulescent: with a tinge of sky-blue.

Caesius -eous: a pale dull blue-gray [blue-gray].

Caespiticolous: frequenting or living in grassy pastures or lawns.

Calathiform: shaped like a deep bowl.

Calcar -ium; pl. ia: a movable spur or spine-like process: specifically
the spines at the apex of a tibia.

Calcarate -us: with a movable spur or spine-like process.

Caliciform: shaped like a cup or calyx.

Calipers: the anal forceps in Dermaptera.

Calli axillary: Odonata; thickenings at the bases of the wings;
distinguished as anterior at the base of the costa, and posterior at the
base of radius + medius and cubitus: = axillary calli.

Callosity: a thick swollen lump, harder than its surroundings: =
callous: also a rather flattened elevation not necessarily harder than
the surrounding tissue.

Callous: see callosity.

Callus: a small callosity.

Caltrops spines: the branched and otherwise specialized irritating
spines in Limacodid larvae.

Calva: a skull-cap: = epicranium, q.v.

Calx: the distal end of the tibia; the curving basal portion of the first
tarsal joint.

Calyculate: applied to antennae, whose cup-shaped joints are so
arranged as to fit one into the other.

Calypter: Diptera; the alula or squama when it covers the haltere.

Calyptra: a hood or cap; see alula.

Calyptrate: those flies that have aluke or membranous scales above
the halteres.

Calyx: the cap or crown of the mushroom bodies of the procerebrum:
see also egg-calyx.

Campanulate: bell-shaped: more or less ventricose at the base and a
little recurved at the margin.

Campestral: applied to species inhabiting open fields.

Campodeiform: applied to larval forms which, in their early stages at
Least, resemble Campodea: = leptitorm.

Canadian zone: is that part of the boreal region comprising the
southern part of the great transcontinental coniferous forests of
Canada, the northern parts of Maine, New Hampshire and Michigan,
and a strip along the Pacific Coast reaching south to Cape Mendocino
and the greater part of the high mountains of the United States and
Mexico. In the east covers Green. Adirondack and Catskill Mountains
and the higher mountains of Pennsylvania, West Virginia, Virginia,
western North Carolina and eastern Tennessee. In the Rockies extends
continuously from British Columbia to western Wyoming and in the
Cascades from British Columbia to southern Oregon with a narrow
interruption along the Columbia River.

Canaliculate: channelled; longitudinally grooved, with a deeper
concave line in the middle.

Cancellate: cross-barred: latticed: with longitudinal lines decussate by
transverse lines.

Canescent: hoary, with more white than gray.

Canine teeth: applied to the sharp and conical teeth of mandibles in
predatory species: = dentes caninae.

Cantharidin: the substance that gives the meloid beetles their
blistering power composition, C10H12O4 (von Furth).

Canthus: the chitinous process more or less completely dividing the
eyes of some insects into an upper and lower half.

Canus: see canescent.

Capillaceous: capilla or hair-like.

Capillaris: a very slender, hair-like tube.

Capillary: long and slender like a hair: antennae in which the joints
are long, slender and loosely articulated.

Capillate -us: clothed with long slender hair; = coryphatus.

Capillii: hairs of the head that form a cap as in certain Trichoptera
and Tineid Lepidoptera.

Capillitium: the hood-like collar in some Noctuid moths, e.g.
Cucullia: see cucullus.

Capitate: with a head: that type of clavate antenna in which the club
is abruptly enlarged at tip and forms a spherical mass.

Capitulum: a small head: the enlarged tip of an antenna: the little
knob at tip of halteres in Diptera: the labella or lapping tip of the
mouth of certain flies.

Capricorn beetle: a Cerambycid or long horned beetle.

Caprification: is that method or process through which the Smyrna
figs are fertilized by Blastophaga throughthe medium of wild, inedible
or "caprifigs."

Capsular: in the form of a capsule or little cup-like container.

Caput: the head with all its appendages.

Capylus: a hump on the Tupper side of the segments of many larva.

Carabidoid: applied to the second stage of a meloid larva, when it
resembles that of a Carabid.

Carbonarius: coal black.

Cardia: the gizzard; q.v.: also applied to the heart.

Cardiac: belonging or relating to the heart.

Cardiac valvule: see oesophageal valve.

Cardinal cell: Odonata; see triangle.

Cardioblasts: a string or row of cells in the embryo giving rise to the
heart or dorsal vessel.

Cardio-coelom: that part of the coelom that forms the pericardium.

Cardio-coelomic: applied to the venous openings from the heart to the
body cavity.

Cardo, pl. Cardines: the hinge or basal sclerite of the maxilla by
means of which it is jointed to the head.

Carina -ae: an elevated ridge or keel, not necessarily high or acute.
Carinate: a surface having carinae.

Carinula -ae: a little carina or keel-like ridge; specifically, the
longitudinal elevation on the middle of snout in Rhynchophora.

Carinulate: a surface with small and rather numerous carinae.

Cariose -ous: corroded; appearing as if worm-eaten.

Carminate -ed: mixed or tinged with carmine.

Carneous -eus: flesh-colored [salmon with a little carmine].

Carnivorous: a feeder upon flesh food.

Cariose -us: of a soft, fleshy substance.

Carolinian faunal area: that area of the upper austral zone comprising
the larger part of the Middle States (except the mountains), s. e. So.
Dakota, east. Nebraska, Kansas and part of Oklahoma; nearly all of
Iowa, Missouri, Illinois, Indiana, Ohio, Maryland and Delaware; more
than half of West Virginia, Kentucky, Tennessee and New Jersey and
large areas in Alabama, Georgia, the Carolinas, Virginia,
Pennsylvania, New York, Michigan and South Ontario: extends along
Atlantic Coast from near mouth of Chesapeake Bay to Southern
Connecticut and sends narrow arms up the valleys of the Hudson and
Connecticut. A narrow arm follows the east shore of Lake Michigan to
Grand Traverse Bay.

Carpus: the pterostigma of Odonata: the extremity of the radius and
cubitus of the primaries: that point in the wings at which they are
tratsversely folded.

Cartilaginous: of the consistency of cartilage or gristle.

Caruncle: a soft, naked, fleshy excrescence or protuberance.

Caryophylleous: nut or clove brown [Indian red].

Castaneous: chestnut brown; bright red-brown [dragon's blood with a
slight admixture of vermilion].

Castes: the various forms or kinds of matured individuals among
social insects as workers, soldiers, queens, etc.

Cataphracted: invested with a hard callous skin, or with scales closely
united. Catch: in Collembola, = tenaculum, q.v.

Catenate: with longitudinal connected elevations like links in a chain.

Catenulate: like catenate; but the links are smaller.

Caterpillar: the term applied to the larvae of Lepidoptera.

Catervatum: by heaps.

Caudal: the tail: any process resembling a tail: the pointed end of the
abdomen in plant lice: any extension of the anal segment or
appendage terminating the abdomen.

Caudad: toward the posterior end of the body, along the median line.

Caudal: pertaining to the posterior or anal extremity.

Caudal setae: long, thread-like processes at the end of the abdomen in
many europterous and some other insects; = anal filaments.

Caudate: with tail-like extensions or processes.

Caudo-cephalic: in a line from the head to the tail.

Caudo-dorsad: directed upward and toward the tail.

Caudula -ae: a little tail.

Caul: the fatty mass of larvae from which the organs of the future
adult were supposed to develop: = epiploon.

Cauliculus: the larger of the two stalks supporting the calyx of the
mushroom body.

Caulis: the funicle of antenna: the corneous basal part of jaws.

Cavate: hollowed out; cave-like.

Cavernicolous: cave-inhabiting.

Cavernous: divided into small spaces or little caverns.

Cavity -as: a hollow space or opening.

Cecidium: a gall.

Cell: any space between or bounded by veins: in the Comstock
system the cells derive their names from the vein forming the Tupper
margin: e.g. all just below the radius are radial cells; and they are
numbered from the base outward, as radial 1, 2, etc.: the living unit;
protoplasm differentiated into cytoplasm and nucleus, from which
units all but the lowest plants and animals are developed by division
and consequent increase into a multicellular condition: a
compartment or division of a nest or honey-comb.

Cellule: a portion of a wing included between veins; usually applied to
a small area completely inclosed, rarely to interspaces where no closed
area is formed.

Cenchrus -rib: minute, often white marks, or membranous spaces on
the metanotum of some Hymenoptera.

Cenogonous: producing young at one time oviparously, at another
viviparously as in plant-lice.

Centimeter: abb. Cm.: = .01 meter = .394 inch; 2.54 Cm. = one inch.

Centrad: toward the centre or interior.

Central foveola: see median foveola.

Centrolecithal: applied to eggs in which the food yolk is central.

Centrosome: a spherical body that appears outside the nucleus of a
cell.

Cephalad: toward the head, along the central line of the body.

Cephalic: belonging or attached to the head; directed toward the
head.

Cephalic bristles: Diptera; specialized bristles occurring on the head.

Cephalic foramen: the posterior or occipital foramen of head through
which the dorsal vessel, oesophagus, salivary ducts and ventral nerve cords
pass from head to prothorax.

Cephalization: concentration toward the head.

Cephalomere: one of the head segments of an arthropod.

Cephalophragm: a v-shaped partition which divides the head of some
Orthoptera, into an anterior and posterior chamber.

Cephalon: the head.

Cephalosome: the head as one of the three regions.

Cephalotheca: the head covering in the pupal stage.

Cephalotheca: the united head and thorax of arachnids and
crustacea {Scanner's comment: nowadays this term is used little
if at all.  It does not seem ever to have been popular.  Instead
the terms cephalothorax or prosoma are widely used.} :
 that portion of an obtect pupa covering head and thorax: the anterior
segments of larva that have no obviously separated head.

Cerago: bee-bread.

Ceratheca or Ceratotheca: that portion of the pupal shell that
envelops the antenna.

Cerci: two lateral anal appendages; usually short, jointed,
antenna-like, developed from the eleventh abdominal segment of the embryo;
sometimes unjointed and specialized into forceps or other processes.

Cercopoda: jointed foot-like appendages of the last abdominal
segment; also applied like cerci.

Cercus: see cerci.

Cerebellum: has been applied to the sub-esophageal ganglion.

Cerebrum: the supra-oesophageal ganglion.

Cernuous: bent: with the apex bent downward.

Cervical: relating or belonging to the neck.

Cervical foramen: in coleopterous larvae - occipital foramen.

Cervical sclerites: small ebitinous plates on the membrane between
head and thorax: see jugular sclerites.

Cervical shield: the ebitinous plate on the prothorax of caterpillars
just behind the head: = prothorax shield.

Cerviculate: with a long neck or neck-like portion.

Ceryinus: reddish, deer-gray [pale cadmium yellow and Indian red].

Cervix: the upper part of the neck; = crag: in Diptera; that part of
the occiput lying over the junction of the head, i.e. between the
vertex and neck.

Cespitose: matted together.

Chaetophorous: applied to bristle-bearing flies.

Chaetotaxy: the science dealing with the arrangement and
nomenclature of the bristles on the body of insects.

Chagrined: see shagreened.

Chalastrogastra: the saw-flies: a group of Hymenoptera.

Chalceous: brassy in color or appearance.

Chalybeate: steely in appearance.

Chalybeous: metallic steel blue.

Channelled: a surface, with deep grooves or channels.

Chaperon: =clypeus or clypeus anterior.

Chaplet: a little crown; a circle of hooks or other small processes
terminating a member or appendage.

Character: a quality of form, color or structure.

Cheek: see gena.

Chela: the terminal portion of a limb bearing a lateral movable claw
like that of a crab; specifically applied to the feet in some Parasitica in
which the opposable claw forms a clasping structure.

Chelate: bearing a cheat or claw; applied when claws are capable of
being drawn down or back upon the last tarsal joint.

Chiasma: an X-like crossing of nerve fibers.

Chirotype: a specimen upon which a manuscript name is based.

Chitin: the material forming the hard parts of the insect body; it is a
secretion (or a metamorphosis?) of the epidermis, differing from horn
by its insolubility in boiling liquor potassae: = elytra, entomolin.

Chitinogenous: applied to that layer of epidermal cells which secretes
the chitin.

Chitinization: the process of depositing or filling with chitin.

Chitinized: filled in with or hardened by chitin.

Chitinous: composed of chitine {Scanner's comment: sic} or like
it in texture: as a color term is amber yellow.

Chlorophane: an oily, greenish yellow pigment found in insects.

Chlorophyll: the green coloring matter of plants; one of the
substances found in the blood of insects.

Chordotonal: responsive to vibrations; applied to the ear-like
structures in Orthoptera.

Chorion: the shell or covering membrane of an insect egg.

Chromatin: the minute granules that make up the chromoplasm of a
cell nucleus.

Chromosome: one of the segments into which the chromoplasmic
filaments of a cell nucleus breaks up just before indirect division.

Chrysalis or -id: applied specifically to the intermedial stage between
larva and adult in butterflies: see pupa.

Chrysargyrus: silvery gilt.

Chyle: the food-mass after it has passed through the guard and is
mixed with the secretions of the salivary glands and caecal structures,
ready to be assimilated.

Chylific ventricle: the true stomach in which the chyle is prepared and
digestion begins.

Cibarian: referring to the mouth parts.

Cicatricose: a surface having scars with elevated margins like those of
small-pox.

Cicatrix: a scar: an elevated, rigid spot.

Cilia: fringes; series of moderate or thin hair arranged in tufts or
single lines; thin scattered hair on a surface or margin.

Ciliate: fringed: set with even, parallel hairs or soft bristles.

Cilium, pl. Cilia: q.v.

Cimicine: an oily fluid of disagreeable odor secreted by certain
Heteroptera and used as a means of defense.

Cimier: the head crest in Pierid chrysalids.

Cinetus: with a colored band:= cingulatus.

Cinereous: ash-colored; gray tinged with blackish [ultra ash gray].

Cinerescent: ashen in color or appearance.

Cingula -um: a colored band or bands.

Circulate -us: having a cingulum or collar: see also cinetus.

Cinnabarine: [vermilion red].

Cinnamomeous: cinnamon brown [burnt sienna].

Cinema: see Thysanura, of which this forms a group including the
bristle-tails, and for which it has been used as an equivalent.

Circinal: spirally rolled like a watch-spring or a butterfly tongue.

Circiter: about, or round-about.

Circular: round like a circle.

Circumgenital glands: small circular glands with an excretory orifice
at tip, disposed in groups about the genital orifice in Diaspinae.

Circumoesophageal commissures: those cords or nerve fibres
connecting the suboesophageal ganglion with the main trunk of
nervous system.

Circumsepted: with a vein all around the wing.

Citrate: antennae with very long, curled lateral branches which may
or may not be ciliated; see plumose.

Cirrose -us: with somewhat dense curled hair.

Cirrus: a curled lock of hair placed on a thin stalk.

Citrine -us: lemon yellow [chrome yellow].

Cladocerous: with branched horns or antennae.

Clasper: a chitinized process, free or attached to the inner sides of
harpes, valves or other lateral pieces, serving to hold the female parts
during copulation: = the harpers of some authors.

Claspette: in genitalia of male culicids, the inner basal lobe of side
piece; q.v.

Clasp-filament: in male genitalia of culicids the articulated appendage
or terminal segment of side-piece or clasp; sometimes bears an
articulated point or apex and then = articulated apex.

Class: a division of the animal kingdom lower than a sub-kingdom
and higher than an order: e.g. the "Class Insecta."

Classification: is the systematic arrangement of insects (or other
animals or plants) in series showing their relation or agreement in
structure, life habits or other characters forming the basis of the
"classification."

Clathrate: latticed or lattice-like in appearance.

Claustrum: the structure uniting the wings in flight, whether by
hooks, by a thickening of the margin, or by a jugum.

Clava: a club; the enlarged apical joints of a clubbed
antenna: = clavola.

Claval suture: Hemiptera; at the base of hemelytra, separating
the clavus.

Clavate: clubbed: thickening gradually toward the tip.

Clavate hairs: in Collembola, = tenent hairs.

Clavicornia: that series of beetles having the antennae more or less
distinctly enlarged or clubbed at tip.

Clavicular lobe: Homoptera; that portion of hind wing behind anal
veins.

Claviform: club-like in form; specifically, in Noctuid moths an
elongate spot or mark extending from the t. a. line through the
submedian interspace, toward and sometimes to the t.p. line.

Clavola: see clava.

Clavus: the club of an antenna lava and clavola: in Heteroptera, the
oblong sclerite at the base of the inferior margin of the hemelytra: the
knob at the end of the stigmal or radial veins in certain Hymenoptera.

Claws: the claw or hook-like structures at the end of the foot or
tarsus.

Cleavage: see segmentation of egg.

Cleft: split: partly divided, longitudinally: in Coleopteran applied to
claws so divided that the parts lie one above the other.

Clintheriform: shaped like a plate.

Cloaca: see rectum.

Clubbed: see clavate.

Clypeal suture: marks the division between clypeus and epicranium.

Clypeate: shield-like in form.

Clypeate constriction: applied when a surface is drawn in from the
sides so as to produce a shield or saddle-like form.

Clypeo-frontal suture: = clypeal suture.

Clypeus: that portion of the head before or below the front, to which
the labrum is attached anteriorly; in Diptera often visible below the
margin of the mouth in front, as a more or less visor-shaped piece:=
epistoma.

Clypeus-anterior: see ante-clypeus.

Clypeus posterior: see post-clypeus.

Coactus: condensed; of a short stout form.

Coadapted: formed so as to work together to one end; as the mandible
and maxilla in Chrysopids, etc.

Coadunate: joined together at base; two or more joined together; said
of elytra when permanently united at the suture.

Coagulate: to congeal; to change from a fluid to a jelly.

Coagulum: a clotted mass, as of blood.

Coalescent: united or grown together.

Coarctate: contracted: compacted: applied to that form of pupa in
which all the members of the future adult are concealed by a
thickened, usually cylindric case or covering, which is often the
hardened skin of the larva: beginning with a narrow base, then
dilated and thickened.

Cocardes: retractile vesicular bodies on each side of the thorax in
certain Malachidae.

Coccineous: cochineal red; dark red [carmine].

Cochleiformis: formed like a snail shell.

Cochleate: spirally twisted like a screw or a univalve shell.

Cocoon: a covering, composed partly or wholly of silk or other viscid
fibre, spun or constructed by many larvae as a protection to the pupa.

Cocoon-breaker: structures or processes of the pupa, often on the
head, by means of which it works its way out of the cocoon.

Coecal: ending blindly, or in a closed tube or pouch.

Coecum: a blind sac or tube: applied to a series of appendages
opening into the alimentary canal at the junction of the gizzard and
chylific ventricle: see caecum; the two are used interchangeably.

Coeloblast: the endoderm in the narrower sense.

Coelom: the body cavity.

Coelomic cavity: the space between the viscera and the body wall.

Coelom-sac: the cavity containing the viscera: in embryology one of a
pair of closed sacs, arising in the mesoderm of each segment of the
embryo and giving rise to more or less of the coelom of the adult.

Coenogonous: oviparous at one season of the year, ovoviviparous at
another, as in Aphididae.

Coeruleus -eous: sky-blue: see caeruleus.

Coincident: when two wing veins run together or lie, one in
continuation of the other so as to appear like one.

Coleoptera: sheath-winged: an order with the primaries coriaceous,
used as a cover only, meeting in a straight line dorsally; mouth
mandibulate; pro-thorax free; transformation complete: the beetles:
the term has also been applied to the two elytra together.

Collar: in general any structure between the head and thorax:
specifically, in Hymenoptera, the neck; in Diptera, may mean the
neck, the sclerites attached to the thorax, the thorax itself, or its
processes (ante furca): in Coleoptera, is the narrowed thorax; in
Lepidoptera, applied to the sclerites attached to the thorax and which
shield the neck.

Collembola: an ordinal term applied to species which are apterous;
have no metamorphoses; have variably developed abdominal
saltatorial appendages and a peculiar ventral tube at base: the
spring-tails.

Colleterial gland: see Colleterium.

Colleterium: a glandular structure accessory to the oviduct, secreting
the viscid material used in cementing the eggs together.

Collophore: the sucker-like organ extended from the underside of the
abdomen in Collembola.

Collum: the neck or collar: the slender connection between head and
thorax in Hymenoptera and Diptera; in Coleoptera, the posterior,
narrow part of the head or even the thorax: loosely used.

Colon: the large intestine; that usually enlarged portion of the
alimentary canal before the rectum.

Columella: a little rod, pillar or central axis.

Columnar: cylindric, but tapering toward one end.

Comate -us: only the upper part of head, or vertex, covered with hair.
Commensal: one who eats at another's table: applied to species that
feed on the surplus supply of another, without destroying the owner of
the supply.

Commensalism: applied to this manner of living and eating together.

Comminute: to grind up fine: to reduce to minute particles.

Commissure: the nerves connecting two ganglia: the point of meeting
or union of two bodies: a bridge connecting two bodies or structures;
e.g. tracheal tubes.

Common: of frequent occurrence: occurring on two adjacent parts: a
band or fascia is common when it crosses both primaries and
secondaries.

Communal: applied to life or dwelling in colonies like ants and bees.

Comose: ending in a tuft or brush.

Complanate: compressed: flattened above and below: = deplanate.

Complemental: applied to sexed forms in the Termitidae, capable of
reproduction, but which do not reach the winged stage; the females
are less fertile than the forms that become winged and several may be
used in one nest to replace a lost queen or mature female.

Complicant: when one elytron extends over the other and partially
covers it.

Complicate: longitudinally laid in folds: intricate as opposed to
simple.

Component: one part of a combined whole.

Compound: made up of many similar or dissimilar parts.

Compressed: flattened laterally.

Concatenate: linked together in a chain-like series.

Concave: hollowed out; the interior of a sphere as opposed to the
outer or convex surface: concave veins are those that occupy the
bottoms of troughs or grooves on the upper surface of a wing; see
convex veins.

Concavo-convex: hollowed out or concave on one surface, rounded or
convex on the other; like a small segment of a hollow sphere.

Concentrated: gathered together at one point; intensified or
strengthened by evaporation.

Conchate: applied to the shell-like inflation of the auricle in the
cephalic tibia of Orthoptera.

Concinne: neat; fine.

Concolorous: of the same general color.

Concretion: a massing together of parts or particles.

Concurrent: applied to a vein which arises separately, runs into
another and does-not again separate.

Conduplicate: doubled or folded together.

Condyle: a process which articulates the base of the mandible to the
head: in general any process by means of which an appendage is
articulated into a pan or cavity.

Confertim: closely clustered or crowded.

Conflect: crowded; clustered; opposed to sparse.

Confluent: running together; as of two macula when united in one
outline.

Confused: a marking with indefinite outlines: a running together as of
lines and spots without definite pattern.

Congener: a species belonging to the same genus.

Congeneric: applied to a species agreeing in all characters of generic
value with others compared with it.

Congested: heaped together; crowded: distended.

Conglobate: gathered together in a ball or sphere.

Conglobate gland: a glandular appendage of male sexual organs in
Orthoptera, opening upon one of the external structures.

Conglomerate: congregated; massed together.

Conic -al: cylindrical, with a flat base, tapering to a point.

Conico-acuminate: in the form of a long, pointed cone.

Coniferous: a surface which bears cone-like processes.

Conjugate: to bring together in pairs: consisting of a single pair.
Conjugation: the union of pairs; usually applied to the merging of the
male and female elements.

Conjunctiva: the membrane uniting the abdominal sclerites.

Conjunctivus: a mandibular sclerite between the molar and basalis.

Conjunctura: the articulation of a wing to the thorax.

Connate: united at base, or along the whole length.

Connexivum: the prominent abdominal margin of Het., at junction of
dorsal and ventral plates: also used like pulmonarium, q.v.

Connivent: converging: approaching together: wings so folded in
repose that they unite perfectly at their corresponding margins.

Consperse: irregularly dotted or sprinkled.

Conspicuous: striking: easily seen at a glance.

Conspurcatus: confusedly sprinkled with discolored or dark spots.

Constituent: a part or element of a whole.

Constricted: drawn in: narrowed medially and dilated toward the
extremities.

Contiguous: so near together as to touch.

Contorted: twisted: obliquely incumbent upon each other.

Contour: the outline or periphery.

Contract -ed: to draw or drawn together: to reduce, or reduced in size
by contraction.

Contractile: that which may be drawn together or contracted or which
has the power of contracting.

Contrasting: appearing in sharp relief or contrast; as one color or
marking against another.

Converging: approaching each other toward the tip.

Convergence: the approaching or drawing together at tips.

Convex: the outer curved surface of a segment of a sphere; opposed
to concave: convex veins are those which occupy the summits of
ridges on the upper surface of - wing; see concave veins.

Convolute: rolled or twisted spirally: also applied to wings when they
are wrapped around the body.

Coprophagus: feeding on excrement or on decaying vegetable matter of
an excrementitious character.

Copula, Copulation: the act of sexual union.

Copulate: to unite in sexual intercourse.

Copulation chamber: a chamber or cell excavated by certain
Scolytid beetles in their burrows, in which copulation takes
place: = rammel-kammer.

Coralline: a pale pinkish red [salmon].

Corbel: an ovate area at the distal end of the tibia in Coleoptera,
surrounded by a fringe of minute bristles; when the articular cavity is
on the side, above the tip, the corbel is closed; when the cavity is at
the extreme tip, the corbel is open.

Corbicula -um: a concave, smooth space, edged by a fringe of hairs
arising from the margins of the posterior tibiae in bees, forming the
pollen basket its function is to hold the collected pollen in place.

Corbiculate: having corbicula.

Cordate: heart-shaped; triangular, with the corners of the base
rounded: not necessarily emarginate at the middle of base.

Cordiform: = cordate.

Coriaceo-reticulate: with impressed reticulations giving a leather-like
appearance.

Coriaceous: leather-like: thick, tough and somewhat rigid.

Coriarious: leather-like in sculpture or texture.

Corium: the elongate middle section of the hemelytra which extends
from base to membrane below the embolium.

Cornea: the outer surface of the compound eye as a whole, and of
each individual facet.

Corneal lenses: are the individual lens-like structures of which the
cornea of the compound eye is composed.

Corneous: of a horny or chitinous substance; resembling horn in
texture.

Cornicles: the honey tubes in plant-lice: = corniculus.

Corniculi: the little horny tips or pieces of the ovipositor in
Orthoptera; see valves.

Corniculus -i: = cornicles; honey-tubes; q.v.

Corniform: like the horn of an ox: a long, mucronate or pointed
process.

Cornute -us: having horns or horn-like processes.

Corona: a crown or crown-like processes.

Coronate: with a crown-like tip or termination.

Coronet: a small crown or corona.

Coronula: a circle or semicircle of spines at the apex of the tibia.

Corpus: the body as a whole.

Corpus adiposum: the mass of fat tissue often found in larvae.

Corpuscle: a small cell; usually applied to blood cells.

Correlate: to bring together into relation or correspondence.

Correlated: derived from the same ancestral form: said of two or more
features or qualities which bear a direct or an inverse relation to each
other, but without implying a relation of cause and effect.

Correlative: of a correlated nature; see correlated.

Corrode: to eat away gradually, as by rust or decay.

Corrodentia: an ordinal term meaning gnawers: net-veined or
wingless: mandibulate, mouth formed for gnawing; transformation
incomplete; thorax incompletely agglutinated: = Psocoptera: includes
Termitidae, Psocidae and Mallophaga.  {Scanner's comment: These
four groups are now placed in totally separate orders, and not
families as these names imply}

Corrugated: wrinkled; with alternate ridges and channels.

Corselet: the thorax in Coleoptera.

Cortical: relating to the cortex or outer skin.

Corticinus: bark-like in sculpture, texture or color [vandyke brown].

Corvinus: crow-black; deep, shining black with a greenish lustre.

Coryphatus: = capillatus.

Corysterium: an abdominal glandular structure in certain females,
secreting a glutinous covering for the eggs.

Cosmopolitan: species that occur throughout most of the world.

Cosmotropical: species that occur throughout the tropics.

Costa: any elevated ridge that is rounded at its crest: the thickened
anterior margin of any wing, but usually the primaries: in Comstock,
the vein extending along the anterior margin of the wing from base to
the point of junction with subcosta.

Costal area: the area behind costal vein; see also, costal field.

Costal cell: the area inclosed between the costal and sub-costal veins:
in the plural, Comstock, are all the cells anteriorly margined by the
costa; in Hymenoptera (Norton), includes the 1st, 2d and sub-costal;
of Packard, the 3d costal = 2d radial 1, and radial 2: in Diptera (Will.),
it is the 2d costal.

Costal field: Orthoptera; that region of the tegmina adjacent to the
anterior margin or costa: = anterior field.

Costal fold: in the males of some Hesperidae, a membranous flap that
may be opened to expose the androconia.

Costal margin: the anterior margin of a wing whether it is really
costate or not.

Costal membrane: Hymenoptera; the surface of wing in front of costal
vein.

Costal vein: Lepidoptera; runs close to and parallel with the costal
margin, extending from base to the margin before the apex; always
simple and often absent in the secondaries; is vein 12 of the
numerical series on primaries; vein 8 on secondaries: = subcosta
(Comst.).

Costate: ribbed; marked with elevated thickened lines.

Costula: Hymenoptera; a small ridge separating the externo-median
meta-thoracic area into two parts.

Costulatus: less prominently ribbed than costate.

Cotyla: the articular pan; the cup or socket of a ball and socket joint.

Cotypes: are all the specimens before the describer when a species is
named, no single one being selected as the type: the type in such case
equals the sum of the cotypes: see paratype.

Coxa -ae: the basal segment of the leg, by means of which it is
articulated to the body.

Coxal cavity: the opening or space in which the Coxa articulates; in
Coleoptera the cavity is open when the epimera do not extend to the
sternum; closed or entire when the epimera reach the sternum or join
medially as in Rhynchophora; the cavities are separated when the
prosternum extends between them, confluent when it does not: see
acetabulum.

Coxal glands: eversible glandular structures at base of legs; well
developed in some Thysanurans, modified variously in higher orders.

Coxal stylets: short, leg-like, jointed appendages on the underside of
the abdominal segments in Thysanura.

Crag: the neck: = cervix.

Cranium: the head or skull except the neck; sometimes limited to the
fixed parts above the clypeo-frontal suture.

Crassus: thick; tumid.

Crateriform: like a shallow funnel or deep bowl.

Creber: closely set.

Cremaster: a stout spine, process or hooked area at the hind end of
pupae in Lepidoptera.

Crenate: scalloped, with rounded teeth.

Crenulate: with small scallops, evenly rounded and rather deeply
curved.

Crepitation: a crackling sound or the production of such as by
discharge of vapor or "bombarding": a cracking or creaking.

Crepuscular: active or flying at dusk.

Crescentiform: like a lunule or crescent.

Crescentric: lunulate.

Crest: a prominent, longitudinal carina on the upper surface of any
part of the head or body.

Crested: see cristate.

Cretaceous: chalky white: the third, uppermost and latest of the three
great divisions of the mesozoic or secondary rocks.

Cribrate: pierced with closely set, small holes.

Cribriform: with perforations like those of a sieve.

Crineous: dark-brown, with a slight admixture of yellow and gray.

Crinite -us: with tufts of long thin hair: see lanuginose.

Crispate -us: with a wrinkled or fluted margin.

Crista: a ridge or crest.

Cristate: with a prominent carina or crest on the upper surface::=
crested.

Cristiform: in the form of a sharp ridge or crest.

Cristula: a small crest.

Cristulate: with little crescent-like ridges or crests.

Croceous: saffron yellow; yellow with an admixture of red [pale
cadmium yellow].

Crocus: =croceous.

Crook: the hook or recurved tip of the antenna in Hesperidae.

Crop: the dilated portion of the alimentary canal behind the gullet
which serves to receive and hold the food previous to its slower
passage through the digestive tract: = ingluvies.

Crotchets: the curved spines or hooks on the prolegs of caterpillars
and on the cremaster of pupae.

Crown: the top of head in Lepidoptera; also used as = coronet or
corona.

Cruciate: shaped like a cross; applied to wings when the inner
margins lie one over the other; or to incumbent wings that overlie only
at the apex: in Diptera, applied to bristles when they cross in
direction.

Cruciato-complicatus: folded crosswise: incumbent wings when the
inner margins overlap; not well distinguished from cruciate.

Crura: the legs or, more specifically, the thighs.

Crura cerebri: two large cords that connect the supra- with the
sub-oesophageal ganglion.

Crus: a leg or leg-like structure.

Crustaceous: hard, like the shell of a crab.

Crypto: hidden, concealed.

Cryptocerata: a division of Heteroptera with small antennae concealed
in a groove under the bead: = adeloceratous: see gymnocerata.

Cryptogastra: with the venter or belly covered or concealed.

Cryptopentamera: feet 5-jointed, the 4th joint small and concealed.

Cryptotetramera: feet 4-jointed, one of them small and concealed.

Cryptothorax: a supposed thoracic ring between meso- and
meta-thorax.

Crypts: minute secretory follicles or cavities: specifically, large
gland-like structures between the epithelial cells in chylific ventricle.

Crystalline: transparent, like crystal.

Crystalline cone: a conical structure below the cornea, imbedded in
pigment cells of the compound eye: also termed Crystalline lens.

Ctenidium: a comb-like structure occurring on any part of an insect.

Cubital: referring or belonging to the cubits.

Cubital cell: the wing area between the cubits and anal vein; in the
plural, all the cells bounded anteriorly by the cubits or its branches
(Comst.); in Diptera (Schiner), = radial 3 (Comst.), = 3d posterior cell
(Loew); in Hymenoptera (Norton), = radial 3, 4 and 5 (Comst.).

Cubital forks: the branching or points of separation of the branches of
the cubits.

Cubital nerve or vein: see cubits.

Cubitus: of Comstock, is the 5th in the series of longitudinal veins
extending from base, and usually two branched before reaching outer
margin: in Orthoptera; = the internomedian and ulnar: in Neuroptera,
a main longitudinal vein next behind the medius and before the anal:
the tibia of the anterior leg.

Cuckoo spit: liquid in the form of bubbles produced by members of
the family Cercopidae and which often conceals the producer.

Cucullate: hooded; somewhat hood-shaped.

Cucullus: a hood: see capillitium.

Cuilleron: see alula.

Culicifuge: any preparation for driving away gnats or mosquitoes.

Culmen: the longitudinal carina of a caterpillar.

Cultellus: one of the blade-like lancets in piercing flies:
= the mandibles of some authors.

Cultrate -iform: shaped like a pruning knife.

Cumulate: in groups or heaps.

Cumulus: a group or heap; as of cells in a developing ovum.

Cuneate, Cuneiform: wedge-shaped; elongate triangular.

Cuneus: Hymenoptera; the small triangular area at the end of the
embolium of hemelytra: Odonata, the small triangle of the vertex
between the compound eyes.

Cupreous: the metallic red of pure shining copper.

Cupules: the sucker-like processes covering the under surface of the
tarsi in male Dytiscidce.

Cupuliform: cup-shaped: like a little cup: = cyathiform.

Cursoria: in Orthoptera, that series in which the legs are formed for
running (roaches, etc.).

Cursorial: formed for running.

Curvate: curved.

Curvinervate: wings with the veins distinctly curved, like some
Psocidae.

Cusp -is: a pointed process; sometimes at the margin of a wing.

Cuspidate: prickly pointed; ending in a sharp point; with an
acuminated point ending in a bristle.

Custodite -us: guarded: a body in an envelope.

Cuticle: the outer skin or skin layer.

Cuticula: = cuticle: specifically applied to the outer or chitinized layer:
see epidermis and hypodermis.

Cyaneous: pure dark blue: indigo blue [French blue].

Cyanescent: with a deep bluish tinge or shading.

Cyanogenic: applied to repugnatorial glands in myriapods and
sometimes in insects.

Cyathiform: obconical and concave; cup-shaped: = cupuliform.

Cyatotheca: the cover of the thorax in the pupa.

Cycle: a round or circle, e.g. of development; a life cycle.

Cyclorrhapha: that section of Diptera in which the adult escapes from
the hardened pupal case by pushing off a lid or covering: see
orthorrhapha. Cyclorrhaphous: circular seamed.

Cydariform: globose, but truncated at two opposite sides.

Cylindrical: in the form of a cylinder or tube; round, elongate, of
equal diameter throughout.

Cymbiform: boat-shaped: a concave disc with elevated margin;
navicular.

Cytoplasm: the protoplasm of a cell exclusive of nucleus; the cell
body.






D

Dactylus: a finger or toe: = digitus: a tarsal joint after the first one,
when that is enlarged as in bees.

Dagger mark: a marking in the form of a Greek Psi _.

Dart: a sting, or its central part.

Dash: a short disconnected streak or mark.

Dasygastres: bees with pollen-carrying structures on the abdomen.

Deaurate: of the color of gold; golden.

Deciduous: that which may be cast off or shed.

Declinate -us: a part somewhat bent, the apex downward.

Decumbent -ous: sloping gradually downward.

Decrepitans: crackling.

Decumbent: bending down at tip from an upright base.

Decurrent: closely attached to and running down another body.

Decurved: bowed downward.

Decussate: crossing at an angle: X-like: in cross pairs; or, when
bristles alternately cross each other, as in some Diptera.

Deflected: bent downward: the wings, when the inner margins lap
and the outer edges decline toward the sides.

Deflexed: abruptly bent downward.

Deformed: twisted or set in an unusual form: specifically, in
Coleoptera applied to knotted or twisted antennae as in male Meloids.

Dehiscence: the splitting of the pupal integument in the emergence of
the adult in Lepidoptera.

Dehiscent: open or standing open: separating toward the tip.

Dejectamenta: the excrement or excretion.

Delamination: the splitting or division into layers.

Deltoid: elongate triangular: resembling a Greek _ with apex
extended.

Demarcation: the bounding, laying out or limiting.

Dendritic: applied to the branched nerve cells in the mushroom bodies
of the pro-cerebrum.

Dendroid: tree or shrub-like: branching like a tree or shrub.

Dendrophagus: feeding on woody tissues.

Dendrophilous: species that live in woody tissue, or on trees.

Dens: a tooth or tooth-like process.

Dense: thickly crowded together.

Dentate: toothed: with acute teeth, the sides of which are equal and
the tip is above the middle of base.

Dentate-serrate: toothed, with the dentations themselves serrated on
their edges.

Dentate-sinuate: toothed and indented.

Dentes: the teeth or pointed processes on the inner side of the
mandible: the second or middle part of the furcula in Collembola,
consisting of two parallel pieces from the distal end of the manubrium
and bearing at their apices the crones.

Dentes caninae: see canine teeth.

Denticle: a small tooth.

Denticulated: set with little teeth or notches.

Dentiform: formed or appearing like a tooth.

Denudate: without covering; destitute of scales or hair.

Denude: to free from covering; to rub so as to remove the surface
covering of scales, hair or other vestiture.

Deorsum: downward.

Dependent: hanging down.

Deplanate -us: see complanate.

Depressed: flattened down vertically; opposed to compressed.

Depressor: applied to a muscle that has for its function the depression
of an organ or a part.

Deratoptera: = Orthoptera.

Dermal: relating to the skin or outer covering.

Dermal glands: hypodermal unicellular glands which secrete wax,
setae, spines, etc.

Dermaptera: see Dermatoptera.

Dermatoptera: skin-winged: an ordinal term applied to insects with
elytriform, abbreviated primaries beneath which the secondaries are
folded transversely and fan-like: mouth mandibulate, prothorax free;
abdomen forcipate; metamorphosis incomplete: the Forficulidae or
earwigs.

Desectus: = truncatus.

Desideratum -ata: some thing or things needed or desired.

Destitutus: wanting; being without.

Determinate: with well-defined outlines or distinct limits: fixed:
marked out.

Detonans: exploding: a sudden noise or a puff like an explosion.

Detritus: rubbed off; a surface partly denuded.

Deuterotoky: parthenogenetic reproduction when the progeny are
male and female: see arrhenotoky and thelyotoky.

Deutocerebral segment: =antennal segment; q.v.

Deutocerebrum: the middle portion of the brain, formed by the
ganglion of the 2d primary segment; also termed antennal or olfactory
lobes from the parts it innervates.

Deutoplasm: the yolk or food plasm of an ovum.

Deutotergite: the secondary dorsal segment of the abdomen.

Dextrad: extending or directed toward the right.

Dextral: to the right of the median line.

Dextro-caudad: extends obliquely between dextrad and caudad.

Dextro-cephalad: extends obliquely between dextrad and cephalad.

Di: as a prefix, = two.

Diaphanous: semi-transparent; clear.

Diaphragm: any thin dividing membrane; that thin membrane
separating the cavity containing the heart from the rest of the body.

Diarthrosis: any articulation that permits of motion.

Diastole: that regular expansion of the heart that draws the blood
inward: see systole.

Dichaetae: a group of brachycerous Diptera with a proboscis
consisting of two parts: Muscids, etc.

Dichoptic: Diptera; eyes separated by front: not contiguous: see
holoptic.

Dichotomous: forked: dividing by pairs.

Dichromatism: the possession of two color varieties.

Dictyoptera: an ordinal term applied to the roaches: also more
generally, to the Orthoptera.  {Scanner's comment: Roaches are now
classed as Dictyoptera, and Orthoptera are now classed as distinct
from Dictyoptera}

Didactyle -us: two-toed: with two tarsi of equal length.

Didymus: double: geminate.

Difformis: irregular in form or outline: not comparable; anomalous.
Diffracted: bending in different directions.

Diffuse: spreading out; without distinct edge or margin.

Digestive tract: the alimentary canal as a whole: more specifically that
portion behind the crop, in which assimilation takes place.

Digitate: finger-like, or divided into finger-like processes.

Digitiform: formed, shaped like or having the function of a finger.

Digitules: appendages on the feet of Coccidae; in Lecanium, four
knobbed hairs.

Digitus: the terminal joint of the tarsus, bearing the claws: a small
appendage attached to the lacinia of the maxilla; rarely present and
probably tactile.

Digoneutism: the power to produce two broods in one season.

Dilatatus: Coleoptera a margin, when the sharp marginal edge
extends beyond its usual limit: the base when the transverse diameter
is much longer at one part.

Dilated: widened, expanded.

Dilation: an expansion or widening.

Dilute: thinned out: applied to color means weak or pale.

Dilution: much thinned out or diluted.

Dimera: forms with two-jointed tarsi: specifically applied to some
groups of Homoptera.

Dimerous: having only two tarsal joints.

Dimidiate -us: halved; extending half way around; applied to elytra
when they cover only half the abdomen.

Dimidius: of half length.

Dimorphic: occurring in two well-marked forms.

Dimorphism: a difference in form, color, etc, between individuals of
the same species, characterizing two distinct types: may be seasonal,
sexual or geographic.

Dioecious: with distinct sexes.

Dioptrate: an ocellate spot with the pupil divided by a transverse line.

Dioptric: with a transversely divided ocellus.

Diploglossata: an ordinal term proposed for Hemimeridae, because of
the supposed presence of a second labial segment.

Diplogangliata: applied to the Arthropods.

Diploptera: = diplopteryga; q.v.

Diplopteryga: Hymenoptera; wasps in which the wings are
longitudinally folded when at rest.

Dipneumones: having two lungs (certain spiders).

Diptera: an ordinal term applied to insects having only one pair of
wings (anterior): thorax agglutinate; mouth haustellate;
transformations complete.

Dipterocecidium: a gall formed by a dipterous insect.

Dipterous: belonging to or having the characters of Diptera.

Direct: applied to metamorphosis = incomplete.

Directive coloration: directive marks or colors which tend to divert the
attention of an enemy from more vital parts.

Disc: see disk.

Discal: on or relating to the disc of any surface or structure.

Discal area: of a wing applies especially to the more central portion, or
that area covered by the discal cell.

Discal bristles: Diptera; are inserted on the middle of the abdominal
segments before the hind margin.

Discal cell: Lepidoptera; the large or median cell extending from the
base of the wing toward the center: = radial cell (Comst.): in Diptera
(Will.) = 1st medial 2 (Comst.): Odonata; = discoidal areolets, q.v.:
Trichoptera, the cell between the forks of the radial sector, and
separated from the 2d apical cell by a cross-vein.

Discal patch: in some male Hesperidae the oblique streak of
specialized black scales on the disc of the primaries.

Discal vein: Lepidoptera; the cross-vein closing the discal or median
cell extends from radius 5 to media 1.

Disciform: formed or shaped like a disc.

Discocellular nervure or vein: Lepidoptera; = discal vein, q.v.

Discoidal: relating to the disc, or middle = discal.

Discoidal area: the middle area or field: Trichoptera; that area of the
tegmina between the posterior or anal and the anterior or costal areas
= d. field.

Discoidal areolets: Odonata; a varying number of rows of cells on the
outer side of the triangle between the short sector (M 4 of Comst.) and
the upper sector of the triangle (Cu 1 of Comst.) = post-triangular cells
:= discal cells.

Discoidal cell: Hymenoptera (Norton) 1st medial 2, medial 3 and
medial 4 (Comst.).

Discoidal field: see discoidal area.

Discoidal nervule: Lepidoptera; = media 1 (Comst.).

Discoidal triangle: Odonata - see triangle.

Discoidal vein: Diptera (Schiner), = media 2 (Comst.) anterior
intercalary vein (Loew); Hymenopteran (Norton), = media 2 (Comst.),
beyond the junction with the medial cross-vein: Trichoptera; the first
and largest branch of the humeral vein.

Discoideous: =discoidal.

Discolored -orous: a different color from the surrounding, more or less
contrasting; not concolorous.

Discota: insects in which development of the adults is from imaginal
discs: see adiscota.

Discrete: distinctly separated.

Discs: the abdominal motor processes of coleopterous larve.

Discus: a disc; a somewhat flat circular part or area.

Disjoined or Disjointed: see disjunctus.

Disjunct: with head, thorax and abdomen separated by constrictions.

Disjunctus: separated; standing apart.

Disk: the central upper surface of any part; all the area within a
margin; the central area of a wing: in Trichoptera, the obliquely ridged
outer surface of hind femur in saltatoria.

Dislocated: a stria, band or line interrupted in continuity, when the
tips of the interrupted parts are not in a right line with each other.

Disperses: with scattered markings, punctures or other small
sculptures.

Disposed: arranged or laid out.

Dissepiment: a partition wall: applied to the forming septa separating
the coelom-sacs in the embryo; also the thin envelope about the
members in obtect pupae.

Dissilient: bursting open elastically.

Distad: toward the distal end.

Distal: that part of a joint farthest from the body.

Distant: remote from: standing considerably apart.

Distichous: applied to antennae when lateral processes originate at
the apices of the joints and bend forward at acute angles to them.

Distiproboscis: the outer third of the proboscis in Muscid flies, bearing
the labella.

Distychus: bipartite: separated into two parts.

Ditrocha: Hymenoptera; that series having the trochanter two-jointed.

Diurnae: day fliers: applied to butterflies.

Diurnal: such insects as are active or habitually fly by day only.

Divaricable: able to spread apart or divaricate.

Divaricate: straddling or spreading apart: when the wings are lapped
at base and diverge behind: tarsal claws when arising at opposite
sides of the joint and separating widely.

Divergent: spreading out from a common base; in Coleoptera, tarsal
claws are divergent when they spread out only a little; divaricate
when they separate widely.

Diverse: unequal: differing in size or shape: of various kinds.

Diverticulum -la: an oft-shoot from a vessel or from the alimentary
canal usually blind or sac-like: applied to the caecal tubes or
pouches: any extensions or evaginations of the hypodermic.

Dividens (vena): Trichoptera; 1st anal (Comst.).

Dog-ear marks: in bees: small, subtriangular marks of light color,
just below the antennae (Cockerell).

Dolabriform: hatchet-shaped: compressed, with a prominent dilated
keel and cylindrical base.

Dolioloides: applied to obtect or coarctate pupae.

Dominant: a character more constant and conspicuous than any
other: a type or series occurring in large numbers both as to genera,
species and individuals and in which differentiation is yet active.

Dorsad: extending or directed toward the upper side.

Dorsal: of or belonging to the upper surface: in Diptera, that face of
the laterally extended legs visible from above.

Dorsal bristles: see dorso-central.

Dorsal diaphragm: the wings of the heart, or the very thin membrane
upon which these muscles rest: = pericardial diaphragm, q.v.

Dorsal gland orifices: in Diaspinae, oval orifices arranged in more or
less distinct rows on the surface of the pygidium, through which is
discharged the material of which the dorsal scale is formed.

Dorsal glands: see last preceding title.

Dorsal line: in caterpillars, extends longitudinally on the middle of the
back or dorsal.

Dorsal scale: that part of the covering scale of the Diaspinae that lies
above the insect, as opposed to the ventral scale, which lies below.

Dorsal space: in slug-caterpillars is the area between the sub-dorsal
ridges.

Dorsal vessel: the heart; q.v.

Dorsi-meson: the middle of the upper surface.

Dorso-alar region: Diptera; between the transverse suture and the
scutellum on one side and the root of the wing and the dorso-central
region on the other.

Dorso-central bristles: Diptera; two or four longitudinal rows on the
inner part of the dorsal.

Dorso-central region: Diptera; bounded by two imaginary lines drawn
from the scutellar bridges forward, and coinciding with a space free
from bristles that exists on the outer side of the dorsal rows and is
often occupied by a dorsal thoracic stripe.

Dorso-humeral region: Diptera; bounded by the anterior end of thorax
and transverse suture on two sides and by the dorsopleural suture
and dorsocentral region on the two others.

Dorsolum: the mesoscutum.

Dorsopleural suture: Diptera; the lateral suture between dorsal and
pleurum from the humeri through the base of the wing: separates the
mesonotum from the pleura.

Dorso-ventral: in a line from the upper to the lower surface.

Dorsulum: the mesonotum before the scutellum, with the wing
sockets: also, specifically, the meso-scutellum.

Dorsum: the upper surface: in Coleoptera; often confined to
meso- and meta-thorax: Odonata; includes mesepisterna and meso- and
meta-thoracic terga: Diptera; upper surface of thorax, limited by the
dorsopleural sutures laterally, the scutellum posteriorly and the neck
anteriorly: Lepidoptera; the lower or inner margin of the wing.

Draw-thread: the silk-producing gland.

Drone: in Hymenoptera; the male bee.

Duct: a channel, tube or canal for carrying a secretion from a gland to
the point of discharge.

Ductus ejaculatorius: the single duct or tube formed by the union of
the vasa deferentia from each side, through which the seminal fluid is
ejected into the vagina.

Dufour's gland: that gland, in Hymenoptera, that secretes the alkaline
portion of the poison carried by the sting.

Duodenum: the chylific ventricle; also applied to the first section of
the digestive tract just behind entrance of malpighian tubules.

Dupion: a cocoon spun by two silk-worms together; also the coarse
silk from such a cocoon.

Duplicate -us: double.

Duplicate-pectinate: having the branches of a bipectinated antenna
alternately long and short.

Duple: double, or twice.

Durus: hard.

Dusky: somewhat darkened; pale fuscous.




E

E: as prefix, is privative and means without.

Ears: organs of hearing, as on the first tibiae or on the first abdominal
segment of some Trichoptera.

Ebenine: black like ebony.

Eburneous: ivory white.

Ecalcaratus: without a spur.

Ecaudate: without tails or tail-like processes: usually applied
to wings : = excaudate.

Ecdysis: the process of casting the skin; moulting.

Echinate: set with prickles.

Ecology: the science of the relation of organisms to each other and to
their surroundings: = ethology.  {Scanner's comment: Ethology
nowadays refers to studies in animal behaviour,
not directly to ecology.}

Ectad: extending outwardly from within.

Ectal: belonging or relating to the outer surface.

Ectoblast: the outer wall of a cell; the ectoderm or epiblast.

Ectoderm: the outer layer of skin: the outer layer of the blastoderm,
giving rise to the nervous system and to epithelial structures of the
body surface.

Ectognathus: see ectotrophous.

Ectoskeletal: referring to the outside or exoskeleton.

Ectotrachea: the outer surface or layer of the trachea.

Ectotrophous: with mouth parts free; not buried in the head: see
entrotrophus.

Edematus: dull translucent white.

Edentate -ulous: without teeth.

Edentula: those having no teeth.

Efferent: carrying outward or away from the centre.

Effluvium: a foul or unpleasant smell or emanation.

Effected: somewhat angularly bent outward.

Egg: a simple cell, capable of fertilization, containing the germ, the
food-yolk necessary for its nutriment, and a covering membrane: a
single ovum or cell from an ovary: the first stage of the insect.

Egg-burster: a projecting point on the head or other part of an
embryo, used in breaking the shell when hatching.

Egg-calyx: the enlarged portion of the oviduct at the opening of the
ovarian tubes, into which the egg is received before its entrance into
the vagina.

Egg-case: the case or covering prepared or secreted by an insect to
contain or hold together the egg-mass as a whole: see oötheca.

Egg-guide: Orthoptera; two small pointed prolongations of the ventral
portion of the 8th abdominal segment, between upper and lower
valves, used in oviposition.

Egg-pouch: see oötheca.

Egg-pod: applied to the egg-mass of grasshoppers.

Egg-tube: see ovarian tube.

Ejaculatory duct: see ductus ejaculatorius.

Elastic: a part which has a degree of flexibility throughout.

Elate -us: see elevatus.

Elater: the spring or forked tail of Podurids.

Eleutherata: all forms with free, separated maxillae; later, and more
specifically, the Coleoptera.

Elevate -us: a part higher than its surroundings.

Elinguata: without a tongue: forms in which the maxillae are connate
with the labium: see synista.

Ellipsoidal: see elliptical.

Elliptical: oblong-oval, the ends equally rounded, together forming an
even ellipsoid.

Elongata -ate: drawn out; lengthened; much longer than wide.

Elutus: with scarcely distinct markings.

Elytra: the anterior leathery or chitinous wings of beetles, serving as
coverings to the secondaries, commonly meeting in a straight line
down the middle of dorsum in repose: also applied to the tegmina in
Orthoptera.

Elytral ligula: a tongue-like process on the inner face of the side
margin of elytra, to perfect the union with the ventral segments: e.g.
in Dytiscidae.

Elytriform: shaped or appearing like an elytron.

Elytrin: = chitin, q.v.

Elytron: singular of elytra; q.v.

Elytroptera: see Coleoptera.

Emandibulata: that series of insects in which there are no functional
mandibles in any stage.

Emandibulate: lacking functional mandibles; e.g. butterflies and
moths, and applied in any stage.

Emarginate: notched: with an obtuse, rounded or quadrate section cut
from a margin.

Embolium: Heteroptera; the narrow sclerite extending along the
anterior margin of the hemelytra, from base to cuneus or membrane:
the lobes on each side of the prothorax: the special enlargement at the
base of the primaries which fits into a cavity in which the wing is
moved.

Embossed: ornamented with raised figures.

Embryo: the young animal before leaving the body of the parent or
before emerging from the egg.

Embryonic: found in, or relating to the embryo; in an undeveloped
state or condition.

Emmet: an ant.

Empodium: Diptera; the small process between the pulvilli: in
Coleoptera; the bifid pseudotarsi between the claws: used also as =
pulvillus; and see arolium, onychium, palmula, paronychium,
plantula, pseudonychium and pulvillus.

Enarthrosis: an articulation like a ball and socket joint.

Encephalon -um: the brain, or that part of the head containing it.

Encircled: ringed; margined round about.

Endemic: occurring normally where found: native, not introduced.

Endocardium: the inner lining membrane of the heart.

Endochorium: the layer of the allantois that lines the chorium; the
inner layer of the chorium.

Endocranium: the inner surface of the cranium.

Endoderm: the inner layer of the blastoderm in the embryo, giving
origin to the mid-intestine and other visceral organs: see entoderm.

Endolabium: the inner or mouth surface of the labium: the
hypopharynx when that is well developed.

Endomesoderm: the inner layer formed by an invagination of the
middle portion of the primitive band of the embryo, and from which
the endoderm and mesoderm are subsequently differentiated.

Endophytic: living within plant or tree tissue, as borers or miners.

Endoskeletal: relating or referring to the endoskeleton.

Endoskeleton: applied to those chitinous processes extending inward
into the body cavity from the body wall and serving as attachments for
muscles.

Endosternite: that part of the apodeme arising from the intersternal
membrane.

Endothorax: the internal framework or processes of the thorax.

Endotoky: is applied to that form of reproduction where the eggs are
developed within the body of the mother; see exotoky.

Endotrachea: the inner surface or lining of the trachea: see intima.

Enervis: applied to wings without veins of any kind.

Engraved: see exsculptus.

Ensiform: sword-shaped: two-edged, large at base and tapering to the
point: see anceps.

Entad: extending inwardly from without.

Ental: referring to the centre of the body cavity.

Enteric: relating to the digestive canal or enteron.

Enteron: the digestive canal as a whole; a general term.

Entire: with an even unbroken margin: said of wings when they are
not divided or cut into.

Entoderm: the innermost germ layer of the embryo, from which are
derived the epithelium of the alimentary canal and accessory
structures: = endoderm and hypoblast.

Entognathous: see entotrophous.

Entoloma: the inner margin of the wings.

Entomogenous: growing in or on an insect: e.g. fungi.

Entomography: the description of an insect or of its life history.

Entomolin: = chitin, q.v.

Entomologist: one who collects and studies insects.

Entomology: that branch of Zoology that deals with insects and,
specifically, the Hexapods.

Entomophagous: feeding upon insects: specifically applied to those
wasps that feed their young with larvae, etc.

Entomophilous: insect-loving: applied to plants especially adapted for
pollination by insects.

Entomophytous: referring to plants produced in or on an insect: see
Entomogenous.

Entomosis: a disease caused by a parasitic insect.

Entomotaxy: the preservation and preparation of insects for study.

Entomotomy: that science which deals with internal structure of
insects.

Entomotomist: a student of insect structure.

Entosternum: the internal processes from the sternum.

Entothorax: applied to the apodemes or processes extending inwardly
from the sternal sclerites: see apophysis.

Entotrophous: with the mouth parts buried in the head:=
entognathous: see ectotrophous.

Entozoa: those animals that live within the body of others.

Environment: the sum of the influences surrounding or acting upon
an organism.

Enzyme: a ferment secreted by a cell or a gland.

Epalpate: having no palpi.

Ephebic: referring to the winged, adult stage.

Ephemerida: May-flies: an ordinal term used for insects with
net-veined wings, held vertically when at rest, not folded; mouth
mandibulate, not functionally developed: thorax loosely agglutinated;
abdomen with anal filaments: metamorphosis incomplete.

Ephemeroptera: briefly winged: = ephemerida; q.v.

Epiblast: the outer germ layer of the embryo.

Epicranial: relating or pertaining to the epicranium.

Epicranial lobe: in caterpillars, the lateral, superior convex lobe of the
head.

Epicranial plate: in some larvae a plate-like structure forming the
epicranium.

Epicranial suture: the line of junction of the two procephalic lobes.

Epicranium: the upper part of the head from the front to the neck:
often used to include front, vertex and genae:= calva.

Epideme: see articulatory epideme.

Epiderma -is: the cellular layer of the skin, underlying and secreting
the cuticula: incorrectly applied to the outer skin or cuticle.

Epidermata: abnormal excrescences or outgrowths from the skin.

Epididymis: the convoluted efferent ducts, massed at the posterior
part of the testes.

Epigastrium: the first entire ventral sclerite of the abdomen.

Epigenesis: the doctrine of growth from an undifferentiated germ, as
opposed to preformation, which implies development from already
existing rudiments.

Epigenetic: the period after the union of the male and female
elements, during which organs are forming.

Epiglossa: = epipharynx;  q.v.

Epiglottis: = epipharynx; q.v.

Epilabrum: a sclerite at each side of the labrum: specifically applied
in myriapods.

Epilobe: of mentum in Carabidae, really corresponds to a partially
divided ligula: a lateral appendage of a bilobed mentum.

Epimera -eron: the posterior lateral thoracic sclerites; usually small,
narrow or triangular.

Epiopticon: the second ganglionic swelling of the optic tract: see
opticon.

Epipharyngeal: belonging or relating to the epipharynx.

Epipharyngeal sclerites: in bees; a pair of strap-like pieces extending
backward from the two sides of the base of epipharynx: see
hypopharyngeal sclerites.

Epipharynx: an organ, probably of taste, attached to the inner surface
of the labium and supposed to correspond to the palate of higher
animals Epiglossa or epiglottis.

Epiphysis: a lappet-like process covering an excavation on the fore
tibia of many Lepidoptera.

Epipleural: the deflexed or inflexed portions of the elytra, immediately
beneath the edge: the inflexed portions of the pronotum are
sometimes called prothoracic epipleura: as generally used, the term is
incorrectly applied to the entire bent under margin of the elytra.

Epipleural fold: the raised lower edge of the epipleura: see hypomera.

Epiploön: see caul.

Epipygium: the dorsal arch of the last abdominal segment.

Episternites: the upper pair of corneous appendages forming the
ovipositor in grasshoppers.

Episternum: the anterior and larger lateral thoracic sclerite between
the sternum and notum.

Epistoma -is: the lower face between the mouth and eyes: that sclerite
immediately behind or above the labrum, whether it be clypeus or an
intermediate piece: in Diptera, that part of the face between the front
and the labrum; the oral margin and an indefinite space immediately
contiguous thereto and so = peristoma: in Odonata; = clypeus: =
hypostoma.

Epithelium: the layer of cells which covers a surface or lines a cavity.

Epizoa: insects that infest the body surface of animals.

Epizoötic: living or parasitic on animals from the outside or on the
surface.

Epomiae: the elevated margin of an oblique furrow in the propleurae
for the reception of the front femora; Hymenoptera.

Epupillate: an ocellate spot included by a colored ring, but destitute of
a pupil or central spot.

Equal: of the same length, size or shape: the superfices when they are
without inequalities.

Equitant: laminated: folding one upon the other.

Erect: standing upright; not necessarily perpendicular.

Erectile: capable of being erected; applied to an appendage, a hair or
other process, or to any tissue which may be distended and made
rigid.

Erecto-patent: the wings of Hesperids when at rest; primaries erect,
secondaries horizontal.

Eremochaetus: Diptera in which there is a general absence of bristles.

Ergatandrous: applied to ants with worker-like males.

Ergatogynous: applied to ants with worker-like females.

Ergatoid: sexually capable, wingless ants, resembling workers.

Ericeticolous: living in poor, sandy or gravelly places.

Eroded -sus: gnawed; a margin with irregular teeth and
emarginations.

Eruca: broadly a larva: more specifically a caterpillar.

Eruciform: like a caterpillar in form or appearance.

Erucina: the caterpillar-like larvae of sawflies and the like.

Erucivorous: a feeder on caterpillars; said of parasites.

Erythrinus: red; nearly arterial blood-red: carmine, a little diluted.

Erythrinus: deep brick-red, tending to blood-red [vermilion with a little
Indian red].

Escutcheon: the scutellum in Coleoptera.

Essential character: see specific character.

Ethology: see ecology.

Eucephalous: with a well-developed head, bearing the normal
appendages: applied to certain dipterous larvae.

Eucone: a compound eye in which the individual ocelli have
crystalline cones see acone.

Euorthoptera: the Orthoptera excluding the Dermaptera.

Euplexoptera: with beautifully folded wings: an ordinal term applied
to the ear-wigs.

Eous or -eus: as a suffix, indicates the possession of the quality of the
stem word: e.g. membraneous, like a membrane in texture.

Eutracheata: applied to articulates which, like the insects, have a
well-developed tracheal system.

Evaginate: extruded by eversion; turned inside out when extruded.

Evagination: an extrusion formed by eversion or turning inside out.

Evanescent: disappearing; becoming gradually less.

Eversible: capable of being turned inside out.

Evident: easily seen or recognized.

Ex: prefix = A and E as privatives: also means from or out of.

Exarate -us: sulcated: sculptured.

Exarticulate: without distinct joints.

Exasperate -us: rough with irregular elevations.

Excalcarate: without spurs.

Excaudate: see ecaudate.

Excavate: with a depression that is not the segment of a circle.

Excentric: not in the centre; revolving or arranged about a point that
is not central.

Excision: with a deep cut: a notch or other cut-out part.

Excrementaceous -titious: made up of or resembling excrement.

Excrescence: an outgrowth or elevation; usually abnormal.

Excretion: the act of getting rid of waste products: any material or
substance produced by any secretory glands or structures and which
is voided or otherwise sent out from them.

Excretory: those structures concerned in ridding the body of waste
products.

Excurrent: attenuate, narrowly prolonged.

Excurved: curved outwards.

Ex larva: from or out of the larva: usually applied to specimens that
have been bred from collected larvae.

Exochorion: that part of the chorion derived from the ectoderm: the
outer layer of the chorion.

Exochorium: Heteroptera; a narrow marginal part of the hemelytra.

Exoderm: the outer skin or crust.

Exoloma: the apical margin of the wings.

Exophytic: relating to the outside of plant tissue.

Exoskeleton: the entire body wall, to the inner side of which muscles
are attached.

Exotic: not a natives of the place where found: an introduced species:
also any species occurring in any country outside of the limits of the
country whose fauna is under consideration.

Exotoky: is applied to that form of reproduction where the eggs are
developed outside of the body of the insect and without care by the
mother see endotoky.

Ex ova: from or out of the egg: applied to specimens that have been
bred from the egg stage.

Expanded: spread or flattened out: applied to Lepidoptera when set for
the cabinet.

Expanse: the distance between the apices or other widest point of the
wings when fully spread.

Expansio alarum: the wing stretch; see expanse.

Expiratory: relating to the act of expiration, when the abdomen is
contracted and the air contained in the abdominal tracheae is
presumably forced out of them.

Explanate: spread out and flattened; applied to a margin.

Explicate: unfolded; open; without folds or plica.

Exsculptate -tus: a surface with irregular, more or less longitudinal
depressions, as if carved.

Exscutellate: having no scutel.

Exserted: protruded; projecting beyond the body or over a given point.

Exsertion: a protrusion: an extension of a line or other ornamentation
beyond its ordinary course.

Extended: spread out: not lying one upon the other.

Extense: extended: expanded.

Extension plate: a structure at the base of the pulvillus whose
function it is to extend it.

Extension sole: the pad-like pulvillus which may be extended by the
extension plate through the pressure plate.

Extensor: that which extends or straightens out; applied to muscles.

Extenuate: to make or to become weak, thin or slender.

Exterior: the outside.

Exterior margin: the outer margin; sometimes used for costal margin.

External: belonging to or on the outside.

External area: Hymenoptera; the upper of the three cells or areas of
the metanotum, between the median and lateral longitudinal carina,
first lateral basal area.

External median area: Hymenoptera; the median of the three cells or
areas between the median and lateral longitudinal carinae: = second
lateral area.

Externomedial vein: in Hymenoptera (Norton) = radius (Comst.); in
Orthoptera, = media (Comst.).

Externo-median nerve: the humeral and discoidal veins together.

Extra-ocular: remote from or beyond the eyes.

Extremity: the point most remote from base.

Extrorse -um: toward the outside.

Extrude: to turn or force out.

Exude: to ooze or flow slowly through minute openings.

Exuvia -iae -ium: the cast skin of a larval insect: in Diaspinae the
larval skin when cast and incorporated in the scale.

Exuviate: to cast the skin: to moult.

Exuviation: the act of molting: the cast-off skin or exuvium.

Eyes: the organs of sight, composed of numerous facets, situated, one
on each side of the head: the term is properly applied to compound
eyes only but is sometimes used to designate also the simple eyes or
ocelli.




F

Face or Facies: the upper or outer surface of any part or appendage:
the front of the head between the compound eyes above the mouth to
the vertex; usually applied to insects in which the head is -vertical:
in bees extends between the eyes to the base of the antennae; in the
Hymenoptera generally the area between antenne and clypeus: in
flies the area between base of antennae, the oral margin, eyes and
cheeks.

Facet: a small face or surface: one of the parts, areas or lens-like
divisions of the compound eye.

Facial angle: the angle formed by the junction of the face and vertex.

Facial bristles: Diptera; a series on either side of the middle portion of
the face, above the vibrissae, along the facialia.

Facial carinae: applied to both the carinae of the frontal costa and the
accessory (lateral) carinae of the face; but usually restricted to the
accessory carinae in Orthoptera.

Facial depression: = antennal fovea, q.v.

Facialium -ia: Diptera; that portion of the face between the lower part
of the frontal fissure and the antennal fovea.

Facial quadrangle: in bees; the quadrangle bounded laterally by the
eyes, above by a line between their summits and below by a similar
line between their lowest points.

Facial ridges: Diptera; the elevated lateral borders of antennal grooves.

Facial tubercle: Diptera; a median convexity below middle of face.

Facies: the face: the general appearance or impression.

Falcate: sickle-shaped; convexly curved: a wing when deeply
excavated below the apex so as to leave the latter acute and a little
curved.

Falciform: curved like a sickle.

False legs: = spurious legs; = prolegs; q.v.

Family: a division of classification including a number of genera
agreeing in one or a set of characters and so closely related that they
are apparently descended from one stem: opinionative and indicated
by the termination idae.

Farctus: fully filled.

Farinaceous: mealy: applied to powdery looking wings and surfaces.

Farinose: dotted with many single, flour-like spots: mealy.

Fascia: a transverse band or broad line; it is common when it crosses
both wings or wing covers.

Fasciate: banded transversely.

Fascicle -ulus: a bundle of hair, threads or fibres.

Fasciculate: bundled; clustered as in a bundle; tufted: a surface
when covered with bundles of long hair.

Fastigiate: flat-topped and of equal height: also applied to elytra that
extend a little beyond the abdomen.

Fastigium: Orthoptera; the extreme point or front of vertex.

Fat-body: is the mass of oil or fat cells found, especially in larvae,
surrounding the alimentary canal and some other internal organs.

Fatiscent: with cracks, crevices or openings.

Fauna: the assemblage of animals inhabiting a region or country.

Favose: with large deep holes, like the cells of a honeycomb.

Favus: a cell like that of a honeycomb.

Fecula: the excrement of insects.

Fecundation: the making fertile; as an egg by a spermatozoön.

Feeler: commonly applied to antennae; q.v.

Feelers: tactile organs: the term is usually applied to the
antennae, but sometimes to the palpi, as mouth-feelers.

Feet: the legs or organs of locomotion; one pair attached to each
thoracic segment; composed of coxa, trochanter, femur, tibia and
tarsus only; plural of foot; q.v.

Female: designated by "O+" the astronomical sign for Venus: that
sex in which the ova are developed. {Scanner's comment: The sign
for Venus being an orthogonal  cross or plus sign hanging vertically
below a circle.}

Femina: the female, or belonging to that sex.

Femorate -us: with abnormal or unusually developed femora or
thighs.

Femoro-tibial: pertaining to both femur and tibia or to the articulation
between them.

Femur -ora: the thigh: usually the stoutest segment of the leg,
articulated to the body through trochanter and coxa and bearing the
tibia at its distal end: in Coccidae and quite commonly, the femur
and trochanter are considered as one, for measuring purposes.

Fenestra: a window; a transparent glassy spot or mark; a pellucid
mark in a vein: a small, pale, membranous area at the base of the
antenna in roaches.

Fenestrate: with transparent or window-like naked spots as in the
wings of some Lepidoptera.

Fenestrate membrane: of the compound eye is at the base of the
ommatidia, at their junction with the optic nerve; see retina.

Ferreous -eus: the metallic gray of polished iron.

Ferrugineous -ous, -eus, -osus: rusty red-brown [Dragon's blood, but
brighter].

Ferrugino-testaeeous: a rusty yellow brown: a mixture of rusty red
with dull yellow brown.

Fertilization: takes place when a spermatozoön enters through the
micropyle of an ovum and unites with the cell nucleus: loosely
applied like copulation or to its completion.

Festivus: variegated with bright colors.

Festooned: arranged in loops as if hung from nails.

Fibre: a thread-like structure of any tissue.

Fibrilla: rod or sliver-like nerve elements, often grouped like a bundle
of short threads.

Fibrin: a proteid compound making up a large part of the muscular
tissue: also found in blood and other body liquids.

Fibrinogen: a proteid substance of the blood and other body fluids,
concerned in the production of fibrin.

Fibroin: a chemical compound found in silk, cobwebs and the like.

Fifth longitudinal vein: Diptera (Will.); = media 3 (Comst.).

Filament: a thread: a long slender process of equal diameter
throughout: an elongated appendage.

Filariasis: a disease caused by the presence of minute worms or
Filaria, transmitted by mosquitoes. {Scanner's comment: Nowadays
it is known that many kinds of filariasis are transmitted by other
species of flies, in particular Simuliidae and Tabanidae}

Filate: Diptera; antennae that are simple, without lateral hair or
dilation: thread-like.

Filator: the silk spinning structure of caterpillars.

File: the diagonal ridged vein near the base of the tegmina in crickets,
used in stridulating: in general any structure wherever situated that
serves the same purpose.

Filicornia: insects with thread-like antennae; e.g. in Coleopteran, the
Carabidae.

Filiform: thread-like: slender and of equal diameter.

Filippi's glands: a pair of secondary glands, opening into the silk
glands of caterpillars near their anterior end.

Fillet: a transverse, raised structure between the antennae in
Lepidoptera.

Filose: ending in a thread-like process.

Fimbria: thick, ciliated hair at the termination of any part: fringes.

Fimbriate: a margin or process when set with a fringe of hair closely
placed.

Finger: of maxilla, is the digitus, q.v.

First clypeus: see post clypeus.

First inner apical nervure: in Hymenoptera (Nort.); is cubitus 1, from
media 4, to first anal (Comst.).

First lateral suture: Odonata; starts from beneath base of front wing
behind humeral suture and meets it behind second coxa.

First longitudinal vein: in Diptera; - radius 1 (Comst.).

First submarginal cross-nervure: Hymenoptera; part of the media and
the radio-medial cross vein (Comst.).

Fissate: divided or split: with fissures or cracks.

Fissile -is: cleft or divided; as the wings in plume-moths: also used
for lamellate.

Fissiparous: applied to that form of asexual generation in which the
parent divides; each part becoming a new individual.

Fissure: a crevice: a narrow longitudinal opening: a slit.

Fissus: cleft: longitudinally divided nearly to base.

Fistula: a slender tube: specifically applied to the channel formed by
the union of the two parts of proboscis in Lepidoptera.

Fistular: like a slender, cylindrical tube.

Flabellate: with long flat processes folding like a fan.

Flabelliform: fan-shaped.

Flabellum: a fan: a leafed structure: the transparent lobe at the end of
the glossa in bees: also used as = flagellum; q.v.

Flabs: the lobes at the tip of the dipterous mouth:= labella; q.v.

Flaccid: feeble: limber: lax.

Flagelliform: whip-like; applied to a process.

Flagellum: that part of the antenna beyond the pedicel: a whip or
whip-like process: the tail-like process of a spermatozoön.

Flammate -eus: flaming or fiery red [vermilion intensified].

Flange: a projecting rim or edge.

Flank: the sides of the thorax: the pleura.

Flaring: widening out like the mouth of a trumpet.

Flavescent: somewhat yellow.

Flavid: yellowed: sulphur yellow.

Flavo-testaceous: light yellow-brown: almost luteous.

Flavous -us: sulphur yellow [gamboge].

Flavo-vixens: green verging upon yellow [apple green + chrome yellow].

Flex: to bend: to curve back.

Flexible: pliable; with elastic properties.

Flexile -is: capable of being bent at an angle without breaking:
flexible.

Flexuous -ose: almost zig-zag, without acute angles but more acute at
angles than undulating: differs from sinuate in being alternately bent
and nearly straight.

Flexor: that which bends; applied to muscles.

Flocculus -i: a hairy or bristly appendage on the posterior coxa of
some Hymenoptera.

Floccus: a tuft of wool or wool-like hair.

Flosculiferous: species that bear a flosculus.

Flosculus: a small, tubular lunulate anal organ with a central style, in
certain Fulgorids.

Fluviatile: inhabiting the margins of running streams.

Fly-blows: eggs or young maggots of flesh flies: meat is fly-blown
when such eggs or larvae have been deposited on it.

Flying-hairs: very long slender surface hairs set in punctures.

Foetid glands: glandular structures from which a foul smelling liquid
may be ejected.

Foliaceous: leaf-like, or resembling a leaf.

Folioles: leaf-like processes from a margin or protuberance.

Follicle: = cocoon, q.v.: a cellular sac or tube, as of a gland or ovary.

Folliculate: enclosed in a case, cocoon or follicle.

Food reservoir: Lepidoptera, a blind sac or diverticulum from the bind
part of oesophagus lying in abdomen dorsal to the stomach.

Foot: the tarsus, q.v.; improperly used to = leg; but in the plural form
refers to legs rather than tarsi: see feet.

Foot-shield: in caterpillars, the chitinous plate on outer side of
abdominal feet.

Foot-stalk: of the maxilla, is the stipes.

Foramen: an opening in the body wall for the passage of a vessel or
nerve: any opening at an apex: the opening of a cocoon.

Foramen magnum; the opening on the posterior surface of the head to
give passage to those structures that extend from head to thorax
occipital foramen.

Foramina: small openings in the body wall: in Orthoptera, the
auditory organs on the anterior tibiae.

Forceps: hook or pincer-like processes terminating the abdomen, like
specialized appendages of ear-wigs: similar processes in the male,
used as clasping organs in copulation.

Forcipate: bearing forceps or similar structures.

Forcipiform: having the form of forceps or pincers.

Fore: anterior.

Foregut: extends from the mouth to the end of gizzard; its epithelium
being formed from the ectodermal invagination known as the
stomodaeum.

Forehead: in Mallophaga, the head in front of the mandibles and
antennae.

Fore-intestine: =foregut, q.v.

Forficate: = forcipate, q.v.

Forks: Trichoptera; forks of veins in apical part of wing,
numbered 1, 2, 3, etc.


Form: applied to representatives of a species which differ from the
normal or type, in some uniform character; it is seasonal if it occurs
at a period different from the type; dimorphic if there is an alternation
of generations or two color patterns occur; or sexual if the members of
one sex differ uniformly from those of the other.

Formic: of, pertaining to or derived from ants.

Formicary: an ant's nest or ant-hill.

Fornicate: arched or vaulted: concave within, convex without.

Fossa -ae: = fossula; q.v.

Fossoria: burrowers: in Orthoptera, the mole crickets and allies; in
Hymenoptera, the digging wasps.

Fossorial: formed for or with the habit of digging or burrowing.

Fossula -ae: a deep groove or sinus with sharp edges: specifically
applied to grooves on the head or sides of prothorax in which the
antennae are concealed.

Fossulate: a surface with oblong impressions.

Fossulet: an elongated, shallow groove.

Fourth longitudinal vein: Diptera (Will.), = media 2 (Comst.).

Fovea, Foveola -ae: a shallow depression with well-marked sides: a pit.

Foveate: with foveae or pit-like depressions.

Foveolate: with shallow cavities like a honey-comb.

Fractus: broken: also applied to a geniculate antenna.

Fragile: easily breakable: thin and brittle.

Frass: the excrement; usually the excreted pellets of caterpillars.

Free: unrestricted in movement: not firmly joined with or united to
any other part: said of pupae when all the parts and appendages are
separately encased as in Coleopteran.

Frenatae: that series of Lepidoptera in which a more or less
well-marked frenulum occurs.

Frenate: having a frenulum.

Frenulum: the spine, simple in males, compound in females, arising
from the base of secondaries in many Lepidoptera, whose function it is
to unite the wings in flight: in Cicada the triangular lateral piece on
the mesonotum which connects with the trochlea: the anal area of
secondaries and thus = tendo, q.v.

Frenulum hook: in the males of frenate Lepidoptera, a hook or fold
into which the frenulum is fitted.

Frenum: that which holds things together: a lunate or triangular
portion at the inner and hinder base of the wing in Odonata and
Trichoptera; see tendo.

Fringe -es: an edging of hair, scales or other processes extending well
beyond the margin and usually of even length: in Lepidoptera, fringes
occur on the outer margins of all wings and consist of scales or hair
projecting beyond the wing membrane.

Frog: the articular pan, - q.v.

Frons: = front; q.v.

Front: the anterior portion of head between base of antennae and
below ocelli: in Homoptera, the vertical median area of face.

Frontal: referring to the front of head or anterior aspect of any part.

Frontal costa: Orthoptera, a prominent vertical ridge of bead which
may be median or lateral: see median carina and lateral carina.

Frontal fastigium: in Orthoptera, that process of the face extending
dorsad between the antennae and meeting or nearly meeting the
fastigium of the vertex in Tettigidae.

Frontal fissure: Diptera; the impressed line extending from the frontal
lunule to the border of the mouth.

Frontal lobes: in Psyllidae, two lobes or swellings more or less
completely divided by a suture in which an ocellus is situated.

Frontal lunule: Diptera; an oval or crescentic space above the base of
antennae in Cyclorrhapha, bounded by the frontal suture.

Frontal processes: Diptera; = antennal process, q.v.

Frontal ridge: in Coleopteran; a sharp ridge on the dorsal margin of
the eye, extending forward.

Frontal stripe: Diptera; the middle of the front when membranous or
discolored: = vitta frontalis.

Frontal suture: Diptera; separates the frontal lunule from that part of
the head above it: in Coleopteran; = clypeal suture.

Frontal tubercles: in certain Aphids, are raised structures upon which
the antennae are placed.

Frontal triangle: Diptera; the triangular space in males, between the
eyes below, limited by a line drawn through base of antennae.

Frontal vesicle: in Odonata; that elevated area on the vertex upon
which the ocelli are situated.

Fronto-orbital bristles: in Diptera; are placed on each side of the front,
just below the vertical bristles.

Fugitive: soon disappearing; not permanent.

Fulcrant: the trochanter when continued along the femur, as in
Carabids.

Fulcrum: the chitinous envelope at the base of mouth in Diptera and
Hymenoptera, covering the beginning of the oesophagus: any
structure that serves as a support to another..

Fulgidus: shining.

Fuliginous -osus: sooty or smoky brown
[Van Dyke brown + a little black].

Fulvo-aeneous: brazen, with a touch of brownish yellow [brown pink].

Fulvous -us: tawny; light brown with much yellow; nearly orange
[pale cadmium yellow + Indian red].


Fumate -us: smoky gray [gray].

Fumose: smoky.

Function: the work or duty which a given part or organ normally
performs.

Fungicolous: living in or on fungi.

Funicle: the joints between the scape and club in Funiculate
antennae: a small cord: a slender stalk.

Funiculate: whip-like: long, slender, composed of many flexible joints.

Funicule: a small, cord-like structure; especially when sheathed.

Funiculus: the main tendon of abdomen: in Hymenoptera a slender
ligament connecting the propodeum to petiole on its dorsal aspect.

Furca: a fork: the anal appendage used for leaping in Thysanura; see
furcula: the forked ental processes of the sternum.

Furcal orifice: see sternal into orifice.

Furcate: forked; divided nto two approximately equal divisions.

Furcula: a forked process: an osmaterium {Scanner's comment:
sic. See comment under "osmaterium".}: in Collembola the spring or
saltatory appendage borne by the fourth abdominal segment: in
Orthoptera, a pair of backwardly directed appendages which overlie in
a more or less forked position the base of the supra-anal plate.

Furred: covered with dense hair resembling fur.

Fuscescent: becoming brown; with a brown shading.

Fusco-ferruginous: brownish rust red.

Fuseo-piceous: pitch black with a brown tinge or admixture.

Fuseo-rufous: red-brown, approaching liver brown.

Fuseo-testaceous: dull reddish brown [brown ocher].

Fuscous -us: dark brown, approaching black; a plain mixture of
black and red [crimson lake + black].

Fused: run together: applied when two normally separated markings
become confluent and have a common outline.

Fusiform: spindle-shaped: tapering gradually to each end.

Fusulus: = spinneret, q.v.






G

Gales: the outer lobe of the maxilla, usually two-jointed, often
hood-like, subject to great modifications in Hymenoptera and
Diptera, and forms the coiled tongue in Lepidoptera.

Galeotheca: that part of the pupal case that covers the gales.

Gall: an abnormal swelling or excrescence on a plant, produced by an
insect: = cecidium.

Gallicolous: dwellers in galls, whether as producers or inquilines.

Gallivorous: feeding upon galls or gall tissue.

Gamogenesis: reproduction through fertilization: see agamogenesis.

Ganglion -ia: a nerve centre composed of a cell mass and fibres: the
white disc-like bodies connected by a double cord, lying above the
ventral surface within the body and forming the centre of the nervous
system.

Gasterotheca: that part of the pupa case that covers the abdomen.

Gastric: of or belonging to the belly or to the stomach.

Gastric caeca: = caecum; q.v.

Gastro-coeli: a pair of usually transverse lateral pits near the base of
the second abdominal tergite in some Hymenoptera.

Gastro-ileal folds: occur in some insects at the junction of the chylific
ventricle with the ileum and serve as a valve.

Gastrula: that embryonic stage resembling a sac, with an outer layer
of epiblastic cells and an inner layer of hypoblastic cells.

Gastrulation: the process of forming a gastrula.

Gathering hairs: the soft, flattened, often hooked hairs on the tongue
of bees and other Hymenoptera; = hooked hairs.

Gelatinous: of a jelly-like texture or consistency: viscid.

Geminate: arranged in pairs composed of two similar parts: doubled.

Gemmate -us: marked with metallic or bright colored spots.

Gemmiparous: applied to that form of asexual reproduction where
new individuals arise as buds from the germ body of the parent.

Gena -ae: the cheeks; includes that portion of the head on each side
below the eyes, and extends to the gular suture: in Odonata the area
between the eyes and clypeus and mouth parts: in Diptera the space
between the lower border of the eye and oral margin, merging into face
at front and limited by the occipital margin behind.

Genal bristles: Diptera; are on the cheeks near lower corner of eye.

Generalized: primitive: containing in combination characters that are
separated and specialized in other forms.

Generation: used as the equivalent of brood; q.v.

Genicular arc: Orthoptera; a curved dark marking on the posterior
knee-joint.

Geniculate: knee jointed: abruptly bent in an obtuse angle.

Geniculum: a little knee or bend.

Genital armature: all the processes concerned in copulation.

Genital hamule: a little hook or plate covering the anal cavity of the
male: the supra-anal or genital hook: in Lepidoptera, the uncut: in
Odonata, in the plural, one or two pairs of lateral processes of the
male genitalia on the ventral surface of the second abdominal
segment.

Genital hook: = genital hamule.

Genitalia: the external organs of generation with all appendages.

Genital lobes: in Odonata, a pair of-backward and downwardly
directed processes from the 2d abdominal segment, between which
the vesicle of the penis lies.

Genital papilla: in some Smynthurids, a tubercular elevation upon
which the genital aperture opens.

Genital spike: the sheath of penis which, in male Diaspinae takes the
form of a long mucronate spike.

Genital tuft: in Lepidoptera; an expansible tuft of fine hair believed to
be scent-producing.

Genital valve: Odonata; a chitinous piece on each side of the
ovipositor, derived from the sternum of abdominal segment 9:
probably = outer pair of gonapophyses.

Genoholotype: the species on which a genus is founded, whether
unique or one of a series, specifically named as generic type by the
author.

Genolectotype: the one species of a series selected as the type of the
genus in which the describer of the genus placed it, subsequent to
the description.

Genosyntype: one of a series of species upon which a genus is
founded, no one species being mentioned as type.

Genus: knee; the joint between femur and tibia.

Genus: an assemblage of species agreeing in some one character or
series of characters; usually considered as arbitrary and opinionative,
though some consider it a natural assemblage.

Geometrid: larva which, when walking, alternately elevate and
straighten the middle of their body: opposed to rectigrade; q.v.

Geodephagous: = adephagous; q.v.

Geodromica: terrestrial Heteroptera in which the antennae are not
concealed.

Geophilous: living on the ground: species that live on the surface or
come freely into contact with it.

Germanium: an ovary: that portion of an ovarian tube containing the
cell elements.

Germ-ball: reproductive cells in larvae from which, exceptionally,
young may develop as buds.

Germ-band or Germinal band: that portion of a young embryo which
is to become the future insect, when it is in the form of a band or
strap and may or may not show the division into the future segments.

Gerontogeic: belonging to the old world: see neogeic.

Gibba: a rounded protuberance or prominence.

Gibbous: hump-backed; protuberant: said of a macula when it
resembles a moon more than half full.

Gibbus: when the whole surface forms a hump or obtuse cone.

Gills: respiratory structures which function in water; distinguished as
true or blood gills where contained blood conveys the absorbed oxygen
from the gill to the tissues, and as tracheal gills when this conveyance
is by contained tracheae.

Gilvus: = flavus; q.v.

Ginglymus: a hinge joint that permits flexion in one plane.

Gizzard: a pouch-like structure between the crop and chylific ventricle
furnished with chitinous teeth or plates, in which the food is prepared
for the digestive juices by grinding or merely sifting = cardia.

Glaber-rous: smooth; free from all vestiture.

Gland: a cellular sac which separates or secretes from the blood
specific portions to produce characteristic products - e.g. wax,
saliva, silk, etc.

Gland-bearing prominence: in Diaspinae a prominence on the margin,
bear-ing a gland opening on the dorsal surface.

Gland orifice: in Coccidae, the external opening through which a gland
pours its secretions.

Gland spines: in Coccidae; spiny appendages, each of which is
supplied with a single gland whose opening is at the tip.

Glandular: having the character or function of a gland: used as
descriptive of specialized hairs, spines or other processes.

Glassy: transparent; glass-like in appearance.

Glaucus: shining sea-green: whitish blue inclining to gray lavender.

Globose: formed like a globe or sphere.

Globulin; an albumenoid proteid compound formed in the blood of
insects.

Glochis: a barbed point.

Glomerate: congregated or massed together.

Glossa: the inner lobe of second maxilla, corresponding to the lacing
of first maxilla: loosely used as a synonym for tongue: especially
applied to the coiled structure of the Lepidoptera; see also ligula.

Glossarium: Diptera; the labrum-epipharynx; q.v.

Glossata: a Fabrician term for Lepidoptera.

Glossate: furnished with a spiral tongue.

Glossotheca: that part of the pupa which covers the tongue.

Glutinose -ous: slimy; viscid.

Gnathal: relating or pertaining to the jaws.

Gnathite: a jaw or jaw-like appendage; in the plural, the mouth parts.

Gnathochilarium: a plate formed by the labial structures.

Gnathopoda: the arthropods: the first pair of legs; especially applied
in crustaceans: mouth feet.

Goffered: a surface with regular impressions, closely set, and
separated by narrow ridges: reticulated.

Gonapophyses: three pairs of processes in the Orthoptera, one arising
from the eighth and two from the ninth abdominal segment op the
ventral surface. They appear to = the rhabdites composing the
ovipositor of other insects.

Gonyodon: a tooth-like articulated process at the apex of the femur in
some Noctuidae.

Gonytheca: articulating surface of femur to which the tibia is joined.

Gorgeret: the barbed sting of the honey bee.

Gracile: slender; graceful.

Gradate -vim: one grade or step at a time: to arrange in a series: to
blend so as to merge one into the other - e.g. colors.

Gradate veins: a transverse series of veins, each before or beyond the
next.

Grammineus: grass-green [apple green].

Granose: like a string of beads; moniliform.

Granulated: covered with small grains.

Granule: a little grain or grain-like elevation.

Granulose: roughened with granules or made up of distinct grains.

Gregarious: living in societies or communities; but not social.

Grège: raw silk, including the gummy outer layer, as spun by a
caterpillar.

Grès: the gummy layer surrounding the silk thread spun by a
caterpillar.

Gressorious -vial: with legs fitted for walking: in Lepidoptera; the
anterior legs aborted, the others fitted for walking.

Griscent: ashen gray.

Griseus: light gray; a mixture of white and black [gray].

Group: a division of classification used indefinitely for a series
of allied species, genera or larger assemblages.

Grouped glands: see circumgenital glands.

Grub: an insect larva: a term loosely applied, but more specifically to
larvae of Coleopteran and Hymenoptera.

Guanin: a white amorphous compound which occurs in the
transparent areas of some wings, giving a milky tinge, and is also
found in the photogenic organs of Lampyridae: an excretory
substance, composition C5H5N5O (von Furth).

Guest: applied to those insects that live in nests or dwelling places of
other species, not necessarily at the expense of the host.

Gula: the throat: that sclerite forming the central portion of the head
beneath, extending from the submental to the posterior margin, and
laterally bounded by the genae.

Gular peduncle: in Coleopteran = submental peduncle.

Gular suture: the line of division between the gulag or throat and the
gene or cheeks.

Gulf strip: see semitropical or gulf strip.

Gullet: = oesophagus; q.v.

Gulo-mental: includes the region covered by the gulag and mentum.

Gustatory: elating to the sense of taste.

Gutta: a light spot on a dark ground.

Guttate: with light spots or drops on a dark ground.

Gymnocerata: insects with freely movable, conspicuous antennae: see
cryptocerata.

Gymnogastra: Hymenoptera; species in which the venter is visible: see
cryptogastra.

Gymnoptera: species with membranous wings not covered with scales.

Gynandromorphic: when an individual of one sex exhibits on one
lateral half the organic characters of the other, more or less
completely.

Gyri-cerebrales: lobes of the oesophageal ganglion of the embryo,
connected with the primary lobe: = stalked bodies.




H

Habena: a fascia on the thorax.

Habit -us: the port or aspect: used to express a resemblance in
general appearance.

Habitat; abbreviated Hab.: the region or place which an insect
inhabits or where it was taken.

Haemoglobin: the coloring matter of blood which serves to carry
oxygen.

Haemolymph: the watery blood or lymph-like nutritive fluid of the
lower invertebrates.

Haemoxanthine: a dissolved albuminoid in the insect blood, which
has both a respiratory and nutritive function.

Hair: a slender, flexible filament of equal diameter.

Hairy: covered or clothed with hair.

Halophilous: species living in salt marshes, or near the sea.

Halterata: the Diptera.

Halteres: the poisers or balancers: capitate movable filaments in
Diptera, situated one on each side of the thorax and representing
rudimentary hind wings.

Halteriptera: the Diptera.

Hamule -us: furnished with hooks, or bent like a hook.

Hammock: the hammock-like covering of the caterpillars of certain
moths. Hamule: a little hook.

Hamuli: Odonata; one or two pairs of hooked processes projecting
from the ventral surface of the 2d abdominal segment of the male;
usually termed genital hamules: in Hymenoptera; minute hooks on
the anterior margin of secondaries used to unite them in flight with
the inner margin of primaries: in tree crickets, hook-like processes of
the male genitalia.

Hamus: Lepidoptera; a hook or loop attached to the under side of
costal margin of primaries near base, to receive the frenulum of male
moths.

Harpago -ones: the inner basal lobes of the clasping organs of d
culicids also, more generally = harpes.

Harpes: the lateral pieces of the male genitalia in Lepidoptera, used as
clasping organs: also applied to the corneous hooks often borne by
these lateral pieces, which are then termed valves; see clasper: in
culicids an articulated process, sometimes jointed, at the base of inner
side of side-piece, below and exterior to the harpagones.

Hastate: halbert-shaped: excavated at base and sides but with
spreading lobes or angles.

Hastiform: = hastate.

Hatched: closely marked with numerous short, transverse lines.

Hatching spines: = egg burster; q.v.

Haustellate: formed for sucking: applied chiefly to mouth structures.

Haustellum: a sucker: applied to that portion of the mouth of a
sucking insect through which liquid food is drawn into the gullet.

Head: the first or anterior region of the insect body, articulated at its
base to the thorax, bearing the mouth structures and antennae. It is
now believed to be made up of seven primitive segments, named in
order: 1, the ocular or protocerebral; 2, the antenna or deutocerebral;
3, second antenna or tritocerebral; 4, mandibular; 5, superlingual; 6,
maxillary; 7, labial or 2d maxillary.

Head vesicle: in Diptera, = ptilinum, q.v.

Heart: the dorsal vessel or tubular structure divided into chambers,
lying just beneath the dorsal, which serves to propel the blood and
controls the circulation.

Heautotype: = autotype; q.v.

Helcodermatus: a surface with ulcer-like depressions: applied also to
the boring or tearing spines of pupae.

Heliciform: in the form of a spiral snail shell: applied to the cases of
some Trichoptera.

Helocerous: with clavate antennae.

Helvolus: tawny or dully reddish yellow.

Helvus: honey yellow [brown pink + chrome lemon].

Hemelytra: a modification of the anterior wings of Heteroptera,
coriaceous at base, membranous at tip, not meeting in a straight line
at the middle: more specifically applied to the corium; q.v.: also used
for the tegmina of Orthoptera.

Hemi: as a prefix, means half.

Hemimeroptera: an obsolete term for Hemiptera.

Hemimetabolous: manifesting an incomplete metamorphosis, but with
a marked difference between the stages: specifically the Ephemerida,
Odonata and Perlidae. {Scanner's comment: nowadays applied to far
more orders, generally to those that undergo a marked
metamorphosis, but without a pupal stage.}

Hemiptera: half-winged: an ordinal term applied to insects in which
the mouth parts consist of four lancets inclosed in a jointed beak or
rostrum; metamorphosis incomplete: the primaries may be of uniform
texture throughout (Homoptera) or may be thickened at base,
membranous at tip (Heteroptera).

Hemispheric: like the half of a globe or sphere.

Hepaticolor: liver-brown [dragon's blood].

Hepatic pouches: applied to caeca pouches; q.v.

Herbivorous: feeding upon plant tissue: a leaf feeder.

Heremetabola: with slight or incomplete metamorphosis, but with a
resting stage at the end of the nymph life; specifically the Cicadidae.

Hermaphrodite: an individual in which the characters of both sexes
are combined.

Hetero: as a prefix, unequal; different from.

Heterocera: Lepidoptera in which the antenna are of any form other
than clubbed at tip: opposed to Rhopalocera.

Heterochrome: of different color: applied to species in which there are
two color forms of one sex, one of which is like (homoeochrome), the
opposite sex, as in certain Odonata and Lepidoptera.

Heterochrony: an irregular development in point of time, a later stage
becoming evident before one that is earlier in ordinary course.

Heterogamy: applied to those cases in which two sexual or a sexual
and parthenogenetic generation alternate.

Heterogeneous: a mixture of different forms; abnormal.

Heterogeny: the alternation of sexual and parthenogenetic
generations.

Heterogyna: the ants: referring to the different kinds of
females, - queens and workers, - as distinguished from males.

Heteromera: Coleopteran in which the anterior and middle tarsi are
5-jointed and the posterior are 4-jointed.

Heteromerous: having an unequal number of tarsal joints on the feet.

Heterometabola: differing among themselves in metamorphosis; but
not manifesting abrupt stages.

Heteromorphous: the metamorphosis complete, in abrupt stages, the
larva unlike the adult.

Heteronomous: if two parts, compared with each other, are of different
quality: differing in development or function.

Heteropalpi: palpi with a different number of joints in male and
female, as in some Trichoptera.

Heteroptera: an ordinal term applied to that series of Hemiptera in
which the anterior wings differ in texture from the posterior, and the
different regions of primaries differ in texture.

Heteropterous: with wings of different texture in different parts.

Heterotypical: a genus, described from more than one species, these
differing in structure,

Hexachaetous: Diptera in which the mouth structures have six
piercing setae.

Hexanephric: with six kidneys, or structures serving as such.

Hexapoda: tracheate arthropods with head, thorax and abdomen
distinct, and only six legs in the adult stage: the true insects.

Hexapodal -ous: provided with six feet.

Hians: gaping.

Hibernaculum: a tent or sheath made out of a leaf or other material in
which a larva hides or hibernates.

Hibernate: to pass the winter in a dormant condition.

Hicks' bottles: {Scanner's comment: sic} flask-shaped pits
or depressions in the antennae of bees and ants: supposed
to be the organs of hearing.

Hind angle: in primaries of Lepidoptera, is that point where inner and
outer margin meet: = anal angle of secondaries.

Hind-body: the abdomen.

Hind-gut: the intestinal canal from the end of chylific ventricle to the
Anus, including the malpighian tubules and anal glands.

Hind-head: Mallophaga; that part of head behind mandibles and
antennae.

Hind-intestine: = hind-gut.

Hinge: of maxilla = cardo; q.v.: the point of articulation of a movable
joint.

Hips: the coxa; q.v.

Hirsute: clothed with long, strong hair; shaggy.

Hispid: bristly: sparsely set with short, stiff hair.

Histoblast: the morphological unit or cell characteristic of a particular
tissue.

Histogenesis: the formation and development of tissue.

Histolysis: the degeneration and dissolution of organic tissue.

Hoary: covered with a fine, white, silvery pubescence: pruinose q.v.

Holometabolous: having a complete transformation; with egg, larval,
pupal and adult stages distinctly separated.

Holopneustic: having many pairs of open stigmata.

Holoptic: Diptera in which the eyes of male are contiguous between
vertex and antennae: see dichoptic.

Holosericeus: with short, dense, silky hair, giving a satiny lustre.

Holotype: the unique type: = type; q.v.

Homelytra: elytra of similar or equal substance.

Homo: prefix = the same; similar.

Homochronic heredity: inheritance at corresponding periods of life.

Homochronous: changes in an organism which appear in the offspring
at the same age at which they did in the parent.

Homodynamous: serially homologous: homology of the metameres.

Homoeochromatism: applied when over a given region many
butterflies tend to vary similarly as regards color.

Homoeochrome: of the same color: see heterochrome.

Homoeomerous: all feet with an equal number of tarsal joints: =
isomerous.

Homoeonomous: of the same substance or texture.

Homoetype: = homotype; q.v.

Homogeneous: of the same kind or nature: similar in texture or parts.

Homogenous: similar in structure due to a community of descent.

Homologous: implies that organs are identical in general structure
and origin, though they may have developed in different ways for
special purposes: see analogous.

Homomorpha: insects in which the larvae resemble the adults.

Homonymous: pertaining to homology of parts arranged on a
transverse axis similarly developed and of equal function.

Homonym: a name similar to or like another already used for a
species in the same genus, or for a genus in the same kingdom: such
names are paid to be preoccupied.

Homonymous: where the same name is applied to different
conceptions.

Homophonous: words differently written but indistinguishable in
sound, applied to different conceptions.

Homoplastic: implies that organs, similar in situation and purpose,
are not structurally the same, or have not the same origin.

Homoptera: an ordinal term applied to those Hemiptera in which the
primaries are of the same consistence throughout.

Homotenous: retaining the primitive form: applied to insects without
or with an incomplete metamorphosis.

Homotype: is a specimen named by another than the author after
comparison with the type.

Honey dew: a sweetish excretion produced by certain insects, notably
Aphids and Coccids, and exuding from the surface of some galls.

Honey tubes: small tubes or tubercles on the abdomen of plant lice
and other insects through which a sweetish liquid or honey dew is
excreted siphonets; siphuncles; cornicles.

Hood: of the maxilla is the galena; q.v.: in Tingitidae the elevated
portion of the prothorax, often covering the head.

Hooked hairs: = gathering hairs; q.v.

Horismology: see orismology.

Horizontal: said of wings when held parallel to the horizon.

Horn: a pointed chitinous process of the head: in the plural form
applied to the antennae; q.v.

Host: the individual infested by or upon which a parasite grows: also
applied to the maker of a cell or other structure in which guest flies or
other insects take up their abode.

Hudsonian zone: is that part of the boreal region comprising the
northern part of the great transcontinental coniferous forests. In the
eastern United States restricted to the cold summits of the highest
mountains, from northern New England to western North Carolina: in
the west it covers the higher slopes of the Rocky and Sierra-Cascade
systems.

Humeral: relating to the shoulder or humerus.

Humeral angle: in Lepidoptera, that angle of the wings at the base of
costa, near the point of attachment to the body: in Coleopteran, the
outer anterior angle of elytra: in Orthoptera, the obtusely rounded
angle formed by the deflection of the sides of the pronotum from the
dorsal.

Humeral bristles: in Diptera, are situated on the humeral callus.

Humeral callus: in Diptera, is a rounded callus forming the anterior
superior angle of the mesothorax.

Humeral carina: in Coleoptera, an elevated ridge or keel on the outer
anterior angle of elytra.

Humeral cross-vein: (Comst.); extends between the costa and
subcosta close to base.

Humeralis: Coleopteran; when the elytral has an angulated projecting
margin at base.

Humeral stripe: in Odonata, covers the humeral suture.

Humeral suture: in Odonata, runs from just in front the base of the
fore-wing to the edge of the median coxa, separating the
mesepisternum from the mesepimeron.

Humeral veins: in Lepidoptera, secondary veins on posterior wings of
Lasiocampids, developed to strengthen the humeral angle.

Humerus: the shoulder: in Coleopteran; the basal exterior angle of
elytra: in Diptera, the anterior superior angles of the mesothorax: in
Orthoptera, the femur of the fore-leg: in Hymenoptera, applied to the
sub-costal vein in some groups.

Humid: applied to regions in which the normal rainfall is sufficient to
produce ordinary farm crops without irrigation: see arid.

Hyacinthine: the purple blue of the hyacinth [between mauve and
lilac].

Hyaline: vitreous: transparent or partially so.

Hyaloplasm: the clear, semi-fluid material between the meshes of the
cell reticulum.

Hybrid: the progeny from the mating of two species.

Hydradephaga; -ous: applied to aquatic, predatory pentamerous
beetles with filiform antennae: see adephagous.

Hydro: relating to water: a combining form used as a prefix.

Hydrolysis: the chemical decomposition of a compound by water,
causing formation of a new compound.

Hydrophilous: applied to species living in low, damp places.

Hymen: a thin plane membrane serving as a partition.

Hymenoptera: membrane-winged: an ordinal term applied to insects
with four membranous wings with few veins, the anterior usually
larger than the posterior; mouth mandibulate; head free; thorax
agglutinate, transformations complete.

Hyoid: having the form of the Greek upsilon, Y

Hypermetamorphosis: when an insect passes through more than the
normal number of stages; the interpolated stages coming usually
between the full-grown larva and adult.

Hyperparasite: is a form that is parasitic upon another parasite.

Hypertely: beyond the bounds of the useful: those forms whose
resemblance to other objects is closer than needful, or without
apparent object.

Hypertrigonal space: = supra-triangular space; q.v.

Hypertrophied: abnormally large or excessively developed.

Hypnody: lethargy; a condition similar to or identical with hibernation.

Hypertrophy: any abnormal enlargement or excessive development.

Hypoblast: = entoderm.

Hypocrateriform: salver-shaped.

Hypodactyle: the so-called labium of Hemiptera.

Hypoderm -is: the cellular layer which secretes the chitinous cuticula
and in this sense = epidermis: specifically applied to the lining
membrane of elytral and hemelytra.

Hypodermatic: of or concerning the hypodermic.

Hypodermic: under the skin.

Hypoglottis: the under surface of the tongue = hypoglottis.

Hypoglottis: a sclerite inserted between rectum and labium in many
Coleopteran.

Hypognathous: having the mouth parts directed more or less vertically
ventrad.

Hypographous: shaded; applied to a fascia that becomes gradually
darker.

Hypomeron -a: in Coleopteran; the inflexed edge of the pronotum
(pronotal hypomera); and the raised lower margin of the epipleural
(elytral hypomera) (see epipleural) fold.

Hypopharyngeal: relating to the hypopharynx.

Hypopharyngeal sclerites: in bees, a pair of strap-like pieces along the
hypopharynx to the mentum: see also epipharyngeal sclerites.

Hypopharynx: a sensitive and sensory structure on the upper surface
of labium that serves as an organ of taste, or true tongue.

Hypopleura: in Diptera, the space over the middle and hind coxa,
between the metapleura and pteropleura: the side of the
metasternum: the mesepimeron of the mesothorax.

Hypoptere: = tegula; q.v..

Hypopygium: the anus: more specifically the lower plate of the anal
opening: in Diptera, the male sexual organs and terminal segments of
abdomen = propygium.

Hypostoma: in Diptera; that portion of the head included between
antennae, eyes and mouth: in Hemiptera: the lower part of face.

Hypotenuses: in Odonata; the simple or broken cross-vein between
media 4, and cubitus 1, forming outer boundary of triangle.

Hypotypes: includes specimens upon which supplementary
descriptions are based: = apotypes.




I

Iceous or Icius: suffix; expresses a likeness or the possession of a
character see aceus.

Icotypes: typical specimens which serve for purposes of identification,
but have not been used in literature.

Idiotype: a specimen named by the author after comparison with the
type, but not also a topotype.

Ignitus: fire-red [vermilion].

Ileo-colon: the anterior portion of the hind-gut, extending from the
mid-gut to the rectum, when not distinctly differentiated into ileum
and colon.

Ileum: the small intestine; begins at end of chylific ventricle at the
point where malpighian tubules join, and extends to colon.

Imaginal: pertaining to the adult or imago.

Imaginal buds, cells, or discs: in forms with a complete
metamorphosis are those embryonic cells around and from which the
organs and appendages of the future imago develop.

Imago: the adult or sexually developed insect.

Imbricate: arranged or appearing like the scales on a fish or the
shingles on a roof.

Immaculate: destitute of spots or marks.

Immarginate: without an elevated rim or margin.

Immersed -us: inserted, imbedded or hidden in.

Imponderable: that which cannot be weighed.

Impregnate-ed: to make or made fertile or pregnant: fertilized.

Impressed -us: a surface with shallow depressed areas or markings.

Impubis: without hair.

Inaequalis: unequal.

Inarticulate: not jointed or segmented.

Inaurate -us: golden yellow [pale cadmium yellow].

Ineanus: hoary.

Inch: the English and American standard of length in insect
measurement: it is = 12 lines and = 25.4 mm.: usually expressed in
units and hundredths, as 1.01.

Incised: notched or deeply cut into.

Incision: any cut into a margin or through a surface: the marginal
slits or notches in Coccidae.

Incisure: an impressed line marking the junction of two segments: an
incision.

Inclinate -us: leaning or inclining.

Inclusus: when one part is wholly or partially hidden in another.

Inconspicuous: not attracting attention or quickly noticeable.

Incrassated: thickened: rather suddenly swollen at some one point,
especially near tip.

Incubate: to brood: to cause to develop; as an egg.

Incumbent: lying one over another: wings when they cover the dorsal
horizontally.

Incunabulum: = folliculus and cocoon; q.v.

Incurved -ate: bowed or curved inwards.

Independent: in Lepidoptera; that vein of the wings that arises from
the cross-vein closing the cell, and does not branch directly from any
vein reaching the base: it is v. 5 of the numerical series in both wings
and the media of Comstock.

Indeterminate: not defined nor well marked; obscure: of no constant
form or shape.

Indigote: a very deep indigo blue.

Indirect: applied to metamorphosis = complete.

Indumentum: a covering of hairs, scales or tufts.

Indurated: hardened.

Indusium: the case made by an insect larva: a membranous layer of
the embryo of Locustidae below the serosa.

Inequal: a surface with irregular elevations and depressions.

Inermis: unarmed: without spines or spurs.

Infericornia: Hemiptera; in which the antenna appear to be inserted
well down on the sides of head; e.g. Lygaeidae.

Inferior: beneath, below or behind: a term of position.

Inferior appendage -es: in male Odonata the lower one or two of the
terminal abdominal parts used to clasp the female in copulation.

Inferior wings: = hind wings or secondaries: q.v.

Infero-posterior: below and behind: refers to location.

Inflated: blown up; distended bladder-like.

Inflected: bent inward at an angle.

Inflexus: = inflected.

Infra: below or beneath: opposed to supra.

Infra-anal lobe: a thick, conical fleshy lobe, often ending in a chitinous
point, situated beneath the vent in caterpillars.

Infra-cereal plates: in Orthoptera - generally inconspicuous paired
plates which underlie in part the cerci and in part the lateral portion
of the supra-anal plate.

Infra-clypeus: = ante-clypeus and rhinarium: q.v..

Infracted: abruptly bent inward, as if broken.

Infra-genital: below the genital opening or process.

Infra-marginal: situated below or behind the marginal cell.

Infra-median vein; in Orthoptera: = ulnar vein: q.v.

Infra-ocular: applied to the region below and between the eyes.

Infra-oesophageal: situated below oesophagus; see sub-oesophageal.

Infra-stigmatal: situated below the stigmata or spiracles.

Infringing: encroaching upon.

Infumated: clouded.

Infundibuliform: funnel-shaped.

Infuseated: smoky gray-brown with a blackish tinge [Roman sepia].

Ingens: unusually large or disproportionate in size.

Ingluvies: the crop; q.v.

Inner lobe: of maxilla = lacinia: q.v.

Inner margin: the line extending along the lower or interior edge of the
wing from the base to the hind or anal angle.

Innervate: to supply with nerves.

Innotatus: without markings.

Inocular: inserted in the inner margin of and partially or wholly
surrounded by the eye.

Inquiline: a species living in a gall or other structure prepared by a
different species, not as a parasite but as, a guest.

Inquiline: living as guests in the homes of others; as in galls.

Insect: a member of the class Insecta strictly limited.

Insecta: broadly defined, contains all articulates that are also
tracheates and have the head free from the thorax; more strictly
limited to those forms that have only three pairs of thoracic legs in the
adult stage and a limited number of segments.

Insectary: a place or building where insects are bred and studied.

Insectivorous: feeding upon or devouring insects.

Insectologist: a student of insects: = entomologist.

Insectology: the science of insect study: = entomology.

Insertion: the point or place where a part is inserted: a part that is
inserted: the act of inserting.

Insertus: a part that has its base set into another.

In situ: in its natural place or normal position.

Instar: the period or stage between molts in the larva, numbered to
designate the various periods; e.g. the first instar is the stage
between the egg and first molt, etc.: see stadium.

Institia: stria or furrows of equal width throughout.

Instrumenta cibaria: mouth parts of a mandibulate insect as a whole.

Instrumenta suctoria: mouth parts of a haustellate insect as a whole.

Integer: entire: applied to a margin without incisions.

Integument: the outer covering to the insect body.

Inter: between; among.

Inter-alar space: in Odonata; the terga of meson- and meta-thorax.

Interantennal: between the basal segments of antennae.

Inter-articular: the membranous tissue between joints or segments.

Intercalary -ies: additional or inserted between others; as a vein:
plural; added or supplementary longitudinal wing reins: see under
specific headings; i.e. anterior, etc.: in Ephemerides, certain
longitudinal veins between the 8th (anal) and 9th (1st maxillary) and
not branches of either: in Diptera, the anterior intercalary (Loew) = the
discoidal, and the posterior intercalary = the cubitus 1 of Comstock:
applied to an evanescent sclerite in the embryo between antenna and
mandible; also termed premandibular.

Intercostal: between veins or costae; usually in the narrow grooves
between veins in the costal region of a wing.

Intercostula: those small, vein-like structures between the normal
veins, visible on a wing margin but lost toward the disc.

Intercoxal process: in Coleopteran; a median protrusion of the basal
segment of abdomen between the hind coxae.

Intermediate: lying between others in position or possessing
characters between two other forms.

Intermediate field: of termini is = discoidal field q.v.

Internal area: in Hymenoptera;  the posterior of the three areas
between  median and lateral longitudinal carina on the metanotum
third lateral area.

Internal cell: in Hymenoptera (Pack.) 2d anal (Comst.).

Internal triangle: in Odonata see triangle.

Internal veins: in Lepidoptera, from one to three in number, run free
from base to outer margin near hind angle; never branched;1a to is
in the numerical series: = anal veins (Comst.).

Interneural: between the nerves (or veins) of wings.

Interno-mandibular: applied to one of the pairs of salivary glands in
bees, situated at the inner side of base of mandible.

Internomedian: in Orthoptera; = cubitus (Comst.); q.v.

Interocular: between the eyes.

Interplical: lying between folds; specifically applied to the alternate
ridges and grooves in anal area of secondaries of Orthoptera.

Interposed sectors: in Odonata; the shorter longitudinal veins
occurring in the wings of some species between the chief veins; =
supplementary sectors. Interrupted: broken in continuity, but with
the tips of the broken parts in a right line with each other.

Intersegmental: = interarticular; q.v.

Interspace: Coleopteran; the plane surface between elytral striae:
Lepidoptera spaces between wing veins not included in closed cells.

Interspaceal: occurring in the interspaces between two wing veins or
two elytral striae.

Interstice -tium: space between two lines, whether striate or punctate.

Interstitial line: the elevated ridge between two striae or series of
punctures.

Interval: the space or time between two structures, sculptures or
periods of development.

Interventricular: the inner valve between the chambers of the heart.

Interventricular valvule: of heart, lies in front of seluilunar valve.

Intervenular: in thespace between two veins.

Intestinal caecum: that point of the large intestine in front of the
junction with the small intestine.

Intestine: that part of the alimentary canal through which the food
passes from the stomach, in which absorption is completed and the
excretions are formed for expulsion.

Intima: the lining membrane of the trachea: see endotrachea.

Intorted: turned or twisted inwardly.

Intra-: within: between.

Intra-alar bristles: in Diptera; a row of two or three between the
supra-alar and dorso-central groups.

Intracellular: occurring within the cell or in a cell.

Infra-humeral bristles: in Diptera calyptrata; occur immediately in
front of the thoracic suture, between the humeral callus and the
presutural depression.

Infra-ocular: situated within the eye, actually or apparently.

Intra-pulmonary: that method of respiration which does not involve
movements of the outer body wall and is confined to the respiratory
organs.

Intrauterine: applied to development, when the young hatch within
the vagina of the mother.

Intricate: irregular: confused; applied to markings and sculpture.

Intromittent: used for throwing within.

Intromittent organ: the penis; q.v.

Introse -um: directed inward, toward the body.

Intrusus: seemingly impressed with a sharp point.

Intumescent: enlarged; swollen: expanded.

Invaginate: when a tubular or vesicular part is turned inward or
retracted within the body wall.

Invagination: a pouch or sac formed by an infolding or indrawing of
the outer surface.

Investitus: unclothed: a surface without scales or hair.

Involucrate: = involute.

Involucrum alarum in Dermaptera a flap of the metanotum.

Involute: spirally rolled inwardly.

Involuti: butterflies whose larvae live in a folded leaf; Hesperidae.

Iridescent: a surface which reflects the prismatic hues.

Iridicolor: any color so broken up as to reflect the prismatic hues.

Iris: the circle which, in an ocellate spot surrounds the pupil.

Irised: with rainbow colors.

Iris-pigment: = iris tapetum.

Iris tapetum: the pigment layer of the compound eye just below the
crystalline cone.

Irregular: unequal, curved, bent or otherwise twisted or modified
without order or symmetry, e.g. certain antennae.

Irrorate: marked with minute points; freckled.

Isabelline -us: pale yellow with some red and brown [chronic lemon
with a little carmine and roman sepia].

Ischia: = pleura; q.v.

Iso-: equal.

Isolate: to separate out from others; occurring alone.

Isomers: that series of Coleoptera in which the tarsi have an equal
number of joints on all feet.

Isomerous: with equal number of tarsal joints on all
feet := homoeomerous.

Isomorphous: having the same form, appearance or construction.

Isopalpi: that series of Trichoptera in which the palpi of both sexes
have the same number of joints.

Isoptera: equal winged: an ordinal term for insects with four, similar,
net-veined wings; mouth mandibulate; thoracic rings similar, loosely
jointed metamorphosis incomplete: the Termitidae. {Scanner's note: In
modern nomenclature the Isoptera constitute the order of all termites;
the Termitidae are just one family within the Isoptera.}

Isotypical: a genus described from more than one species, all of which
are congeneric.

-itus: = -atus; q.v.

-ius: suffix; having the power or ability to.




J

Jabot: the crop; q.v.

Janthine: violet colored.

Jaw-capsule: contains the mouth structures in those dipterous larvae
in which the head is differentiated.

Johnston's organ: a complex nervous structure in the basal joint of
dipterous antennae.

Joint: a segment or part between two incisures: an articulation.

Jubate -us: fringed with long pendent hairs.

Juga: the lateral anterior lobes of the head of a Heteropteron; each
side of the tylo.

Jugatae: that series of Lepidoptera in which there is a jugum instead
of a frenulum to unite the wings in flight.

Jugular: of or pertaining to the throat.

Jugular sclerite: small sclerite in the membrane connecting the head
with the thorax: see cervical sclerite.

Jugulum: that sclerite just behind the sub-mentum; =gula: that cavity
of the posterior part of the head to which the neck is annexed: the
lateral and under parts of the prothorax.

Jugum: in certain Lepidoptera and Trichoptera, a lobe or process at
the base of primaries, overlapping secondaries and holding the two
together in flight.






K

Katabolic: the destructive change from animal tissue to waste product:
see anabolic.

Keel: an elevated ridge or carina.

Kermesinus: dark red, with much blue [purple lake].

Key: a tabular or other arrangement of species, genera or other
classification according to characters that serve to identify them.

Kidney-shaped: like a kidney in outline; convex on one long side,
concave on the other, the ends evenly and somewhat obtusely
rounded: bean-shaped.

Knee: the point of junction of femur and tibia.




L

Labellum -a: the sensitive ridged tip of the mouth structures of certain
Diptera: a prolongation of the labium covering the base of rostrum in
Coleoptera and Hemiptera.

Labial: referring, pertaining or belonging to the labium.

Labial segment: the 7th segment of head = second maxillary segment.

Labial suture: is between labium and mentum.

Labiate: lip-like or having lip-like sutures.

Labipalp: a labial palpus.

Labis: the slender abdominal forceps in some Lepidoptera.

Labium: the lower lip: a compound structure which forms the floor of
the mouth in mandibulate insects, behind the first maxilla and
opposed to the labium; formed by a fusion in embryonic life of
separate right and left maxilla-like halves: in some of its
developments referred to as the tongue.

Labral suture: is between labrum and clypeus.

Labro-frontal lobes: of brain, = trito-cerebrum; q.v.

Labrum: the upper lip; covers the base of the mandible and forms the
roof of the mouth.

Labrum-epipharynx: in the mouth of piercing Diptera is the central
unpaired lancet.

Lac: a mixture of resin, wax and other substances produced by certain
scale insects as a protective covering.

Lacer: a lappet; applied to a margin with irregular, broad and deep
emarginations, leaving lappet-like intervals.

Lacerated: ragged; torn in appearance; see lacer.

Lacinia: the inner lobe of first maxilla, articulated to the stipes,
bearing brushes of hair or spines: a blade: in Diptera, forms a flat
lancet-like piercing structure and is never jointed.

Lacinia exteriores and interiores: in Apidae, the palpiger and
paraglossa often used for the gales and lacinia of maxilla.

Laciniated: jagged; cut into irregular fragments.

Lacte: milk-white.

Lacteal: relating to milk; milky in appearance.

Lactescent: secreting or yielding a milky fluid.

Lacteous -eus: white, with a slight bluish tinge, like skim-milk.

Lacunae: irregular impressions or cavities: specifically the non-walled
cavities of the body.

Lacunose: pitted; the surface covered with small cavities.

Laemodipodiform: like a laemodipod; similar to the larva of a walking
stick.

Laete: bright.

Laevis -igatus: smooth, shining and without elevations: said of a
surface.

Lamella: a thin plate or leaf-like process.

Lamellate: antennae with the club formed of closely opposed leaf-like
surfaces, the concealed surfaces set with sensory pits.

Lamellicornia: those beetles in which the antennae terminate in a
lamellate or leaf-like club.

Lamelliform: made up of or resembling leaves, blades or lamellae.

Lamina -ae: a chitinous plate or plates.

Lamina externa: the paraglossa.

Lamina interna: the ligula.

Lamina subgenitalis: the sub-genital plate; q.v.: in roaches the 7th
ventral plate of females and 9th ventral plate of males.

Lamina supra-analis: = supra-anal plate.

Laminate: formed of thin, flat layers or leaves.

Laminato-carinate: with an elevated ridge or keel, formed of thin
plates.

Laminiform: layer-like: having the appearance or made up of lamina.

Lana: wool: the long hair on the abdomen of some Lepidoptera.

Lanate -atus: woolly: covered with dense, fine, long hairs, so distinct
that they may be separated.

Lanceolate: lance- or spear-shaped: oblong and tapering to the end.

Lanceolate cell: in Hymenoptera (ort.); - 2d anal (Comst.).

Lancet: indiscriminately applied to any piercing mouth structure.

Lanuginose -us: with long, curled hair dispersed over the surface: see
crinitus.

Lanugo: slender single hairs.

Laparostict: that series of lamellicorn beetles in which the abdominal
spiracles are situated on the connecting membrane between the
dorsal and ventral rings.

Lapidicolous: living under deeply imbedded stones.

Larva: the second stage of insect development; comes from the egg or
ovum, grows, and according to its kind, changes to a pupa or
chrysalis or to an imago; bears various names in the different orders:
see nymph; caterpillar slug; maggot; grub.

Larvarium: a tube or case made by a larva as a shelter or retreat.

Larvatae: asked; applied to coarctate and obtect pupae.

Larvina: a maggot: a dipterous larva without distinct head or legs.

Larvule: applied to early stages of Ephemerid larvae when they appear
to have no developed respiratory, circulatory or nervous systems.

Lashed: eyes that have a more or less complete fringe of stiff hairs or
bristles at the orbits.

Lasureus: a very dark blue [French blue with some black].

Laterad: toward the side and away from the median line.

Lateral: relating, pertaining or attached to the side.

Lateral areas: in Hymenoptera; on the metanotum, the three spaces
between the median and lateral long carinae; the upper is the
external or first lateral basal area; the second is the external or central
lateral area; the third is the middle, internal, apical or third lateral
area.

Lateral bristles: in Diptera; situated at or near the lateral margins of
the abdominal segments.

Lateral carinae: in Orthoptera; on the head, extend downward from
the front margin of the eyes: on prothorax extend along each lateral
margin of the dorsum.

Lateral foveolae: in Orthoptera: foveate depressions on the margins of
the vertex near the front border of the eye.

Lateral line: in caterpillars is at the margin of the dorsum between
sub-dorsal and supra-stigmatal line.

Lateral lobe: of the labium in Odonata, corresponds to the paraglossa
with palpiger and palpus (Gerstaecker) or, more probably, to the
palpus alone (Butler).

Lateral lobes: the deflexed portions of pronotum that cover the sides of
pro-thorax in many Orthoptera: in certain Hymenoptera, lie on each
side of the parapsidal furrows of mesoscutum and = scapulae.

Lateral longitudinal area: of Hymenoptera, extends between the
median and pleural carinae of metanotum.

Lateral ridge: in slug caterpillars, extends longitudinally along the
lateral series of abdominal tubercles.

Lateral scale: one of the lateral processes of the ovipositor in
Cynipidae, lying within and below the anal scale.

Lateral space: in slug caterpillars is the area on each side of the body
between the subdorsal and lateral ridges.

Lateral sutures: of the thorax in Odonata, are situated on the sides of
thorax, the first separating the metepisternum from the mesepimeron;
the second separating the metepisternum from the metepimeron;
the first more or less obsolete in the Anisoptera.


Lateral tubercle: lateral on thoracic and abdominal segments of
caterpillars: it is 3 of the abdomen, 2a of thorax: constant (Dyar).

Latericeous: = lateritius: q.v.

Lateritius: yellowish-red; yellowish brick color [pale clay yellow with a
little red].

Laterodorsal: the point of junction of dorsum and pleurum.

Lateropharyngeal: applied to the 4th pair of salivary glands in bees;
situated on each side of the pharynx.

Laterostigmatal: situated on the side, immediately above the spiracle.

Lateroventral: the point of junction of sternum and pleurum.

Latero-ventral metathoracic carina: in Odonata; forms the dividing
line between the metepimera and the metasternum.

Latescent: becoming obscure or hidden.

Latreille's segment: the first abdominal segment of those Hymenoptera
in which it is fused with the thorax:= median segment, propodeon,
propodeum.

Latticed: = cancellate; q.v.

Latus: the side: broad.

Latuscula: the facets of the compound eye.

Leathery: having the appearance or texture of leather.

Lectotype: a co-type chosen, subsequently to the original description,
to take the place which in other cases a holotype occupies.

Leg -s: the jointed appendages attached to the thoracic segments,
used in walking: the organs of locomotion other than wings:
unjointed organs of locomotion are pro-legs or false legs; q.v.

Legion: a group of genera, subequal to a tribe.

Legnum: the margin of a squama.

Lemniscate: ribbon-like: in the form of an 8.

Lenticular: round, doubly convex; like a lens or lentil.

Lepidoptera: scale-winged: an order of insects with spirally coiled
haustellate mouth structures; head free; thorax agglutinate;
transformations complete four scale-covered wings.

Lepidopteric acid: a green pigment obtained from the wing scales of
Lepidoptera; a derivative of uric acid: see Lepidotic acid.

Lepidopteron: a butterfly or moth: one of the Lepidoptera.

Lepidotic: set with minute scales.

Lepidotic acid: a yellow pigment obtained from certain butterfly scales
a derivative of uric acid: see Lepidopteric acid.

Lepis: a scale.

Leprous: with loose, irregular scales.

Leptiform: = compodeiform; q.v.

Leptos: small, fine.

Lethargic: torpid or inactive.

Leucine: a white crystalline compound, the product of animal
decomposition, found in the malpighian tubes: as a color, cheesy
white.

Leucocytes: pale, unicellular bodies, numerous in the insect blood.

Levator: a muscle that raises an organ or a part.

Levigate -us: with a smooth, somewhat shiny surface.

Liber: free.

Ligament: a band or sheet of tough, fibrous tissue between two parts
or segments.

Ligneous -eus: wood brown [Vandyke brown].

Lignivorous: feeding upon wood or woody tissues.

Ligula: the central sclerite of the labium, borne upon the mentum,
usually single, sometimes paired: often used as synonymous with
"glossa" and "tongue": corresponds to the united laciniae of right and
left maxillae: see also elytral ligula.

Ligulate: strap-shaped; linear, much longer than broad.

Lilacinous: lilac-colored [lilac].

Limaciform: having the form of a Limax or slug; said of larvae.

Limb: the circumference: the area surrounding the disc.

Limbate: when a disc is surrounded by a margin of different color.

Limbus: the area along the outer and posterior margin of wing beyond
the closed cells; Homoptera, Cicada.

Limpid: clear and transparent: applied to wings and ornamentation.

Line: a narrow streak or stripe: as a term of measurement,
one-twelfth of an inch; commonly used by English and early
American authors.

Linea: a line or narrow stripe.

Linear: straight; in the form of a right line.

Lineate: marked with lines or streaks: lined.

Lineolet: a delicate fine line.

Lingua: the tongue; applied in Hymenoptera, to the ligula: in
Lepidoptera and Diptera, to maxillary structures: has also been used
for the hypopharynx, and that use might be adopted: a median organ
of the hypopharynx in Apterygota.

Lingua spiralis: the spiral tongue of Lepidoptera: see glossa.

Linguiform: tongue-shaped: linear, with the extremities obtusely
rounded.

Lingula: in Aleurodidae, a more or less slender tongue or strap-shaped
organ, attached cephalad within the vasiform orifice: a term proposed
by Leuckart for the ligula of the bees.

Lipochromus: without color.

Lipoptera: = Mallophaga; q.v.

Literate: ornamented with characters like letters.

Littoral: living along the sea-coast or in the shore debris: strictly,
between tide marks.

Littoralia: Heteroptera that live in marshes.

Litura: an indistinct spot, paler at its margin.

Livid: yellowish gray with a violet tinge: greenish gray.

Lobate -us: divided by deep, undulating and successive incisions.

Lobe: any prominent rounded process or excrescence on a margin:
specifically, the rounded, tooth-like processes on the margin of the
pygidium of the Diaspinae: also applied to lateral expansions of the
abdominal segments.

Lobes: of the maxilla; see galea (outer) and lacinia (inner): of the
mentum in Coleoptera, are the lateral expansions shielding the base
of the central organs.

Lobes of pronotum: in Orthoptera; the spaces or areas formed by
three transverse impressions on the pronotum: that which borders
the head is the anterior lobe, the hindmost is the posterior lobe, those
intervening are the middle lobes.

Lobiform: shaped like a lobe or rounded process.

Lobulate: divided into, or with many small lobes or lobules.

Lobule: in Coccidae, one of the two distinct parts of which a lobe is
sometimes composed.

Lobulus: the partly separated portion of the wings of some flies and of
secondaries in some Hymenoptera: also used as = alula; q.v.

Lobus: of maxilla = galea; q.v.

Locomotion: organs of, are legs and wings.

Longicorn -ia: having the antennae as long or longer than the body;
specifically the Cerambycid beetles.

Longitudinal: in the direction of the long axis.

Longitudinal veins: are those that extend lengthwise through the wing
either directly from base or as branches of one that does start there:
they are named or numbered, and differently in the different orders.

Loop: applied to that structure at base of innerside of primaries into
which the frenulum of male moths is fitted: see retinaculum.

Looper: applied to geometrid and other caterpillars in which some or
all the middle abdominal legs are wanting and which move by bringing
tail to thorax and forming a loop of the intervening segments.

Lora: the chitinous bands connecting the submentum with the cardo
of maxilla (Comst.): the submentum: small cords upon which the
base of the proboscis is seated (Say): the anterior part of the genae at
the edge of the mouth: the corneous processes to which the muscles
flexing the mouth in certain Diptera are attached, and in that sense
the palpifer of the maxilla: in Homoptera, the small sclerite at side of
clypeus and front, extending laterally to the genae.

Lorum: in bees: the angular piece upon which the sub-mentum rests.

Lower austral zone: occupies southern part of United States from
Chesapeake Bay to the great interior valley of California. Is
interrupted by the continental divide in eastern Arizona and west New
Mexico and divided according to conditions of humidity into an
eastern or Austroriparian and western or lower Sonoran area.

Lower field: in termini; see costal field.

Lower fronto-orbital bristles: in Diptera: are on the lower part of front,
above the antennae, along the orbit.

Lower margin: of tegmina (Thomas), is the costal or anterior margin of
other authors.

Lower radial vein: in Lepidoptera (Holland) media 2 (Comst.).

Lower sector of triangle: in Odonata - = cubitus 2 (Comst.).

Lower Sonoran faunal area: comprises the most arid deserts of North
America, beginning west of lat. 98 degrees in Texas: sends narrow arms into
southern New Mexico, is interrupted by the Continental Divide; covers
a large part of w. and s. Ariz., s. w. Nev., s. w. Calif., a portion of
central Calif., and most of Lower Calif. These areas are irregular and
incapable of brief definition.

Lubricate -ous: covered with a slippery mucus.

Lucid: shining; applied to luminous insects.

Luciferase: a substance in the nature of an enzyme, existing in the
luminous organs of light-giving beetles.

Luciferine: a substance in the blood of luminous beetles which, when
brought into contact with luciferase, produces light.

Luciferous: light giving.

Lucifugous: fleeing the light: applied to nocturnal forms or those that
live in concealment.

Lumen: the cavity of an organ: the inner surface of a tube: the hollow
portion of a gland or vesicular structure.

Luminescence: applied to the light of fire-flies, as a substitute for
phosphorescence.

Lumper: one who, in describing species or genera recognizes only
prominent or obvious characters to the exclusion of minor color or
variable characters of maculation or structure: see splitter.

Lunaris or Lunate: crescent-shaped: formed like a new moon.

Lunula: a small lunule or crescent.

Lunulae: in Hymenoptera, crescent-shaped marks near the orbits.

Lunulate: a line, when made up of a series of small lunules.

Lunule: a lunate mark or crescent.

Lurid -us: dirty brown with a bluish tinge [pale brown + a little French
blue]: also used to indicate an obscuring of bright colors.

Luteo -testaceous: dark clay yellow.

Luteous -eus: clay yellow [pale clay yellow].

Lutescent: becoming or appearing to be clay yellow.

Lutose -us: apparently or really covered with dirt.

Lymphatic: producing, carrying or relating to the lymph.

Lyrate: lyre-shaped: cut into several transverse segments, and
gradually enlarging towards the extremity.

Lyre: the upper wall or border of the spinning tube of caterpillars.






M

Macrochaetae: the long bristles occurring singly on the body of
Diptera.

Macropterous: long or large winged.

Macrosomites: the primitive regions of primitive hand of the insect
embryo.

Macula: a colored mark larger than a spot; of indeterminate figure.

Maculate -ed: spotted or marked with figures of any shape, of a color
different from the ground.

Maculation: the ornamentation or pattern of marking.

Maculose: spotted; with many marks or spots.

Maerianum: "that segment of the post-pectus situate one on each
side behind the acetabulum and parapleurum"; it supports the
posterior feet: see meriaeum.

Magenta: pinkish red; an aniline product.

Magis: more.

Maggot: applied to the footless larvae of Diptera.

Mala: a lobe: a ridged or grinding surface.

Mala mandibularis: the grinding surface or area of a mandible.

Mala maxillae: the globes of maxilla; outer or galea, inner or lacinia;
where only one is present, the term refers to that one.

Malaxation: a kneading or softening; applied to the chewing and
squeezing by fossorial wasps of insects captured as food for their
larva.

Male: that sex having organs for the production of spermatozoa:
designated by "?", the astronomical sign for Mars.
{Scanner's comment: The sign for Mars being an diagonal  arrow
rising from a circle, and pointing upwards towards the right.}


Mallophaga: wool-eaters: an ordinal term applied to biting lice:
wingless: mandibulate; thoracic segments similar; no
metamorphosis: =Lipoptera.

Malpighian tubules: long, slender tubules, varying in number, serving
as excretory organs, entering the alimentary canal at the point of
junction of chylific ventricle and ileum: said to be analogous with
kidneys: = biliary vessels.

Mammilate: with nipple-like protuberances or processes.

Mandible: the lateral upper jaws of a biting insect.

Mandibular strobe: a broad deep groove on outer side of mandible in
some Coleoptera.

Mandibular segment: the fourth or mandible bearing segment of head.

Mandibulata: that series of insects in which the adults have
functional mandibles used for biting.

Mandibulate: with jaws or mandibles.

Manicate -us: fur-like: surface clothed with irregular depressed hair.

Manitrunk: that part of trunk that bears the anterior legs: =prothorax.

Manometabola: with a slight or gradual metamorphosis and without a
resting stage; e.g. the Orthoptera.

Manubrium: in Coleoptera: that part of the mesosternum in Elateridae
which forms the process for fitting into the cavity of the prothorax: in
Collembola the basal part of the furculum.

Manus: the hand: formerly applied to the anterior tarsus.

Marbled: irregularly mottled, gray and white, like marble; =
marmoratus.

Marcescent: shrivelling.

Margaritaceous: shining, like mother of pearl = nacreous; q.v.

Margin: that portion of a surface within the edge, bounded on the
inner side by the sub-margin and consisting of a more or less dilated
imaginary line.

Marginal: of, belonging to, or near the margin.

Marginal area: in Orthoptera; see mediastinal area.

Marginal bristles: in Diptera; are inserted on the posterior margin of
the abdominal segment.

Marginal cell: in Diptera (Williston):= subcostal (Shiner):= radial
(Comst.): in Hymenoptera:= radial  and 2 (Comst.): in general that
cell beyond the stigma.

Marginal field: in tegmina = costal field: q.v.

Marginal nervure or vein: in Orthoptera, = costa (Comst.): in
Hymenoptera (Norton) = radius 3 (Comst.): in general, the vein
forming the marginal cell.

Margined -ated: bounded by an elevated or attenuated margin: when
the margin is edged by a flat border.

Marmorate -us: spots and lines irregularly disposed, as in marble:
marbled. Mask: in the nymphs of Odonata, the modified labium
which, when at rest,  conceals the other mouth parts.

Masticate: to chew.

Masticatory: formed for chewing or grinding; applied to the mouth
parts and to the grinding structures in the gizzard.

Mastigium -ia: telescopic anal organs in certain caterpillars, serving
to repel attacks of parasites.

Matrix: the formative substance from which cells and other structures
are derived.

Maxilla: without any qualifying adjective, the second pair of jaws in a
mandibulate insect; the most persistent when the mouth is modified,
and represented by some functional part in all insects in which the
mouth structures are useful: second maxillae, = the labium, or third
pair of jaws in a mandibulate insect.

Maxillary: attached or belonging to the maxilla; e.g. palpi.

Maxillary palpi: the first pair of palpi, borne on the maxilla.

Maxillary pleurites: the lateral pieces, epimera and episterna of the
maxillary segment.

Maxillary segment: the sixth segment of the head, bearing the
maxillae.

Maxillary tendons: two slender rods in basal third of the
muscid proboscis the remnant of the palpifer, to which muscles for
flexing the proboscis are attached: see lora.

Maxillary tentacle: in female Pronuba: a specialized process of
palpifer.

Maxillulae: a pair of appendages in Thysanurids, between
mandibles and first maxillae.

Maxime: very much or very large.

Mealy: with a flour-like dusting: = farinose.

Mecaptera: = Mecoptera, q.v.

Meconium: the substance excreted by certain metabolic insects soon
after their emergence from the chrysalis or pupa.

Mecoptera: long-winged: neuropterous insects with similar, large,
unfolded wings; mouth mandibulate, prolonged into a beak: head
free; thorax agglutinated; transformations complete: the scorpion
flies or Panorpidae. Medi-: prefix, = middle.

Media: the fourth of the longitudinal veins extending from base
through approximately the middle of the wing, not more than four
branched, the branches numbered on margin from  nearest apex, to 4
nearest anal angle: in Orthoptera; it is the median or externomedian:
in Lepidoptera (Pack.), is cubitus  (Comst.).

Mediad: toward the median plane or middle.

Mediafurca: a process extending internally from the meso-sternum, to
which the muscles are attached.

Medial: referring to, or at the middle.

Medial cells: (Comst.), are anteriorly bounded by the media or its
branches: in Hymenoptera (Mort.), includes median and cubital
(Comst.)

Medial cross-vein: (Comst.), is between media 2 and 3.

Median 1: in Lepidoptera (Pack.), = media 2 (Comst.).

Median 2: in Lepidoptera (Pack.), = media 3 (Comst.).

Median 4: in Lepidoptera ( Pack.), = cubitus 2 (Comst.).

Median area: of wings in Orthoptera, lies between the radial and ulnar
veins, radius and media (Comst.): of meta-thorax of Hymenoptera, is
the middle of the dorsum, divided into three spaces or cells; 1st or basal
area, 2d or Lipper median or areola; 3d or apical or petiolar area.

Median carina: Orthoptera; of head, is usually applied to a median
dorsal carina, but has been also used for that which extends down the
middle of front from the fastigium, and then = frontal costa: of
prothorax, extends along the middle of pronotum.

Median cell: in Lepidoptera, is the closed area formed by a line
extending from the end of subcostal to the end of the median veins, =
radial (Comst.): in Hymenoptera, 1st median (Pack.), = medial (Comst.);
 2d median (Pack.), - medial 4 (Comst.); 3d median (Pack.), = medial 2
(Comst.); 4th median (Pack.), = medial 1 (Comst.).

Median cross-veins: in Odonata; are those which cross median space.

Median foveola: in Orthoptera; the foveate depression of the vertex
between the eyes: = central foveola.

Median forks: in Orthoptera, refers to the forks of the median vein.

Median furrow: lies between radius and media: in some Heteroptera,
separates the embolium from the remainder of the corium.

Median lines: on the primaries of many moths: the first or t.a.
crosses about one-third from base; the second or t.p. crosses beyond
the outer third and is usually sinuate.

Median lobe: of labium in Odonata, is the partly divided glossa or
ligula; probably corresponds to united glossa and paraglossae (Butler).

Median longitudinal carinae: on the metanotum of Hymenoptera,
extend one on each side of the middle.

Median nervules: in Lepidoptera (Holland)1st = cubitus 2 (Comst.): 2d
cubitus 1 (Comst.); 3d = media 3 (Comst.).

Median notch: in Coccidae, a notch in the edge of the pygidium, at the
posterior extremity of the body.

Median plate: in Hymenoptera  := sessiliventres, is the dorsal plate
connecting the thorax and abdomen.

Median sector: in Odonata, = media 3 (Comst.).

Median segment: applied to the basal segment of the abdomen when it
forms part of the metathorax: see propodeum.

Median shade or line: in Lepidoptera, crosses at or about middle of
wings.

Median space: in Lepidoptera, is the area between the median
lines: in Odonata, the cubital cell (Comst.); the space at base
between submedian (radius) and postcosta (st anal); by Selys in 1896
and later used in the sense of medial cell of Comst.

Median vein: in Odonata and Lepidoptera, = radius (Comst.): in
Lepidoptera, it runs from base to about middle, nearly through centre,
and is four or five branched: in Hymenoptera, it is the 3d from costal
margin.

Mediastinal: relating to the longitudinal median line or area.

Mediastinal area: in Orthoptera, the area between median or
mediastinal vein and the costal or front margin: = marginal area.

Mediastinal vein: in Orthoptera and Diptera, = suhcosta (Comst.):
also, in Diptera, = auxiliary vein (Meigen).

Medio-eubital cross-vein: between media 4 and cubitus, connecting
the two series (Comst.).

Medio-ventral line: in caterpillars, extends along middle of under side.

Medipectus: the under side of meta-thorax: the mesosternum.

Mediproboscis: the middle third of the flexed proboscis of muscid flies.

Medi-thorax: =mesothorax; q.v.


Medius: middle.


Mega- Megalo-: large.

Melanic: with a blackish suffusion.

Melanism: an abnormal or unusual darkening: a suffusion with
blackish.

Mellifera: honey-makers: applied to bees as a whole.


Melliferous: honey-producing, or producers of honey.

Mellisugous: honey-sucking: a feeder on honey.

Member: any one of the external appendages.

Membranaceous: thin, skin-like, semi-transparent, like parchment:
of a thin, pliable texture.

Membrana retinens: the stretched part of the membrane around the
rectum of butterfly larvae, used in the change to the chrysalis.

Membrane -ana: any thin, transparent, flexible body tissue:
specifically the wing tissue between the veins: in Heteroptera, the thin
membranous tip of the hemelytra.

Membranous or eous: composed of membrane or skin-like tissue.

Membranule: the small opaque expansion at base of wings in
Odonata.

Meniscoidal: with one side concave the other convex, like a round
segment from a hollow sphere.

Menognatha: insects in which both young and adults feed by
mandibles; e.g. the Orthoptera: see menorhyncha and metagnatha.

Menorhyncha: forms in which both young and adult take food by
suction e.g. Hemiptera: see metognatha and metagnatha.

Mental suture: in Coleoptera, the line between mentum and gula.

Mentigerous: bearing or having a mentum.

Mentum: a labial sclerite bearing the movable parts; attached to and
sometimes fused with the sub-mentum; corresponds to the (united)
stipes of maxillae: in Coleoptera, what is usually called mentum is
really submentum: in Diptera, the term is applied to the posterior oral
margin: in Hymenoptera, is part of "tongue," the second joint bearing
the labial palpi, paraglossae and ligula.

Merdivorous: feeding upon dung or excrement: see scatophagous.

Meriaeum: the posterior inflected part of the metasternum  in
Coleoptera.

Meroistic: ovaries that secrete yolk or vitellaginous cells as well as ova.

Mesad: extending or directed toward the median plane.

Mesal: pertaining to, situated on or in the median plane of the body.

Mesenchym: that portion of the mesoderm that produces the
connective tissues of the body.

Mesenteron: the mid-gut, stomach or chylific ventricle: the middle
portion of the primitive intestinal canal, lined with entoderm.

Mesepimeron: in Odonata: the sclerite between humeral and first
lateral suture.

Mesepisterna: in Odonata,- the oblique lateral pieces of mesothorax,
meeting dorsally in a ridge.

Mesially: at or to the middle.

Mesinfraepisternum: a sclerite formed between propleuron,
mesepisternum, mesepimeron and second coxa.

Meso: middle: as prefix, drops the o when stem begins with a vowel.

Mesoblast: the middles germ layer of the embryos: = mesoderm.

Mesoderm:= mesoblast: gives rise to muscular and circulatory
systems.

Mesodont::= amphiodont: q.v.

Mesomeros: the 2d to 5th abdominal segments in Lepidoptera.

Meson: the middle plane of the body.

Mesonotum: the primitively upper surface of the 2d or middle thoracic
ring.

Mesophragma: an internal prolongation of the metapraescutum,
affording attachment to some of the wing muscles.

Mesopleura: in Diptera, the space before the root of the wing between
the dorso- and sternopleural sutures: in Hymenoptera, the piece
below the insertion of the wings.

Mesopleural bristles: in Diptera, are inserted in the angle formed by
the dorso-pleural and meso-pleural sutures.

Mesopleural suture: in Diptera, runs from the root of the wings
downward and separates the meso-pleura from the pteropleura.

Mesopleuron: the lateral surface of the meta-thorax.

Mesosternal cavity: in Elateridae, the opening into which the
prosternal spine or mucro is fitted.

Mesosternal epimera: in Coleoptera; the narrow pieces separating the
meta-sternal from the meta-sternal episterna.

Mesosternal episterna: Coleoptera; on each side of mesosternum
between anterior border and epimera; generally separated by a
distinct suture.

Mesosternal lobes: in Orthoptera; = mesosternellum, q.v.

Mesosternellum: in Orthoptera, two median lobes of the mesosternum,
one on each side of the deep median notch: in general,
the sternellum of the mesothorax.

Mesosternum: the underside or breast of the meta-thorax.

Mesostethidium: = meso-thorax: q.v.

Mesostethium: the middle piece of the underside of meta-thorax,
between the middle and hind legs.

Mesostigma: in Odonata, the spiracles of second thoracic segment.

Mesosulcus: a central longitudinal furrow of mesosternum in
Hymenoptera.

Mesotarsus: the tarsus of the middle leg.

Mesothoracotheca: the pupal covering of the meso-thorax.

Mesothorax: the second or middle thoracic ring; bears the middle legs
and the anterior wings.

Mesotergum: = mesonotum; q.v.

Meta-: posterior: used as a prefix to designate the third thoracic ring
and its parts.

Metablastic: relating to the ecto- or meta-blast or ectoderm.

Metabola: insects with a complete metamorphosis in which the larva
does not resemble the adult, and the pupa is quiescent.

Metabolism: is transformation: the whole process or series of changes
of food into tissue and cell-substance and of these latter into waste
products the first of these changes being anabolic, the second
katabolic.

Metabolous: undergoing metamorphosis or transformation.

Metacoxal plate: in Coccinellidae, that portion of the first ventral
segment included above the ventral lines visible on that segment.

Metagnatha: insects which feed with jaws when young and by suction,
with tubular mouths when mature; e.g. the Lepidoptera: see
menognatha and menorhyncha.

Metagonia: the hind or anal angle of a wing.

Metallic: having the appearance of metal: applied to a surface or color.

Metaloma: the sutural or inner margin of primaries.

Metamere: a segment, somite or athromere.

Metameric: made up of segments or metameres.

Metamerism: the arrangement in metameres.

Metameros: in Lepidoptera. the 6th to 8th abdominal segments.

Metamorphosis: is that series of changes through which an insect
passes in its growth from egg through larva and pupa to adult: it is
complete when the pupa is inactive and does not feed; incomplete
when there is no pupa or when the pupa is active and feeds.

Metamorphosis dimidio: an incomplete transformation.

Metamorphosis perfecta: a complete transformation.

Metanotum: the primitively upper surface of the third or posterior
thoracic ring: in Diptera, the oval arched portion behind, beneath
the scutellum best developed in flies with long, slender abdomen:
e.g. Tipulidae.

Metaphragma: the hindmost internal thoracic septum.

Metapleura: in Diptera, a swollen space at the outside of the
metanotum, between it, the pteropleura and the hypopleura; in
Hymenoptera, the piece behind and below the insertion of the hind
wings.

Metapleural bristles: in Diptera, are inserted in the metapleura.

Metapneustic: larva, chiefly dipterous, in which the spiracles are
confined to the posterior segment.

Metapnystega: that circular area of metanotum behind the
postscutellum.

Metapodeon: the abdomen behind the podeon or petiole in
Hymenoptera.

Metasternal: relating or attached to the metasternum.

Metasternal epimera: small sclerite separating the metasternal
episterna from the ventral segments.

Metasternal episterna: sclerite situated on each side of the
Metasternum, immediately behind the mesosternum epimera.

Metasternellum: the sternellum of the metathorax.

Metasternum: the underside or breast of the metathorax.

Meta-stethidium: = meta-thorax; q.v.

Metastigma: in Odonata, the spiracles of third thoracic segment.

Metastoma: in Orthoptera:= hypopharynx: q.v.

Metatarsus: applied to basal joint of tarsus, where that differs greatly
in length or otherwise from the other joints: see sarothrum.

Metatergum: = metanotum; q.v.

Metathoracotheca: the pupal covering of the meta-thorax.

Metathorax: the third thoracic ring or segment; bears the hind legs
and second pair of wings; variably distinct; sometimes closely united
with the mesothorax and sometimes appearing as a portion of the
abdomen.

Metatype: is a specimen named by the author after comparison with
the type; according to some, it should be also a topotype.

Metazona: in Orthoptera, the dorsal surface of the prothorax behind
the principal sulcus.

Metepimeron: in Odonata, lies behind the second lateral suture and
extends ventrally to the sternum.

Metepisternum: in Odonata, is the sclerite between the first and
second lateral thoracic sutures.

Meter: the standard of length in the metric system = 39.37 inches:
see centimeter and millimeter.

Meticulose -us: is a maculation in the form of a series of colored
flames.

Metinfraepisternum: in Odonata; the sclerite just above base of 3d
coxa; below metepisternum and before metepimeron.

Metochy: the relation borne to ants by the tolerated guests in
ant-hills; demanding nothing from and giving nothing to the ants; see
symphily and synecthry.

Metopidium: the anterior declivous surface of prothorax in
Membracidae.

Micans: shining: also a surface of which only parts are shining.

Microchaetae: small bristles, as opposed to macrochaetae, in Diptera.

Microergates: the dwarf workers among ants.

Micron: the unit of microscopic measurement = 001 mm.: represented
by the symbol µ: the symbol  µµ represents .001 of a micron.
{Scanner's note: the µµ notation would no longer be valid.}

Micropterous: small winged.

Micropterism: the tendency to produce small wings; applied to a line
of variation.

Micropyles: minute openings in the egg, through which spermatozoa
enter.

Microsomites: small secondary rings or somites of the macrosomites
in the embryo, which afterward become the body segments.

Microthorax: a supposed thoracic ring between the head and
prothorax.

Middle apical area: = internal area; q.v.

Middle field: = discoidal field; q.v.

Middle lobes: of pronotum in Orthoptera; see lobes.

Middle pleural area: in Hymenoptera; the median of the three areas
between lateral and pleural carinae: = 2d pleural area.

Mid-dorsal thoracic Carina: a ridge or elevated line at the meeting of
the mesepisterna in Odonata.

Mid-gut: the chylific ventricle with the caecal glands, tubes or
pouches.

Mid-intestine: = mid-gut.

Migrants: applied to that brood of plant lice which flies from one to an
alternate food plant: any forms that fly from the place where they
were born for food or other purposes.

MM.: = Millimeter: .001 meter = .039 of an inch: roughly 25 mm. are
counted to an inch in measuring insects. {Scanner's comment: modern
usage is lower case.  So: mm.}

Mimetic: when a species mimics or resembles another or some other
object in appearance; but not in structure and other characters.

Mimicry: strictly, the resemblance of one animal to another not closely
related animal, living in the same locality; often loosely used to
denote also resemblance to plants and inanimate objects: Batesian
mimicry is where one of two similar species is distasteful (so-called
model), the other not distasteful (so-called mimic);

Müllerian mimicry is where both species are distasteful.

Mines: applied to galleries or burrows between upper and under
surface of leaf tissue, when made by larvae: they are linear, when they
are narrow and only a little winding; serpentine, when they are curved
or coiled, becoming gradually larger to a head-like end: trumpet-mines,
when they start small and enlarge rapidly at tip; blotch mines,
when they are irregular blotches tentiform, when the blotch mines
throw the leaf into a fold on one side.

Miniate -us: of the color of red lead [vermilion with a slight admixture
of dragon's blood].

Mirror: in Cicada; see specular membrane.

Mitosoma: the middle piece of a developing spermatozoon.

Mobile: movable: having the power of motion.

Model: see mimicry.

Modioliform: globular, truncated at both ends; like the hub of a wheel.

Mola or Molar: the ridged or roughened grinding surface of the
mandible: when the mandible is compound, the molar corresponds to
the subgalea of maxilla.

Monarsenous: that kind of union where one male suffices for many
females.

Moniliform: beaded like a necklace.

Monochromatic: of one color throughout.

Monodactyle: with a single movable claw which closes on the tip of the
other leg structures as in some parasitica.

Monodomous: ants in which each colony has one nest only.

Monoecious: when both sexual elements or glands exist in one
individual.

Monogamous: a union where a female is fertilized by one male only.

Monomeri: insects with one-jointed tarsi.

Monomorphic: species of which only one sex (female) is known to
exist.

Monophagous: insects feeding upon only one species or genus of
plants.

Monothelious: a union where one female is fecundated by many
males.

Monotrocha -ous: Hymenoptera in which the trochanters are single:
having legs in which the trochanter is one-jointed.

Monotypical: a genus described from a single species, no other being
known; or described from a single specified species with which are
associated others believed to be identical in structure: see isotypical
and heterotypical.

Moult: a period in the transformation when the larva changes from
one instar to another: the cast skin of a larva that has moulted.

Mouth: the anterior opening into the alimentary canal, where the
feeding structures are situated and in which the food is prepared for
ingestion.

Mouth-parts: a collective name including labrum, mandibles,
maxillae, labium and appendages = trophi.

Mucoreus: mouldy: a surface covered with small, fringe-like processes.

Mucro: a long, straight or curved process terminating in a point: the
pro-sternal process in Elateridae: the terminal spine or process of an
obtect pupa: "the median posterior point of the epigastrium when
differentiated by elevation."

Mucronate: terminated in a sharp point.

Mucrones: in Collembola the two small end pieces of the furcula,
proceeding from the dentes.

Mullerian association: a group of species belonging to different genera,
often different families or even orders, having similar colors,
possessing more or less distasteful qualities and living in the same
locality.

Muller's thread: the common terminal thread of all the ovarian tubes.

Multangulate: with many angles.

Multi-: many; used as a prefix, often without the i.

Multiarticulate: with many joints or segments.

Multilocular: with many large cells, spaces or cavities.

Multipartite: divided into many parts.

Multiplicate: with many longitudinal folds or lines of plication.

Multispinose: with many spines.

Mumia: the pupa.

Munite -us: armed; provided with an armature.

Muricate -us: armed with sharp, rigid points.

Murinus: mouse colored [gray with some yellow].

Mushroom bodies: two stalked, mushroom-like bodies arising from
procerebral lobes; supposed to be the seat of insect intelligence.

Muscle: the fleshy fibres of the insect body that serve to move the
appendages and other body organs.

Mute: silent: without power to produce audible sound.

Mutic -us: unarmed: lacking processes where such usually occur.

Mutici: Acridiids without a posternal spines.

Mutilate -us: cut off: mutilated: abbreviated: not complete.

Mycetophagous: feeding upon fungi.

Myiasis: disease or injury caused by the attack of dipterous larvae.

Myoblast: a cell that produces muscular tissue.

Myrmecology: that branch of entomology that deals with ants.

Myrmecophilous: ant-loving: applied to insects that live in ant nests.

Mystacine -us: bcarded: with a hairy fringe above mouth or on
clypeus.

Mystax: in Diptera; a patch of hair or bristles above the mouth, on the
lower part of the hypostoma above the vibrissae.

Mytiliform: shell-like; as the middle feet in some aquatic Hemiptera.






N

Nacreous: pearly: resembling mother of pearl := margaritaceous.

Nail: a tarsal claw: specifically the stout pointed claws in predatory
Heteroptera = unguis.

Naked: not clothed: lacking vestiture: a pupa when not inclosed in a
cocoon or other covering.

Nasal suture: =clypeal suture; q.v.

Nasus: anterior termination of the face in certain  Hymenoptera: the
clypeus or a modification of it: in Odonata, the upper portion of the
clypeus = supra-clypeus = postclypeus.

Nasuti: that type of termite soldiers that have the head prolonged into
a point.

Natatorial -ions: formed for swimming.

Navicular: boat-shaped = cymbiform.

Neanic: referring to the pupal stage.

Nearctic: temperate and arctic North America, including Greenland.

Nebula: a cloud: a vague, indefined, dusky shading.

Nebulous -ose: cloudy: without definite form or outline.

Neck: the slender connecting structure between head and thorax of
such insects as have the head free: any contraction of the head at its
juncture with the thorax.

Necrophagous: living in or on carrion.

Nectaries: honey-tubes, cornicles, siphuncles; q.v.

Nematid: thread-like.

Nematocera: = nemocera; q. A.

Nematocerous: with long, thread-like antenna.

Nemocera: Diptera with long, at least six-jointed antennae.

Nemoglossata: bees with a thread-like tongue.

Nemoricolous: living in open, sunny woods.

Neogeic: belonging to the Western Hemisphere or New World: see
gerontogeic.

Neolepidoptera: all haustellate Lepidoptera, except the generalized
Micropterygidae; mandibles not functionally present; pupa incomplete
or obtect: see paleolepidoptera and protolepidoptera.

Neoteinic: applied to complemental females in Termites because,
though reproductive, they retain some juvenile characters.

Neotropical: that part of the earth's surface embraced in the greater
part of Mexico, West Indies and South America.

Neotype: a specimen identified with a species already described, and
selected as a standard of reference where the original type or co-types
are lost or destroyed.

Nephridia: tubular structures functioning as kidneys in Annelids,
Mollusks, etc. and incorrectly used as = malpighian tubules; q.v.

Nepionic: that stage of development immediately succeeding the
embryonic; proposed as a substitute for larval.

Nerinaeum: a ventral thoracic sclerite between the metasternum and
posterior coxa in some Coleoptera.

Nerve: a thread-like structure, composed of delicate filaments whose
function it is to transmit sensations or stimuli to or from a ganglion or
from or to any part of the body or its appendages.

Nerves: sometimes used to = veins, in wing structures.

Nervi: belonging or referring to the nerves.

Nervulation: arrangement of the nerves: specifically applied to the
arrangement of the chitinous framework of wings and thus= venation;
q.v. Nervules or Nervures: the rod or vein-like structures supporting
the membranes of wings and = veins and veinlets; q.v.

Nervuration: = nervulation and venation: q.v.

Neural canal: an incomplete tunnel on the floor of meso- and
metathorax, formed by fusion of apodemes, serving for the reception
and protection of the ventral nerve cord and for the attachment of
muscles.

Neural groove: is that furrow in the primitive layer of the embryo in
which the nerve cord is formed.

Neuration: = venation; q.v.

Neurilemma: the external sheath of a nerve fibre.

Neuroblast: the large cell in the early embryo, from which the nervous
system develops.

Neuromere: that part of a body segment pertaining to the nervous
system.

Neuroptera: nerve-winged: an ordinal term applied to insects with four
net-veined wings; mouth mandibulate: head free: thorax loosely
agglutinated; metamorphosis complete: in its older use, the term
applied to all net-veined insects irrespective of metamorphosis or
thoracic structure.

Neuropteroidea: like the Neuroptera in the wide sense; applied to
those living insects included by Linnaeus in his Neuroptera; also to
those extinct forms which have a general resemblance to them.

Neurospongium: a granular matrix in the periopticon of the insect eye.

Neuter: the term applied to workers or undeveloped females in some
Hymenoptera: indicated by * or *, an imperfect form of Venus
sign.{Scanner's comment: I have no characters to represent the
symbols.  One is like the normal female (Venus) sign, but with no
cross stroke on the downward stroke.  The other is the symbol for
Mercury or of Hermaphroditus, like a Venus sign crowned with
crescent horns.}

Nidificate: to nest: applied when eggs are placed in a prepared
receptaculum.

Niger: black.

Nigricans: black, tinged with gray.

Nits: the eggs of sucking lice; specifically when attached to a hair: in
general, though rarely, applied in the singular to an egg.

Nitidus: shining: applied to a highly polished, smooth surface.

Niveous -eus: snowy white.

Nocturnal: species that fly or are active at night.

Nodal furrow: in Odonata; a transverse suture, beginning at a point
in costal margin corresponding to the nodus, and extending toward
inner margin.

Nodal sector: in Odonata; = media 2 (Comst.): arises from upper
sector of arculus near nodus and extends to outer margin.

Node: a knot or knob: in the plural refers to the small segment or
segment between thorax and main portion of abdomen in ants.

Nodiform: in the form of a knot or knob.

Nodicorn: with antennae that have the apex of each joint swollen.

Nodose -us: knotted or with knots; a body with one or more knotted
parts a sculpture with almost isolated knots.

Nodule: a little knot, lump or node.

Nodulose -us -ate: with small nodes or nodules: a surface sculpture
of knots or links, connected by an undulating line.

Nodus: in Odonata; a stout, oblique, short vein at the place where the
anterior margin of the wings is sometimes drawn in.

Nopalry: a plantation of cacti for raising cochineal insects.

Normal: of the usual form or type: not out of the ordinary.

Notate: marked by spots: with a series of depressed marks as a
sculpture.

Notched: indented, cut or nicked; usually a margin.

Notocephalon: in some aquatic Hemiptera, that part of the head which
is apparent from a dorsal aspect.

Notodont: with toothed backs: applied to a series of moths whose
larvae are more or less conspicuously humped on dorsal surface.

Notopleural suture: = dorso-pleural suture; q.v.

Nototheca: that part of the pupa covering upper surface of abdomen.

Notum: the dorsal or upper part of a segment: = tergum.

Nucha: the upper surface of the neck connecting head and thorax.

Nucleate: with, or having a nucleus.

Nucleolus: the small portion of matter in the nucleus most readily
affected by staining fluids.

Nucleus: a well-defined, differentiated, round or oval body imbedded
in the cell contents.

Nude -us: naked: a surface devoid of hair, scales or other vestiture.

Nuditas: = nudity.

Nudity: the state of being naked or bare of vestiture.

Nurses: worker ants or worker bees which care for the eggs, larvae
and pupae, but do not forage, the latter function being taken up later,
when nursing is given up.

Nutant: nodding; the tip bent toward the horizon.

Nutritive chamber: an enlarged section of ovarian tube, filled with
granular nutritive material used in developing the egg cells.

Nymph: the larval stage of insects with incomplete metamorphosis:
applies also to their pupal stage, and sometimes used as = pupa.

Nympha inclusa: = coarctate pupa; q.v.

Nymphipara: applied to insects that bear living young in an advanced
stage of development: see also pupipara.






O

Ob-: as a prefix, means inversely.

Obconic: conic, with the apex pointing downward.

Obcordate: inversely heart-shaped, with the point applied to the base
of another object or part.

Obese -us: unnaturally distended: usually applied to the abdomen.

Oblate: flattened; applied to a spheroid of which the diameter is
shortened at two opposite ends.

Oblique: any direction between perpendicular and horizontal.

Oblique vein: in Odonata; an apparent cross-vein situated between M2
and Rs, distal to the level of the nodus and inclined obliquely, from its
front end, backward and outward; in reality the basal part of Rs.

Obliterate: nearly washed out; indistinct.

Oblong: longer than broad.

Obovate: inversely egg-shaped; the narrow end downward.

Obpyriform: inversely pearshaped.

Obscure: not readily seen: not well defined.

Obsite-us: a surface covered with equal scales or other bodies.

Obsolete: nearly or entirely lost: inconspicuous.

Obtect: wrapped in a hard covering.

Obtected: applied to pupae when they are covered with a chitinous
case which confines and conceals all appendages, though their
outlines may be marked on the surface: see free, and coarctate.

Obtuse: not pointed: an angle greater than a right angle: opposed to
acute. Obtuse-angulate: two markings or margins meeting so as to
form an obtuse angle.

Obtusilingues: short-tongued bees with the tip obtuse or bifid: see
acutilingues.

Occipital foramen: the opening in the occiput, opposed to a similar
opening in the prothorax: = foramen magnum.

Occipital margin: in Mallophaga, the posterior margin of the head.

Occipito-orbital bristles: in Diptera; situated on posterior orbit of eye.

Occiput: that part of the head behind the vertex: in Diptera, the whole
posterior surface of the head: in bees, the space between the vertex
and the neck.

Occlusor: applied to muscles which close an opening; e.g. spiracles.

Occult -us: hidden; concealed from superficial view.

Ocellar bristles: in Diptera, are situated close to the ocelli, usually
directed forward: often absent.

Ocellar ribband: a crescent-shaped, smooth thin belt across the eye
region in butterfly chrysalids.

Ocellar triangle: a triangle, indicated by grooves or depressions, on
which the ocelli are situated; Diptera.

Ocellate: eye-like in appearance: in Lepidoptera, spots on the wings,
bordered by a colored iris or ring, and usually with a pupil.

Ocelli: plural of ocellus; q.v.; = stemmata.

Ocelligerous: supplied with, or bearing ocelli.

Ocellus: a simple eye, consisting of a single convex or bead-like lens,
which conveys an image to a retina.

Ocelli occur in larvae and, singly or in small groups, in adults: the
compound eyes are made up of numerous ocelli.

Ochraceous: yellow with a slight tinge of brown [pale cadmium yellow
and brown ochre].

Ochraeus -eus: = ochraceous.

Ochro-leucus: dilute ochraceous.

Ocular emargination: in Mallophaga, a lateral emargination of the
head in which the eye is received posteriorly.

Ocular fleck: in Mallophaga, a small, intensely black spot of pigment
in the eyes.

Ocular fringe: in Mallophaga, closely set small hair on posterior half of
ocular emargination, sometimes extending on temporal margin.

Ocular lobes: of brain = procerebrum; q.v.

Ocular sclerite: the first or protocerebral segment of the head.

Ocular tubercles: in Aphids, are a group of prominent facets on the
hinder part of each eye.

Oculi -us: the eyes: an eye: refers to the compound eyes.

Oculocephalic: applied to that pair of imaginal buds destined to
produce the cephalic region in Hymenoptera.

Odona: toothed: applied to Odonata by Fabricius because of the long
teeth on the maxilla and labium.

Odonata: net-veined insects with mandibulate mouth; head free;
thorax agglutinate; wings similar, elongate, flat; metamorphosis
incomplete; copulatory organs of male near base of abdomen,
separate from the testes. {Scanner's comment: Dragon flies
and damselflies}

Odonate: bearing toothed mouth parts, like those of dragon flies.

Odoriferous: diffusing an odor; applied to glands or secreting organs.

OEcology: see ecology.

OEdagus: the penis.

OEnocytes: large yellow cells arranged segmentally in clusters, in each
side of body cavity: associated with blood and fat bodies.

OEsophageal bone: a plate below anterior part of oesophagus in
Psocidae.

OEsophageal bulb: = sub-clypeal pump; q.v.

OEsophageal diverticula: = food reservoirs (q.v.); but more generally
applied also to any sac-like structure connected with the gullet.

OEsophageal lobes: form posterior portion of brain or tritocerebrum.

Oesophageal valve: a funnel-like folding of the oesophagus, extending
into the chylific ventricle in some insects, and forming a valve that
controls the entrance of food into that organ: = cardiac valvule.

Oesophagus: the gullet: that part of the alimentary canal between the
mouth and the crop.

Olfactory: pertaining to the sense of smell: those lobes of the
deutocerebrum from which the nerves supplying the antennae arise.

Oligonephria: applied to insects with few urinary (Malpighian) tubes.

Oligoneura: having few wing veins: specifically applied in Diptera to
Cecidomyids.

Olivaceous: with a tinge of olive-green, usually as a shading [olive
green].

Omaloptera: the pupiparous flies.

Omia: the shoulders: the lateral anterior angles of an agglutinated
thorax, when they are distinct:= see umbone: in Coleoptera; a
corneous sclerite to which the muscles of the anterior coxa are
attached; also the lateral margin of the prothorax; also the lateral
margin of the scutellum in Carabids and Dytiscids.

Ommateum: the compound eye.

Ommatidium -ia: one of the elements of which the compound eye is
composed.

Omnivorous: a general feeder upon animal or vegetable food, or both.

Oncus -i: a welt: applied to welt-like ridges on caterpillars.

Onisciform: shaped like a wood-louse, Oniscus sp.; applied to certain
Lycaenid and other caterpillars.

Ontogenetic: relating to the development of the individual.

Ontogeny: the development of the individual as distinguished from
that of the species: see phylogeny.

Onyches: claws of tarsi.

Onychium -ia: small processes between the tarsal claws in many
Diptera; see empodium: a more or less retractile process on the feet of
some beetles: in Hymenoptera, the apical tarsal joint bearing the
claws: see also arolium and pulvillus.

Oöblast: the primitive germinal nucleus of an egg.

Oögenesis: the process of egg-formation.

Oölemma: the cell wall of an egg: see vitelline membrane.

Oötheca: the covering or case over an egg mass, as in certain
Orthoptera: see egg case.

Opacus: opaque; a surface without any lustre.

Opalescent: with a bluish white lustre, as in opals.

Opalinus: = opalescent; q.v.

Opaque: without lustre: not transparent.

Operaria: the workers in Hymenoptera.

Operative: in working order or actually working.

Opercula: two plates covering the vocal structure of Cicada, beneath.

Operculum: a lid or covering: in Diptera, the chitinous envelope
covering the lower part of the muscid mouth; the labrum-epipharynx
of Dimmock: the scutes covering the meso-thoracic stigmata: in
Aleurodidae, the lid-like structure closing the vasiform orifice; q.v.

Ophthalmic: relating to the eye.

Ophthalmotheca: that part of the pupa that covers the eyes.

Opisthogoneate: having the organs of generation at hind end of body.

Opisthogonia: the anal angle of the secondaries.

Opposite: placed over against, or opposed to.

Optic: relating to the organs of vision.

Optic ganglia: are at the sides of the procerebrum and innervate the
compound eyes.

Optic lobes: the laterals lobes of the procerebrum in which are
centered the nerves supplying the organs of vision.

Opticon: the first of a series of three ganglionic swellings in the optic
nerve: see epiopticon and periopticon.

Optic segment: =procerebral segment; q.

Optic tract: is the perceptive portion of the compound eye.

Ora: a border: specifically in some Coleoptera, the lateral margin of
prothorax.

Ora coleopterorum: the margin of the elytra.

Orad: toward the mouth.

Oral: pertaining to the mouth.

Oral cavity: the mouth; = buccal cavity.

Oral fossa: in Mallophaga, a furrow lying in front of the mandibles.

Oral segment: that ring or segment which bears the mouth.

Orbicular: round and flat, the diameters of the plane equal: in sonic
moths, a round or oval macula in the median cell.

Orbit: an imaginary border around the eye: in Diptera the orbits are
divided into vertical or superior; frontal and facial or anterior; of the
cheek or inferior; occipital or posterior.

Orbital sclerite: a narrow sclerite encircling some eyes.

Order: one of the primary divisions of the Class Insecta, based largely
on wing structure and then usually ending in -ptera.

Ordure: excrement; usually applied to such as is foul or offensive.

Orichalceous: = aurichalceous; q.v.

Oriental: in geographical zoology as used by Wallace, that part of the
earth's surface including Asia east of the Indus River, south of the
Himalayas and the Yangtse-kiang watershed, Ceylon, Sumatra, Java
and the Philippines.

Orificium: the anal or genital opening.

Original type: is the actual specimen from which a published
description is prepared.

Orismologia -y: the defining of scientific or technical terms.

Orthoptera: straight winged: an ordinal term applied to insects in
which the primaries are not used in flight, but cover the longitudinally
folded secondaries; mouth mandibulate; head set into prothorax, the
latter free; metamorphosis incomplete.

Orthorrhapha: that section of Diptera in which the pupa escapes from
larval skin through a T-shaped opening on back: see cyclorrhapha.

Orthorrhaphous: straight-seamed.

Os: the mouth of insects, in general.

Oscillation: a vibrating or swinging from side to side.

Osculant: intermediate in character between two groups or series.

Osmaterium -ia: fleshy, tubular, eversible processes producing a
penetrating odor, capable of being projected through a slit in the
prothoracic segment of certain Papilionid caterpillars, and from
openings elsewhere in the bodies of other forms.
{Scanner's comment: currently the only spelling I can find is
"osmeterium".  This given spelling is almost certainly an error
on someone's part.  Not only do the earliest books that I can
find spell it "osmeterium", but the Greek root is "osme".}

Osmosis: the tendency of liquids to pass or diffuse through a
membrane or septum.

Osselet: = ossicle; q.v.

Ossicle: a small nodule of chitin resembling a bone.

Ossicula: small corneous pieces that serve in the articulation of the
wings to the thorax.

Ostia: the slit-like openings of the heart.

Ostiolar canal: a marginal furrow leading from the ostiole.

Ostiole: in Heteroptera, the openings at the sides of meso- and
metathorax, through which an odoriferous fluid is excreted.

Ostium: singular of Ostia; q.v.

-osus; an affix, signifying saturation, or the possession of the quality
expressed in the stem word.

Otocyst: an auditory or ear-like vesicle.

Otolith: a little ear-bone: granules or concretions found in an otocyst.

Outer lobe: of maxilla = galea; q.v.

Outer margin: the outer edge of wing, between apex and hind angle.

Ovo, Ovum: the eggs; an egg.

Ova glebata: eggs laid or concealed in lumps of dung.

Ova imposita: eggs laid in the substance that is to serve as food for
the larva.

Oval: egg-shaped, with both ends similar.

Ova pilosa: eggs that are covered with hair: usually from the abdomen
of the female.

Ovarian tube: a tubular structure in which are developed the cells
forming the future ova: a single one of the mass which, taken
together, form the ovaries.

Ovaries: a mass of ovarian tubes, lying one on each side of the body
cavity of the female, in each of which tubes eggs or ova are developed:
the individual tubes of an ovary all converge to one oviduct.

Ovariole: an ovarian tube: q.v.

Ovary: singular of ovaries; q.v.

Ovate: in outline, egg-shaped or oval.

Oviduct: the tube through which the egg passes from ovarian tubes
into vagina: sometimes used in the sense of ovipositor: q.v.

Oviform: egg-shaped.

Oviparous: where reproduction is through eggs laid by the female.

Oviposition: the act of depositing the eggs.

Ovipositor: the tubular or valved structure by means of which the eggs
are placed; usually concealed; but sometimes extended far beyond the
end of the body.

Oviscapt: = ovipositor; q.v.

Ovivalvule: in Ephemeroptera; is an appendage of the female
reproductive organs.

Ovoviviparous: when living young are born from eggs which are
hatched in the body of the parent.




P

Pacific coast humid area: is that faunal area of the transition zone
comprising the western parts of Washington and Oregon between the
Coast Mountains and Cascade range: parts of northern California and
most of the coast region from near Cape Mendocino south to the
Santa Barbara Mountains. To the south and east it passes into the
arid transition and in places into the upper Sonoran.

Pad: the pulvillus, or that part of it which is capable of extension and
retraction in some Coleoptera.

Paddle: the flattened joints of posterior tarsi in aquatic Hemiptera.

Paedogenesis: reproduction in the sexually immature or larval stage.

Paedogenetic: reproducing in the sexually immature or larval stage.

Pagina: the surface of a wing: P. superior, is the upper surface;
P. inferior, the lower surface: in Orthoptera, the external flattened
surface of the caudal femora.

Pagiopoda: Heteroptera, in which the posterior coxae are not globose
and the articulation is a hinge joint: see trochalopoda.

Pagiopodous: those Heteroptera which have the coxae of the hind legs
hinged and the femora grooved.

Pala: the shovel-shaped tarsal joints in many aquatic Heteroptera.

Palate: = hypopharynx; q.v.

Paleace: chaff or chaffy: = paleaceous.

Paleaceous: chaffy in appearance.

Palearctic: relating to that part of the earth's surface including
Europe, Africa north of Sahara, and Asia as far south as the southern
edge of the Yang-tse-Kiang watershed and the Himalayas, and west to
the Indus River.

Paleodictyoptera: an ordinal name suggested by Scudder for Paleozoic
insects which cannot be assigned to existing orders.

Paleolepidoptera: haustellate Lepidoptera in which the mandibles are
distinct and the pupa is free: includes the Micropterygidae only: see
protolepidoptera and neolepidoptera.

Pallescent: becoming pale or light in color or tint.

Pallette: the disc-like structure composed of three tarsal joints, on the
anterior feet of male Dytiscidae.

Pallid: pale or very pale.

Pallide-flavens: pale or whitish yellow.

Pallidus: of a pale, cadaverous hue [a very dilute brown pink].

Pallium: an erectile membrane partially closing the open cavity formed
by the walls of the sub-genital plate in Melanopli.

Palma: the basal segment of the anterior tarsus when it is broadened
or specifically modified.

Palmate: like the palm of the hand, with finger-like processes.

Palmula: = pulvillus; q.v.

Palp: a mouth feeler or palpus.

Palpal: belonging, relating or attached to the palpi.

Palparium: in some Coleoptera, and other insects, the membranous
support to which the labial palpi are attached, and which permits an
amount of extension not possible when they are fixed.

Palpi: plural of palpus; q.v.

Palpicorne: with long, slender, antenna-like palpi.

Palpifer: any palpus-bearing part: specifically, a small sclerite hearing
the maxillary palpus and itself articulated to the stipes.

Palpiferous or -gerous: bearing a palpus.

Palpiger: that sclerite of the labium to which the labial palpus is
attached corresponds to the palpifer of the maxilla and has been used
in the same general sense.

Palpigerous stipes: in Coleopterous larvae, = palpifer; q.v.

Palpuli: the maxillary palpi in Lepidoptera, when visibly developed.

Palpus: a mouth feeler: tactile, usually jointed structures borne by the
maxillae (maxillary palpi) and labium (labial palpi).

Panduriform: violin shaped: oblong, with rounded ends, medially
constricted.

Panorpatae: = Mecoptera; q.v.

Pantherine: in color, almost like cervinus; q.v.: in maculation, like
those of a panther.

Papilioform: formed like a butterfly wing.

Papilionaceous: butterfly-like.

Papilla: a minute, soft projection: specifically the modified ligula in
silk spinning caterpillars.

Papillary: with nipple-like processes that have the tips rounded.

Papillate -us: a surface with small elevations which are porous at tip.

Papilliform: like a wart or pimple.

Papillose -us: pimply; a surface covered with raised dots or pimples.

Pappose: downy: made up or clothed with pappus.

Pappas: a fine down.

Para-: next to; near by; at the side of.

Parabiosis: see symbiosis.

Parabolic: elongately rounded.

Paraclypeal piece: in lepidopterous pupa, occurs in some of the
generalized families on each side of the maxillary palpi.

Paraclypeus: in caterpillars, a narrow sclerite bordering clypeus at
sides.

Paraderm: the limiting membrane enclosing the pronymph of Muscidae.

Paraglossa: a paired, labial structure, lying at each side of the ligula;
often connected with it; sometimes free and two-jointed: corresponds to
the galea of maxilla.

Parallel: along the same line and nearly equidistant.

Paranal: at the side of or next to the anus or anal structures.

Paranal forks: two lateral, bristle-like structures in some caterpillars,
used to throw frass pellets to a distance.

Paranal lobes: = podical plates; q.v.

Paraphysis: the chitinized thickenings or lateral ingrowths, usually
situated at the base of the lobes in certain Diaspid genera.

Parapleura: the sternal side pieces in beetles.

Parapodia: the pro- or false legs: more specifically applied to the
jointed abdominal processes of the Symphyla.

Parapsidae: the small sclerites on each side of the scutellum in
Chalcids, marked by the parapsidal grooves.

Parapsidal furrows: longitudinal grooves on each side of the
mesoscutum of Proctytrypidae separating the parapsides from the
middle lobe.

Parapsidal grooves: the grooves or furrows on each side of the Chalcid
scutellum, defining the parapsidae.

Parapsides: lateral pieces of the meso-scutum, separated from the
mesal portion by the parapsidal furrows.

Parapteron -era: small sclerites, articulated to the dorsal extremity of
the episternum, just below the wings; absent on prothorax = the
tegulae of Hymenoptera, and patagia of Lepidoptera: have been
homologized with the elytra of Coleoptera.

Parasita: = parasitica: q.v.

Parasite: a species that lives in or on another animal or insect, and
depends upon the tissue of the host for its food supply.

Parasitic: living on or in some other animal or insect in such a way as
to derive all nourishment from the tissues of the host.

Parasitica: the sucking lice: wingless; without metamorphosis; mouth
with piercing lancets; thoracic segments similar; habits epizoötic.

Parasitism: a form of symbiosis in which one party lives upon or at the
expense of the other, makes no return and destroys its host: see
symbiosis; commensalism.

Parastigma: = pterostigma; q.v.

Parastigmatic glands: small, circular glands, which secrete a waxy
powder, sometimes present around the spiracles of Coccidae.

Paratype: is every specimen of the series from which the type was
selected see type and cotype.

Parse: sparse or sparsely.

Parcidentate: with few teeth.

Parenchymatous: composed of soft cellular and connective tissue.

Parietes: walls: the perpendicular sides of elevated bodies.

Paronychium-ia: one or more bristle-like appendages of onychia; q.v.

Parthenogenetic: see asexual.

Parthenogenesis: reproduction by direct growth of germs from
egg-cells without fertilization by the male element: as in
plant lice, gall wasps, etc.

Particolored: partly of one, partly of another color: divided into two or
more color fields.

Partite -us: divided; e.g. the eyes of Gyrinidae.

Parum: not much.

Patagium -ia: in Lepidoptera, those sclerites that cover the base of
primaries: often used as synonymous with tegula and squamula, q.v.:
assigned by some writers to the pro-, by others to the meso-thorax:
homologized with the paraptera of meso-thorax.

Patella -ae: the modified joints of anterior tarsi in Dytiscidae;
plate-like, horny or spongy structures on the undersides of the tarsal joints:
the first coxal joint.

Patellar: pertaining to the knee-joint or cap.

Patellariae: in Dytiscids, the unequal, cup-like impressions on the
underside of the patella.

Patens, Patentes: open; diverging; spreading apart.

Patric: home or country of origin.

Patulous-ose: open, spreading.

Paunch: a crop-like accessory pouch in some Mallophaga: any
pouch-like appendage of the alimentary canal.

Paurometabolous: metamorphosis in which the changes of form are
gradual and inconspicuous: e.g. Orthoptera and most Rhynchota.

Pavillions: the sheds or cells sometimes built by ants as a shelter for
groups of plant lice.

Paxilla: a small stake or peg: a bundle of spicular processes.

Pearlaceous: having the appearance of pearl.

Pecten: a comb: in Hymenoptera, rigid, incurred setae on the basal
parts of maxilla and labium: the rows of spines on the feet of
pollen-gathering bees: any series of bristles arranged like a comb: in
mosquito larvae the comb-like teeth on the breathing tube.

Pectinate: comb-shaped: with even branches like the teeth of a comb.

Pectinato-fimbriate: having pectinations that are fringed with hair.

Pectoralis: relating to the breast.

Pectoral plate: in Coleoptera, the sternum.

Pectunculate: with a row of minute appendages like the teeth of a
comb: e.g. some maxillary structures.

Pectus: the ventral portion of thorax: variably applied in Coleoptera,
for the entire meso- and meta-thorax: also the pro- and meso-sternum:
in Diptera, is the inferior surface of the thorax between the legs.

Pedal line: in caterpillars: extends along the base of the feet.

Pedal tubercle: on the thoracic and abdominal rings of caterpillars: on
the anterior side of leg-base and, correspondingly, on apodal
segments: is VII of the abdomen where it consists of three setae: VI of
the thorax where the setae are not numbered: constant (Dyar).

Pedamina: the aborted fore-legs of Nymphalid butterflies.

Pedate: foot-bearing, or having feet.

Peddler: applied to the larvae of such Cassid beetles as carry their
excrement and cast skins on an anal fork.

Pedes: the feet, or really, legs.

Pedicellus or Pedicle: the third joint in a geniculate antenna: forming
the pivot between scape and funicle: in general, a stalk or stem.

Pediculosis: a state of lousiness, or the abnormal condition caused by
the multiplication of lice on the body: sec phthiriasis.

Pediculous: lousy: infested with lice.

Pedigerous: feet bearing.

Peduncle: a stalk or petiole: the basal joint of the antenna in
Homoptera: the smaller of the two stalks supporting the
mushroom body; q.v.

Pedunculated: set on a stalk or peduncle: attached by a slender stalk
or neck.

Pelagic: inhabiting the sea, far from land.

Pellicles: the exuviae or cast larval skins of many insects: in Coccidae
more especially applied to the hardened larval skin attached to the
puparia of Diaspinae.

Pellit: covered with long, drooping hairs, irregularly placed.

Pellucid: colored, but transparent: sometimes applied
when there is no color.

Pelotons: the balls of fine tracheae in larvae, developed to
supply the adult organism.

Pelottae: =arolia: q.v.

Peltate: shield- or target-shaped.

Penal claspers: in Proctytripidae. lateral fringed processes of the male
genitalia.

Penal sheath: the horny outer covering of the penis.

Pencil: a little, elongated brush of hair: in Diptera, applied to a group
of sensory hairs on the flagellum of the antenna.

Pendent: hanging down.

Pendulous: drooping: hanging free, attached to one end only.

Penes: open, slit-like structures of the seminal vesicles to the outer
surface in Euplectoptera.

Penicillate: with a long, flexible brush or pencil of hair: often at the
end of a thin stalk.

Penicilli: a pair of small style or cerci-like pieces on the tip of the 8th
dorsal segment of abdomen of various male Hymenoptera.

Penicilliform: pencil-like or shaped.

Penicillum: a pencil or brush of long hair attached at the end of a
stalk as long as the brush, and folded in a lateral groove in some
male moths.

Penis: the flexible, membranous, intromittent organ of the male.

Pennaceous: = pennate.

Fermate: feathered or bearing feather-like processes.

Penniform: feather-like in form.

Pentagon -um: a five-sided figure with five equal or unequal angles.

Pentamera: Coleoptera with 5-jointed tarsi.

Pentamerous: species having five-jointed tarsi.

Penultimate: next to the last.

Peptone: a soluble proteid compound produced by the digestion of
albummenoid food substances.

Per-: as a prefix, means very: extremely: through.

Percipient: with the power of perceiving.

Percurrent: running through the entire length.

Pereion: the prothorax.

Pereipoda: the second and third pair of thoracic legs of larvae, and the
2d pair in adults.

Perfoliate: divided into leaf-like plates: applied to antennae with
disc-like expansions connected by a stalk passing nearly through
their centres: also to any part possessing a well-developed
leaf-like or plate-like expansion.

Pergamenous: thin, partly transparent: resembling parchment.

Peri-: round about.

Periopticon: a complex nerve structure back of the basilar membrane
of the eye.

Pericardial: around, or belonging to the heart.

Pericardial cavity: the space between the diaphragm and dorsal body
wall, which contains the heart.

Pericardial cells: specialized cells, which lie along both sides of the
heart, and whose function it is to purify the blood.

Pericardial chamber: is the open space around the heart or dorsal
vessel.

Pericardial diaphragm: a delicate membranous tissue attached
to the ventral surface of the heart and laterally to the body wall
:= dorsal diaphragm wings of the heart.

Peri-intestinal: that part of the body cavity around the alimentary
canal.

Peri-neural: situated around a nerve: the body cavity
immediately surrounding the nervous system.

Periodical: recurring at regular intervals.

Periopticon: third ganglionic swelling of optic tract: see opticon.

Peripheral: referring to the outer margin.

Peripheria: the entire outline of the body.

Periphery: the circumference or outer margin.

Peripneustic: larvae which have the spiracles absent on middle and
posterior thoracic rings, and present on all other body segments.

Peripodal cavities: pouches in the embryo in which the rudiments of
the future legs and wings are developed.

Peripodal membrane: the cell layer surrounding the peripodal cavities.
Peristaltic: that periodic motion of the alimentary canal by means of
which the food is forced toward the anal extremity.

Peristethium: the meso-sternum.

Peristoma -ium: the border of the mouth or oral margin in Diptera;
sometimes used as := epistoma: q.v.

Peristome: a membranous tissue surrounding the mouth parts at
base, and forming the true ventral wall of the head.

Peritoneal: applied to the membrane surrounding the viscera, trachea,
and other internal structures.

Peritracheal: surrounding the trachea.

Peritreme: the corneous selerite surrounding a spiracle.

Peritrophic membrane: a funnel-like extension of the fore-gut,
extending back tube-like, through the chylific ventricle in some
insects.

Perivisceral: the cavity containing the alimentary canal and its
appendages.

Perlate: beaded: bearing relieved, rounded points in series.

Perpendicular: upright: at right angles to horizontal.

Persicinus: the red of peach blossoms.

Persistent: remaining constantly; always present.

Personate: gaping wide open; masked; disguised.

Pes, Pedes: a foot feet.

Petiolar area or Petiolarea: on the metanotum of some Hymenoptera,
the apical or hindmost of the three median cells 3d median area;
apical area.

Petiolate: that series of Hymenoptera in which there is a slender
stalk between the thorax and abdomen: = apocrita.

Petiolate: supported or placed on a stem or stalk; usually applied in
describing venation and the method of attachment of abdomen to
thorax.

Petiole: a stem or stalk: specifically the slender segment between the
thorax and abdomen in many Hymenoptera, and some Diptera.

Phaeism: applied to a duskiness of butterflies occurring in a limited
region.

Phagocyte: a corpuscle or cell that devours or absorbs noxious
organisms and also absorbs the organs of the larval stage in the
developments to the adult condition.

Phagocytosis: the destruction or devouring of bacteria or other
microorganisms by phagocytes.

Phalaenae: a Linnean term embracing most of the heterocerous
Lepidoptera: more specifically applied to the Geometridae.

Phalanx -ges: a joint or joints of the tarsus: a division of classification
of uncertain value: similar to tribe.

Phalerated: beaded.

Phallus: =penis: q.v.

Pharyngeal pump: = sucking pump; q.v.

Pharynx: the back part of the mouth and upper part of the throat: a
slight enlargement at the beginning of the oesophagus: in Diptera is
sometimes restricted to the space between the hypopharynx and sub-clypeal
pump, and is then = sub-clypeal tube.

Phauloptera: an ordinal term for the scale insects (Laporte 1835).

Phleboptera: = Hymenoptera; q.v.

Phonetic: sound producing; applied to stridulating structures.

Phosphorescent: shining or glowing in the dark, like phosphorus.

Photogenic: a light producing structure; producing a
Phosphorescent glow.

Phragma: a partition or dividing membrane: longitudinal, thin
partitions passing down from the dorsum of meso- and meta-thorax:
the partition formed by the inflexed hinder edge of prothorax.

Phragmocyttares: social wasps in which the combs of the nest are
wholly or partly supported by the covering envelope: see stelocyttares:
poecilocyttares.

Phthiriasis: a diseased condition of the skin caused by sucking lice.

Phyllophagous: feeding upon leaf tissue.

Phylogenetic: relating to tribal or stem development.

Phylogeny: the development of a genus, family, tribe or class: see
ontogeny.

Phyloptera: the super-ordinal term proposed to include all
the net-veined orders, the Orthoptera and Dermatoptera.

Phylum: a stem or tribe: used in classification to indicate a series of
related organisms.

Physopoda: bladder-footed: = Thysanoptera; q.v.

Phytophaga: plant-eaters: beetles in which the 4th and 5th tarsal
joints are anchylosed and the 3d is lobed.

Phytophagus: feeding upon plants.

Phytophilous: plant loving: species that live on plants.

Phytophthira: plant lice: some authors include also scale insects.

Phytoscopic: characters of light or conditions of illumination that
affect colors of caterpillars. {Scanner's comment: This is a
puzzling term.  I suspect it is a misspelling of "Photoscopic"}

Piceous -eus: pitchy black.

Picine: black, with a bluish oily lustre.

Pick: a chitinous maxillary structure in Psocidae.

Pieza: the combined biting and sucking mouth of the Hymenoptera.

Piezata: the Fabrician term for Hymenoptera.

Pigment: any coloring matter or material that gives a color
appearance. {Scanner's comment: sic}

Pile: a hairy or fur-like covering: in Diptera, applied to thick, fine,
short, erect hair, giving a surface appearance like velvet.

Pilifer or Piliger: a small sclerite at each side of the clypeus in
Lepidoptera, resembling a rudimentary mandible.

Piliferous: with a covering of fine hair or pile.

Pillared eye: in Ephemerids, that type which is placed on a cylindrical
stalk or process: = turbinate eye.

Pilous or Pilose: clothed with down, or dense pile: with long, sparse
hair.

Pilosity: a covering of fine, long hair.

Pincers: the anal forceps.

Pinna: a narrow wing; a feather.

Pinnae: of posterior femur in jumping Orthoptera, are the oblique
ridges running to the median line and somewhat resembling a feather.

Pinnate: feather-like; cleft, like the wings of Alucita: with markings
resembling a feather: with stiff hairs or thorny processes occupying
opposite sides of a thin shank.

Pinnatifid: divided into feathers, as when wings are cleft nearly to the
base.

Pistazinus: yellowish green, with a slight brownish tinge [pale
green with a little burnt sienna].

Plaga: a spot, stripe or streak of color; a longitudinal spot of irregular
form.

Plaited: longitudinally folded or laid in pleats.

Planate: with a flattened surface.

Plane: level, flat; applied to a surface.

Planipennia: applied to Neuroptera in which the wings are large and
laid flat on the body wnen at rest; Sialidae, Myrmeleonidae, etc.

Planta -ae: the basal joint of the posterior tarsus in pollen gathering
Hymenoptera: the soles of the posterior tarsal joints: the anal clasping
legs of caterpillars.

Plantigrade: species that walk on the entire foot, not on the claws
alone.

Plantula: a lobe of the divided tarsal pulvillus; one of the soles
or climbing cushions of the foot: see arolium; pulviglus.

Plaques: the small leathery hemelytra in some Naucorids.

Plasma: the liquid portion of animal fluids and cells.

Plasticity: the capacity for being formed, moulded or developed.

Plate: any broad flattened piece or sclerite: = squame, in Coccidae.

Platelet: a little plate or sclerite of chitin in a membrane.

Plates: in Coccidae, the squames; q.v.: in male Homoptera, a pair of
pieces following the last full ventral segment; usually preceded by a
short piece, - the valve.

Platyptera: flat and broad-winged: an ordinal term applied to insects
with four net-veined wings, secondaries longitudinally folded beneath
primaries; mouth mandibulate; prothorax free; transformations
complete: Psocidae, Termitidae, Perlidae and Mallophaga.
{Scanner's comment: These four groups are now placed in totally
separate orders, and not families as these names imply}

Plecoptera or Plectoptera: plaited winged: an ordinal term applied to
net-veined insects in which the secondaries are longitudinally folded
beneath primaries; mouth mandibulate; body loosely jointed;
prothorax free; metamorphosis incomplete: the term Plecoptera was
used by Brauer for Perlidae; Plectoptera by Packard for the
Ephemerida: there has been some confusion since, and both have
been used in the Brauer sense.

Pleon: = abdomen; q.v.

Pleopoda: abdominal legs of larva: posterior legs of an adult.

Plesiobiosis: see symbiosis.

Plesiotype: any specimen identified with a described or named species
by a person other than the describer.

Pleura: plural of pleuron or pleurum: the lateral sclerites between the
dorsal and sternal portion of the thorax: in general, the sides of the
body between the dorsum and sternum.

Pleural areas: on the metanotum of some Hymenoptera, the three
spaces between the lateral and pleural carinae; the 1st or anterior =
spiracular area; the 2d or central = middle pleural; the 3d or
posterior = angular area.

Pleural carinae: in Hymenoptera, extend along the exterior margin of
the metanotum.

Pleural pieces: the lateral sclerites of the thorax; see pleura.

Pleurites: the sclerites into which the pleurum is divided.

Pleuron: the side of the thorax.

Pleuropodia: embryonic or temporary bands formed by the modified
first pair of abdominal legs in many insects.

Pleurostict: lamellicorn beetles in which the abdominal spiracles are
situated on the dorsal portion of the ventral sclerites.

Pleurum: = pleuron; plural, pleura; q.v.

Plexus: a knot: applied to a knot-like mass of nerves, or tracheae.

Plica: a fold or wrinkle: a longitudinal plait of a wing.

Plicate: plaited; folded like a fan.

Plications: folding,; applied to the folds on the hind wings of
Orthoptera.

Plicipenna: = Trichoptera; proposed by Latreille.

Plumate: like a feather.

Plumbeus: leaden or bluish gray [neutral].

Plumose: feathered; like a plume: antennae that have long ciliated
processes on each side of each joint: see cirrate.

Plump: with full, rounded outlines; not obese.

Plumules: specialized scales of the androconia of male Lepidoptera.

Pluri: as a prefix, means many.

Pluri-dentate: with many teeth.

Pluri-setose: bearing several seta; as the head in some Carabids.

Pluri-valve: with several valves or valve-like appendages.

Pneumogastric: the ganglion supplying nerves for the tracheal and
digestive system: also used as = vagus: q.v.

Pneustocera: breathing horns: the prolongations of the metathoracic
spiracles in Berytidae, etc.

Pnystega: in Odonata, applied by Charpentier to a portion of
mesonotum.

Pobrachial: a longitudinal vein of the Ephemerid wing just
behind praebrachial; usually simple: number 7 of some systems.

Podeon: in Hymenoptera, the petiole: the true second abdominal
segment.

Podex: the upper plate of the anal opening; = supra-anal or
sur-anal plate in caterpillars.

Podical plates: the latero-ventral plates attached to the loth abdominal
segment of Orthoptera; the two pieces on each side of the vent,
thought by Huxley to be rudiments of an 11th abdominal ring; united
they form the tergite of a rudimentary ring: = anal valves: paranal
lobes.

Pododunera: apterous insects with biting mouth structures.

Podotheca: that part of pupa that covers the legs of future adult.

Poecilocyttares: social wasps that build their combs around the
branch or other support covered by the envelope: see stelocyttares
and phragmocyttares.

Poisers: = halteres and balancers; q.v.

Poison glands: sometimes applied to the salivary glands of bugs and
biting flies; more usually to an abdominal gland connected with the
sting of female Hymenoptera.

Policate: a tibia produced inwardly into a short, bent spine or thumb.

Politus: smooth, shiny, polished.

Pollen: a dusty or pruinose surface covering which is easily rubbed off;
 used mostly in Diptera.

Pollen-plate: a polished area margined by hair, on the outer face of the
tibia in bees.

Pollex: a thumb: the stout fixed spur at inside of tip of tibia.

Pollicatus: = policate; q.v.

Polliniferous: formed for collecting pollen: pollen bearing.

Pollinigerous: = polliniferous: q.v.

Pollinose: covered with a yellow, pollen-like dust.

Poly-: many, much.

Polyandry: where a female mates with more than one male.

Polychromatic: many colored.

Polydomous: applied to ants when one colony has several nests.

Polyembryony: the production of several embryos from a single egg, as
in some Chalcids.

Polygamy: where a male mates with more than one female.

Polygonal: with many angles.

Polygoneutism: the power to preduce several broods in one season.

Polymorpha: the claviform and serricorn Coleoptera, as a whole.

Polymorphic-ous: occurring in several forms; differing in sex,
In season, in locality or without apparent reason: undergoing
Several changes, and in this sense applied to insects with
a complete metamorphosis.

Polynephria: applied to insects with many urinary (Malpighian) tubes.

Polyphagous: eating many kinds of food.

Polyphyletic: derived or descended from several stems or sources.

Polypodous: having many feet, and thus, specifically applied to the
Myriapoda, and to the larvae of Lepidoptera and saw-flies, in
contradistinction to footless and hexapodous larvae.

Ponderable: that which may be weighed.

Pone: behind (the middle).

Ponticulus: = frenulum; q.v.

Porcate: marked with raised longitudinal lines.

Pore: any small, round opening on the surface.

Poriferous: closely set with deep pittings or punctures.

Porose -us: with little round openings on the surface.

Porrect: stretched out forward: straightly prominent.

Post-: behind or after.

Post-alar callosities: rounded processes at the posterior
lateral margin of the dorsum, in Diptera.

Post-alar callus: in Diptera, a rounded swelling between the root of the
wing and the scutellum.

Post-alar membrane: the strip of membrane connecting the squamae
with the scutellum.

Postal vein: in Hymenoptera, = costa (Comst.).

Post-annellus: in Hymenoptera, the 4th joint of antenna and 2d of
flagellum.

Post antennal organs: in Collembola, oblong or ellipsoidal organs
situated just caudad of the bases of the antenna.

Post-brachial: = pobrachial; q.v.

Post-cerebral: applied to that pair of salivary glands in bees, situated
close to the posterior wall of the head.

Post-clypeus: in Odonata, the upper of the two parts into which the
clypeus is divided: in Psocidae, a peculiar inflated structure behind
the clypeus: in general, the posterior or upper part of clypeus when
any line of demarcation exists: = supra-clypeus; nasus: afternose;
paraclypeus: first clypeus; clypeus posterior.

Post-costa: = sub-costa (Comst.): in Odonata, = 1st anal vein (Comst.):
 in Trichoptera = anal.

Post-costal space: Odonata; the cell or cells lying posterior to the
post-costa = anal cell (Comst.).

Post-cubitals: = post-nodal spaces; q.v.

Post-dorsulum: the middle piece of the meta-notum, between the
mesophragma and post-scutellum.

Post-embryonic -otic: the stage after the insect has come out of the
egg.

Post-epistoma: that part of the head behind the clypeus in
Hymenoptera: see also post-clypeus.

Posterior: hinder or hindmost: opposed to anterior: in Diptera; applied
to that face of the legs which is not visible when viewed from the front,
the legs being laterally extended.

Posterior angle: of thorax, in Coleoptera, is the lateral angle near base
of elytra: of the wings = hind angle; anal angle; q.v.

Posterior cells: in Diptera (Will.): 1st radial 5 (Comst.): 2d = medial 1
(Comst.): 3d = 2d medial 2 (Comst.) 4th = medial 3 (Comst.): 5th
cubitus 1 (Comst.).

Posterior cephalic foramen: in Odonata, the opening of head
posteriorly through which the cavities of head and thorax
communicate.

Posterior field: of tegmina, = anal field; q.v.

Posterior intercalary: in Diptera, is one of the anal veins (Comst.).

Posterior lateral margins: in Orthoptera, extend from base of
pronotum downward to the posterior angle of sides.

Posterior lobe: of the pronotum in Orthoptera, see lobe: in Diptera,
that part of wing between axillary incision and base: = alar
appendage (Loew). Posterior margin: = inner margin; q.v.

Posterior pereion: the meta-notum.

Posterior pleon: the terminal segments of the abdomen.

Posterior pleopoda: the anal clasping legs of caterpillars: see planta.

Posterior stigmatal tubercle: on thoracic and abdominal segments of
caterpillars; varies in position from substigmatal to stigmatal posterior;
sometimes united to V: it is IV of the abdomen, II of the thorax
(Dyar).

Posterior trapezoidal tubercle: on the thoracic and abdominal
segments of caterpillars; subdorsal, posterior, always present,
rarely united with I: it is II of the abdomen,
lb of the thorax (Dyar).

Posterior veins: those separating the posterior cells.

Posterior wings: = secondaries: q.v.

Postero-dorsal: Diptera; applied to leg bristles at the meeting of the
dorsal and posterior face.

Postero-ventral: Diptera; applied to leg bristles at the meeting of the
ventral and posterior face.

Postfurca: an internal process of metasternum to which the muscles
of hind legs are attached.

Post-gena:  the sclerite below occiput and behind gena in some
Orthoptera.

Post-gula: is situated at the extreme base of the underside of the head
in Dermaptera.

Post-humeral bristles: in Diptera, are usually two, inserted above the
dorso-pleural suture between the humeral callus and root of wing, on
the bottom of the presutural depression.

Postical vein: in Diptera, = 5th longitudinal (Meig.);
= media 3 (Comst.).

Posticus: hinder.

Post-media: Ephemerida; an apparently distinct vein between media
and Cubitus (Comst.).

Post-medial line: in Lepidoptera, = t.p. line: q.v.

Post-median: Diptera; those leg bristles situated above or behind the
middle. Post-nodal cross-veins: in Odonata, the transverse veins
between costa and radius 1, and radius 1 and media 1, from nodus to stigma,
separating the post-nodal cells or spaces: = post-cubital cross-veins.

Post-nodal costal spaces: in Odonata, the cells below costal margin
from nodus to stigma.

Post-nodal radial spaces: in Odonata, the cells between radius 1 and
media 1, from nodus to outer margin.

Post-nodal sector: in Odonata, a longitudinal vein lying between
media 1 and media 2 (Comst.): = ultra-nodal sector.

Post-oral: behind the mouth; those segments bearing mouth
structures.

Post-pectus: the under surface of the meta-thorax.

Post-petiole: in Hymenoptera, that part of abdomen behind petiole.

Post-retinal: the fibres arising from the facets of the compound eye
and extending into the ganglionic plate.

Post-scutellum: the fourth and posterior sclerite of the dorsum of the
thoracic rings.

Post-sutural: in Trichoptera, the little plate behind the scutellum of
mesothorax: = post-scutellum.

Poststigmatal: that portion of the marginal cell beyond the stigma in
bees: = 2d radial 1 (Comst.).

Post-stigmatal primary tubercle: on thoracic segment of caterpillars;
sub-primary, stigmatal, posterior; it is III of the thorax and not
present on abdomen (Dyar).

Post-subterminal: following the s. t. line in Lepidoptera.

Post-sutural bristles: in Diptera, dorsal bristles behind transverse
suture.

Post-terga: applied to the posterior scutes of the segments of
Coleopterous larvae.

Post-triangular cells: = discoidal areolets; q.v.

Post-vertical cephalic bristles: in Diptera, are in the middle of upper
part or Occiput.

Pouch: in Trichoptera, a depressed, usually longitudinal area in a
wing.

Prae- or Pre-: anterior to; before.

Praebrachial: a longitudinal vein in middle of an Ephemerid wing;
usually forked: no. 6 of some systems.

Praecostal spur: a false vein in costal angle at base of secondaries.

Prae-dorsum: = prophragma: q.v.

Prae-labrum: in Diptera = clypeus: q.v.

Praeocular: before the eyes.

Praeputium: the external membranous covering of penis:
specifically a spherical muscular mass at base of penis
in some Orthoptera.

Prae-scutellum: a sclerite, rarely present, between the
meso-scutum and meso-scutellum.

Prae-scutum: the first of the four divisions of the notum of the
thoracic rings.

Prae-subterminal: preceding the s.t. line in Lepidoptera.

Prae-terga: the anterior thoracic scutes in coleopterous larvae.

Prae-tornal: preceding the tornus (q.v.) in Lepidoptera.

Prasinus: grass-green [apple green].

Pratinicolous: frequenting or living in grassy meadows or bogs.

Pre-alar callus: a small swelling or projection before the root of wings,
just back of outer ends of transverse suture, in Diptera.

Pre-anal: above or before the anal opening.

Pre-anal plate or lamina: = supra-anal plate; q.v.

Pre-antennal: anterior to or before the antenna.

Pre-apical: before the apex.

Pre-balancer: = pre-halter: q.v.

Pre-basilar: before the base.

Precocious stages: generally applied to all stages of development from
the fertilized egg to the pupa.

Precurrent: continuous: entire: complete: said of a vein.

Predaceous: applied to insects that live by preying upon other
organisms.

Predatory: = predaceous: q.v.

Pre-eruciform: before the caterpillar stage: specifically applied to the
early larvae of some Proctytrypidae.

Preformation: the doctrine of growth or development from already
existing rudiments; opposed to epigenesis: q.v.

Pre-furca: "the stem vein in front of a fork, that reaches back to where
itself forks from another vein"; Diptera.

Pregenicular: in Orthoptera, that portion of femur proximad the knee.

Pregenicular annulus: a more or less conspicuous color ring on the
caudal femora proximad the knee in Orthoptera.

Pre-halter: a membranous scale in front of the true haltere of a fly.

Prehension: structures fitted for grasping or holding.

Pre-mandibular: situated in front of the mandible: applied to a
temporary segment of the embryo: = intercalary segment.

Pre-media: Ephemeridae; an apparently distinct vein between radius
and media (Comst.).

Premorse: as if bitten off: with a blunt or jagged termination.

Prensor: the genital lateral clasping organ of male Lepidoptera: see
clasper.

Pre-ocular: see prae-ocular.

Pre-oral: in front of the mouth: the embryonic head segments before
those bearing the mouth parts.

Prepuce: =praeputium; q.v.

Pre-pupal: that stage in the larva just preceding the change to pupa.

Pre-scutellar bristles: in Diptera, are in a transverse row in front of
the scutellum.

Pre-scutellar callus: = post-alar callus: q.v.

Pre-scutellar rows: in Diptera, short rows of small bristles in front of
the scutellum.

Press: =filator; q.v.

Pressure plate: a structure at base of pulvillus, which exerts a
pressure on the sole of the pad.

Pre-sutural bristles: in Diptera, in a trigonate depression at outer
ends of transverse suture, near dorso-pleural suture.

Pre-sutural inter-alar bristle: the single bristle of the interalar series,
situated before the transverse suture.

Primaries: the anterior or fore-wings.

Primitive: simple in character; of an early or ancient type.

Principal sector: in Odonata, extends from its point of separation
From the median sector to the outer margin, at or just below
the apex:= media 1 (Comst.).

Principal sulcus: in Orthoptera, a transverse impression of the
prothorax, at or behind the middle.

Priodont: applied to those forms of male Lucanids that have the
smallest mandibles: see teleodont, mesodont, amphiodont.

Prismatic: formed like a prism: a play of colors similar to that
produced through a prism.

Pro-: anterior: used as a prefix to designate the parts of the first
thoracic segment.

Proboscidea: an ordinal term for the Coccidae.

Proboscis: generally applied to any extended mouth structure; usually
applied to the extensile mouth of the Diptera; frequently to the beak of
Hemiptera; sometimes to the tongue of Lepidoptera; and rarely, to the
mouth of long-tongued bees.

Procephalic: relating or belonging to the procephalon.

Procephalic lobes: in the embryo, form part of the anterior,
overhanging portion of the head.

Procephalon: that segment of the head in the embryo which is formed
by the coalescence of the first three primitive segments.

Procerebral: that segment of the brain containing the median
protocerebrum and optic ganglia; also called optic segment.

Procerebral lobes: the central portion of the cerebrum, made up of the
fused median lobes, giving rise to the mushroom bodies; q.v.

Procerebrum: the anterior part of the brain, formed by the ganglion of
the first primary segment; also termed ocular lobe, froth part it
innervates. Process: a prolongation of the surface, margin, or an
appendage: any prominent portion of the body not otherwise
definable.

Process of labrum: in bees = appendicle: q.v.

Procidentia: the narrow projecting tip of 7th dorsal segment in
Nematinae.

Proclinate: directed forward; applied to hair or bristles.

Proctodaeum: the invagination of epiblast that produces the anus and
intestine as far forward as and including malpighian tubes.

Proculiform or Poculiform: hollow, cylindrical, with a hemispherical
base, the sides at top straight goblet-shaped.

Procumbent: trailing; prostrate; lying flat.

Produced: drawn out; prolonged; extended from.

Proeminent: said of the head when it is horizontal and does not form
an angle with the thorax.

Profile: the outline as seen from the side.

Profound, Profundus: deep.

Prognathus: having the jaws directed forward.

Progoneate: with the genital opening on an anterior body segment.

Progonia: the anterior angle of the secondaries.

Proleg: any process or appendage that serves the purpose of a leg:
specifically the fleshy unjointed abdominal legs of caterpillars and
certain saw-fly larvae: = abdominal feet: false legs.

Proloma: the anterior margin of the secondaries.

Prolonged: extended or lengthened beyond ordinary limits.

Promeros: the first abdominal segment in Lepidoptera.

Prominent: raised or produced beyond the level or margin: standing
out in relief by color or otherwise: conspicuous.

Promuscidate: with proboscis or extended mouth structure.

Promuscis: an extended mouth structure: has been applied to the long
tongue of bees and to the rostrate structure in Hemiptera.

Pronotal carina: in Orthoptera, the main or median carina on
pronotum.

Pronotum: the upper or dorsal surface of the prothorax.

Pronucleus: the nucleus of male and female elements, spermatozoa
and ova, the union of which forms the nucleus of a fertilized ovum.

Pronymph: is that stage in certain inctabolous insects in which the
larval tissues are completely broken down, and the imaginal tissues
are just beginning to build up.

Proparaptera: the paraptera of the prothorax: the terms erroneously
applied in this connection.

Propedes: = prolegs: q.v.

Prophragma: the anterior dividing wall of meso-thorax, which is horny
and, at its upper edge, bears the connecting membrane between
pro- and mesothorax.

Prop-leg: = pro-leg; q.v.

Propleura: the lateral portions of prothorax.

Propleural bristles: in Diptera, are situated immediately above the
front coxa: = prothoracic bristle; q.v.

Propneustic: larval forms in which only the most anterior spiracles
occur.

Propodeon: = propodeum.

Propodeum: in Hymenoptera, that part of thorax just above insertion
of abdomen, and really the first abdominal segment: see median
segment.

Propolis: a glue or resin-like product elaborated by bees to
serve as a cement in cases where wax is not sufficiently tenacious.

Propulsatory: that which drives onward or forward.

Propupa: a semi-pupa: q.v.

Propygidium: the dorsal segment or tergite in front of the pygidilini,
sometimes left exposed in Coleoptera.

Propygium: = Hypopygium: q.v.

Proscutum: the scutum of the pronotum.

Proscutellum: the scutellum of the pronotum.

Prostemmatic: = ante-ocular; q.v.

Prosternal: belonging to the prosternum.

Prosternal grooves: occur laterally in some Coleoptera. e.g. Elateridae,
to receive the antennae.

Prosternal epimera: the epimera of prothorax.

Prosternal episterna: the episterna of prothorax.

Prosternal lobe: in some Coleoptera, an anterior prolongation of the
prosternum which more or less conceals the mouth from below.

Prosternal spine: the curved mucro in Elateridae which extends
backward into a meso-sternal cavity: the cone or tubercle between
fore-legs in some Orthoptera.

Prosternal suture: that suture of pro-thorax which separates the
sternum front the pleural pieces.

Prosternellum: the sternellum of the prothorax

Prosternum: the fore-breast: the sclerite between the fore-legs.

Prostheca: a mandibular sclerite set with hair, articulated to the
basalis - q.v. -and equal to the lacinia of the maxilla.

Protamphibion: a name applied by P. Mayer to the hypothetical
common ancestor of the Perlina, Ephemerina and Odonata.

Protandry: the appearance of males earlier in the season than females.

Protarsus: the tarsus of the anterior leg.

Proteiform: having many fortes or varieties: protean.

Protergum: in Odonata, the upper surface of prothorax.

Proterotypes: primary types, including all the material upon which the
original description is based.

Prothoracic bristle: in Diptera, a strong bristle immediately above the
front coxa: see propleural bristles.

Prothoracic glands: occur in Orthoptera, on the sides of prothorax in
certain Phasmid genera.

Prothoracic shield: = cervical shield: q.v.

Prothoracotheca: the pupal covering of prothorax.

Pro-thorax: the first thoracic ring or segment: hears the anterior legs
but no wings: when free, as in Coleoptera. is usually referred to as
"thorax" merely.

Protocerebral segment: = ocular seginent; q.v.

Protocerebrum: the primitive anterior cerebral vesicle.

Protocosta: the thickened costal margin of Lepidopterous wings.

Protocranium: the posterior part of the epicranium: sometimes used
as Occiput.

Protogonia: the apical angle of the primaries.

Protograph: all original description by a figure or picture made from
the original type.

Proto-lepidoptera: proposed for those forms (Eriocephalidae) in which
lacinia and mandibles are obvious and the spiral tongue is not
developed: see neolepidoptera and paleolepidoptera.

Protolog: the original description by words.

Protoloma: the anterior margin of primaries.

Protomesal: applied to certain areolets in Hymenoptera, situated
between costal cells and apical margin.

Prototergite: the foremost dorsal segment of abdomen.

Preto-thorax: = prothorax: q.v.

Prototype: a primitive form to which later forms can be traced.

Protractor: that which extends or lengthens out: applied to muscles.

Protuberance: any elevation above the surface.

Protuberant: rising or produced above the surface or general level.

Proventriculus: the posterior portion of crop: the gizzard.

Proximad: toward the proximal end.

Proximal: that part of an appendage nearest the body: see distal.

Prozona: in Orthoptera, the upper or dorsal surface of prothorax in
front of the principal sulcus.

Pruinose: hoary: as if covered with a fine frost or dust.

Pruinous -us: deep blue with a reddish tinge, like a plum [French blue
+ purple lake].

Psammophilous: living in sandy places.

Pselaphotheca: that part of the pupa which covers the palpi.

Pseudidolum: = nymph: q.v.

Pseudimago: = sub-imago; q.v.

Pseud- or Pseudo-: as a prefix means false, spurious, or merely
resembling. Pseudo-cellula: = accessory cell: q.v.

Pseudo-chrysalis: the semi-pupa.

Pseudo-coel: a false hollow; a hollow which does not form a tube.

Pseudo-cone: a soft, gelatinous cone in the compound eye of some
Insects, replacing the crystalline cone of others.

Pseudo-elytra: the aborted anterior wings of Strepsiptera.

Pseudogyna fundatrix: in Aphids, is the immediate issue of a
fecundated egg: a stem-mother.

Pseudogyna gemmans: in Aphids. are wingless descendants of the
stem-mother (fundatrix) or of the winged migrants (migrans) which
reproduce asexually through a number of generations.

Pseudogyna migrans: in Aphids, the winged descendants of the
stem-mother (fundatrix) through which the species is spread.

Pseudogyna pupifera: in Aphids, the last generation of p. gemmans,
which produces the true sexes.

Pseudogyna: a female that reproduces without impregnation.

Pseudo-halteres: the rudimentary primaries of Stylops.

Pseudo-neurium: a false vein formed by a chitinous thickening of a
wing fold.

Pseudo-neuroptera: those net-winged insects with incomplete
metamorphosis: includes the present Ephemeroptera, Odonata,
Plecoptera, Isoptera and Corrodentia: = Archiptera.

Pseudonychium -ia: = paronychia; q.v.

Pseudo-nymph: = semipupa; q.v.

Pseudopodia: = parapodia; q.v.

Pseudoptera: an ordinal name for the scale insects (Amyot 1847)

Pseudo-pupa: the inactive larval stage preceding the formation of the
true pupa in some insccts; e.g. Meloidae: = semi-pupa; q.v.

Pseudo-pupillae: in Odonata, the black spots seen on the compound
eyes of the living insects.

Pseudosessile: those petiolate Hymenoptera, in which the abdomen is
so close to the thorax as to seem sessile.

Pseudo-trachea: the ringed and ridged grooves on the labella of
Diptera, by means of which they scrape their food.

Pseudova: egg-like germ cells capable of development without
fertilization e.g. in certain plant lice.

Pseudovary: the organ or mass of germ cells of an agamic insect.

Pseudo-vitellus: a cellular organ in Aphididae, supposed to replace the
absent Malpighian tubules.

Psocoptera: = Corrodentia; q.v.

Psychogenesis: the origin and development of social and other
instincts and habits.

Pterodicera: with wings and two antenna.

Pterogostia: the wing veins.

Pterogostia: referring to the wing structure.

Pteropega: wing sockets or cavities into which the wings are inserted.

Pteropleura: in Diptera, are situated below the base of the wings
behind the meso-pleural suture: = the posterior lateral plate of
mesothorax of Lowne; the episternum of meso-thorax of Hammond.

Pteropleural bristles: in Diptera, are inserted on the pteropleura.

Pterostigma: a thickened, opaque spot on the costal margin of a wing,
near its middle or at end of the radius: = bathmis, and see stigma.

Pterotheca: that part of the pupa that covers the wings.

Pterothorax: the wing-hearing thoracic segments in Thysanoptera.

Pterygium: a lateral expansion of the snout of some Coleoptera.

Pterygodes: the patagia or tegtila: q.v.

Pterygogenea: insects that are winged in the adult stage or believed to
be descended from winged ancestors: see apterogogenea.

Pterygostium: a wing vein.

Pterygote: wing bearing.

Ptilinum: in Diptera cyclorrhapha, an inflatable organ capable of being
thrust out through a frontal suture just above the root of antenna.

Ptilota: winged insects.

Pubes or Pubescence: short, fine, soft, erect hair or down.

Pubescent: downy: clothed with soft, short, fine, closely set hair.

Pubis: the lateral region of the prothorax.

Pulmonarium: the membranous connection of the plates or scutes of
the abdominal rings: = connexivum.

Pulsatile: having the power of pulsating or moving in a rhythmic
manner: applied to special organs in the legs, which aid in circulating
the blood in these appendages.

Pulverulent: powdery or dusty in appearance.

Pulvilliform: having the appearance or structure of a pulvillus.

Pulvillus -i: soft, pad-like structures between tarsal claws: the
cushions of short, stiff hair or other clothing on the underside of
tarsal joints; rarely fleshy lobes: see arolium.

Pulvinatus: moderately convex.

Punctate: set with impressed points or punctures.

Punctiformis: shaped like a point or dot.

Punctulatus: with small punctures.

Puncture: an impression like that made by a needle.

Punctured: marked with small, impressed dots.

Puniceus: carmine red [carmine].

Pupa: the intermediate stage between larva and adult; loosely applied
for all orders, properly only for those with a complete metamorphosis:
a pupa is obtect, when inclosed in a rigid case on which the members
may or may not be outlined. It is liber, or free when the appendages
are separately encased and there is no covering over the whole: see
chrysalis.

Puparium -ia: in Diptera, the thickened larval skin within which the
pupa is formed.

Pupate, Pupation: to become a pupa: the act of becoming a pupa.

Pupiferous: applied to that generation of plant lice which produces
sexed individuals.

Pupigenous: =pupiparous; q.v.

Pupigerous: forming a larval pupariuni: coarctate: said of dipterous
larva that contract to form an envelope for the inclosed pupa.

Pupil: the central mark of an ocellate spot.

Pupillate: spots or marks that have an eye-like centre.

Pupipara: a series of Diptera, in which the females do not extrude the
young until they have reached the stage ready to pupate.

Pupiparous: bringing forth young ready to pupate.

Pupivorous: feeding upon pupa: especially applied to those
Hymenoptera that are parasitic upon insects in the pupal stage.

Purpurascent: becoming purple in shade.

Purpureous -eus: purple [mauve].

Pustular a colored point of moderate circumference.

Pustulated hair: in Mallophaga those arising from unchitinized
spaces.

Pygidium: the last dorsal segment of abdomen left exposed by the
elytra: in Forficulidw, the last dorsal segment: in Diaspincr, the
compound terminal segment.

Pygofer: the last segment of the abdomen in certain Homoptera,
especially the lateral margins which appear in the ventral view; hence
sometimes used in the plural - pygofers.

Pygophore: the large upper piece of the genitalia in Homoptera.

Pygotheca: the parts containing the genitalia in Homoptera.

Pyloric: referring to the posterior extremity of the chylific ventricle.

Pyloric valve: the specialized posterior portion of crop where there is
no distinct gizzard.

Pyloric valvule: a circular projection of the stomach behind which is
an enlargement of the intestine.

Pylorus: the chylific ventricle.

Pyriform: shaped like a pear.




Q

Quadra -ri -ro: as a prefix, means four.

Quadrate: square or nearly so.

Quadrifarium: having four rows.

Quadrilateral: four-sided: formed or bounded by four lines: in
Odonata, a space on the wings of Zygoptera bounded by the lower
sector of arculus, the sub-median vein, a cross-vein between these
two, and the lower part of arculus.

Queen: the actively reproducing female among worker insects.

Quiescent: not active: applied to the pupae in forms with complete
metamorphosis.

Quiet: subdued: not conspicuous or contrasting in color or
maculation.




R

Race: a variety of a species possessing constant characters which yet
are not specific; usually occurring in a different faunal region from the
type and may thus be geographical: nearly synonymous with
subspecies.

Racemose: like a bunch of grapes: applied to ovaries when they form
bunches or sacs.

Rachis: a ridge or keel dividing the spinning canal at base, in
caterpillars; the shank of an antennal joint into which the lateral
spines or other processes are inserted.

Radial: pertaining to the radius or radial vein.

Radial area: in Orthoptera; the space between the mediastinal (
subcosta) and radial veins: see scapular area.

Radial cells: the wing area between the radius and media; often
divided: in the plural (Comst.), are those cells anteriorly margined by
the radius or its branches.

Radial cross vein: (Comst.), is that which divides cell, radius 1.

Radial sector: in general, the lower of the two primary divisions of the
radius (Comst.): in Odonata, an indirect branch from the media, just
below and parallel with media 2.

Radial vein: in Homoptera, the first important vein next the costa
between it and ulnar: in Orthoptera, = radius (Comst.): in Diptera, =
2d longitudinal vein (Meigen), = radius 2 (Comst.).

Radiate veins: the longitudinal veins spreading fan-like in the anal
field of secondaries: = anal veins; q.v.

Radiated: marked with lines proceeding from a common centre.

Radicle or Radicula: that joint of the antenna that is articulated to the
head.

Radio-medial cross vein: connects the radial and medial systems and
usually closes the radial cell (Comst.).

Radius: (Comst.); the third of the longitudinal veins starting from
base and dividing into not more than five branches before reaching
the margin: the branches are numbered 1, 2, 3, 4, and 5,
respectively, beginning at the costal margin and extending outward
and downward.

Radix: base of wings, and their point of insertion; see pteropega.

Rami -us: branches: a branch.

Ramification: the branching out in every direction.

Ramify: to branch out in every direction.

Rammel-kammer: = copulation chamber; q.v.

Ramose -ous: branched, or having long branches.

Rapacious: predatory; capturing and eating prey.

Raptatory: = raptorial; q.v.

Raptoria: applied to that series of Orthoptera, in which the anterior
legs are fitted for grasping; Mantidae {Scanner's comment: No longer
Orthoptera, but Mantodea, a suborder of the Dictyoptera.}

Raptorial: formed for seizing prey.

Rare: seldom seen or found.

Rasorial: formed for scratching; applied to leg structures.

Ravenous: greedy; voracious; hungrily.

Receptaculum seminis: a sac or pouch-like appendage at the junction
of the oviducts with the vagina; it is filled during copulation and the
eggs are fertilized from it as they are extruded.

Reclinate: directed backward; e.g. the bristles in Diptera.

Reclinatus: = reflexed; q.v.

Reclivate: curved into a convex, then into a concave line.

Recondite: the sting when concealed in the abdomen.

Rectal cauda: the terminal, tubular process or tail terminating the
abdomen of some male Hemiptera.

Rectal glands: appendages to or thickenings of the rectum secreting a
lubricating material.

Rectal tracheal gills: lamelliform structures in the rectum of the
nymphs of some Odonata, supplied with trachea and tracheoles and
serving as respiratory organs.

Rectangular: in the form of a right or rectangle.

Rectangulate: forming or meeting in a right angle.

Rectigrade: larvae which, having sixteen feet, walk with a rectilinear
body.

Rectilinear: in the form of a straight line.

Rectum: a chamber, variable in size and form, just within the anus, in
which the excretions are formed or molded for expulsion from the
body:= cloaca.

Rectus: right or straight.

Recumbent: lying down; reclining.

Recurrent: running backward: applied to nerves it = stomatogastric.

Recurrent nervure: in Hymenoptera (Nort.), is the medial cross vein
(Comst.), from the point of branching to the junction.

Recurrent vein: in Hemerobiidae, the first branch of the subcosta
when it recurves toward the base of the wing.

Recurved: bowed backward.

Reductus: a zig-zag marking or corrugation.

Reflected or Reflexed: angularly bent backward.

Refracted: bent back as if broken.

Region: a space or area adjoining a specified point: a part of the body
composed of a number of segments, as the head, the thorax, or the
abdomen.

Rejuvenescence: a renewal of youth; bringing back to a condition of
youth.

Remote: further removed than distant.

Reniform: kidney-shaped: applied to a macula approximating that
shape, found at the end of median cell in many moths.

Repand: wavy; with alternate segments of circles and intervening
angles.

Replicate: wings folded back upon the base; like the secondaries in
Coleoptera.

Replicatile: capable of being folded back.

Repugnatorial: serving to repel: so offensive as to drive away: applied
to glands that secrete an offensive material.

Reservoir: a case or cavity for the storage of any fluid or secretion.

Resilient: elastic; having the property of springing back.

Respiration: breathing or taking breath: union of oxygen with tissues
and liberation of carbon dioxide from same.

Restricted: held back: confined to a limited area.

Resupinate: upside down; horizontally reversed.

Rete: the fatty mass of insects: also applied generally to any
structureless membrane or layer.

Reticulate: like net-work.

Reticulum: a net-work; as of a cell.

Retina: that portion of the eye upon which the image is formed.

Retinaculum: in Lepidoptera, the loop into which the frenulum of the
male is fitted; = hamus, q.v.: in Hymenoptera, horny, movable scales
serving to move the sting or to prevent its being darted out too far: in
Coleoptera, the middle, tooth-like process of the larval mandible.

Retinal pigment: the pigment layer of the compound eye just above the
basilar or fenestrate membrane.

Retinophora: = retinula; q.v.

Retinula -ae: the retina of a single ocellus: the nerve fibres or cells
between pigment cells and retina of the compound eye.

Retracted: drawn back; opposed to prominent.

Retractile: capable of being drawn in or retracted.

Retractor: used in drawing in or back; as a muscle.

Retroarcuate: curved backwards.

Retrocession: the going or moving backward.

Retrose: (sinuate), pointing backwards; (serrate) inversely serrated.

Retuse: ending in an obtuse sinus or broad, shallow notch, terminated
by an obtuse hollow.

Reversed: turned in, an unusual or contrary direction, as upside down
or inside out: said of wings when they are deflexed, the margin of
secondaries projecting beyond those of primaries.

Reviviscence: coming back to life; awakening from hibernation.

Revolute: spirally rolled backward.

Rhabdites: the blade-like elements of the sting and ovipositor: a rod
or bladelike process projecting from the epidermis.

Rhabdom: the rod lying in the axis of the retinula, below the
crystalline cone of an eye.

Rhabdomere: the rod-like distal portion of a retinular cell.

Rhabdopoda: clasping organs of the 9th abdominal segment of male.

Rhinarium: a nostril piece or portion of the nasus: q.v.: in Odonata,
the lower portion of clypeus = ante-clypeus; q.v.

Rhipiptera: = Strepsiptera q.v.

Rhomboidal: having the form of a rhomb.

Rhombus: a quadrangular figure having its four sides equal and its
opposite lines parallel, with two opposite angles acute and two obtuse.

Rhopalocera: that series of Lepidoptera in which the antenna are alike
in both sexes and form a club at tip.

Rhodoptera: apterous insects with sucking mouth structures.

Rhophoteira: an ordinal term for the fleas (Clairville).

Rhynchophora: that section of Coleoptera, in which the head is
produced into a snout, at the end of which the mouth structures are
situated; gular sutures confluent: prosternal sutures wanting: the
weevils.

Rhynchota: = Rhyngota: q.v.

Rhynchus: of Fabricius, = promuscis: q.v.

Rhyngota: insects in which the mouth parts are prolonged into a beak
or rostrum which serves as a protection to the piercing lancets:
Hemiptera in the broad sense.

Rhythmical: occurring at regular intervals in the production of
opposite conditions.

Rigid: inflexible: holding a direct course.

Rima: a crack or longitudinal opening with sharp edges.

Rimose: full of cracks.

Ring: a circle or annulus, usually margining a discolored spot.

Ringent: gaping.

Riparian: along the river or along shore.

Ripicolous: dwelling on river banks: riparian.

Rorulentum: dusty: =pulverulent: q.v.

Roseate-eous,-ens: rose colored: pale blood red [rose].

Rosette-shaped: in the form of a double rose: clustered round a
centre.

Rostellum: a small beak; applied to the mouth parts of sucking lice:
also used in Hemiptera, as = rostrum; q.v.

Rostral: pertaining or attached to a rostrum; specifically of
Hemiptera.

Rostrate: the head, when it has a long protraction bearing the mouth
parts.

Rostriform: produced like a beak or snout.

Rostrum: a snout-like prolongation of the head: in Coleoptera,
applied to the rigid extension in the snout beetles: in Hemiptera, is the
jointed beak covering the piercing lancets; and this is the better use
of the term.

Rotate: wheel-shaped.

Rotator: used for turning; applied to muscles.

Rotatory: an articulation that permits a rotating motion, e.g. a ball
and socket joint.

Rotula: a small round segment sometimes present between the joints
of antenna; and palpi: = torquillus.

Rotule: the trochantine.

Rotundate: rounded: in the form of a circle or segment of a circle:
without angles: said of margins when they pass gradually into each
other and do not form an angle at their point of junction.

Royal jelly: the food supplied to bee larva that develop into queens.

Royal pairs or Royalties: the sexually active males and females of
social insects.

Ruben: red, approaching carmine [alizar crimson].

Rubescent: reddish or becoming red.

Rubiginose: a rusty red [dragon's blood, but brighter].

Rubinous: ruby red: like the eye of a house fly.

Rudiment -any: the beginning of any structure or part before it has
developed.

Rufescent: reddish.

Rufous: brick-red [chronic yellow + dragon's blood].

Ruga, Rugulae: a wrinkle; small wrinkles.

Rugose -ous: wrinkled: with irregular waved elevated lines.

Rugulose -ous; minutely wrinkled.

Runcinate: notched: cut into several transverse acute segments
which point backward.

Ruptor ovi: = egg burster; q.v.

Rutilous: a shining bronze red.






S

Sabulose: sandy or gritty.

Sac: in Coccidae, the separate cottony envelope secreted by many
species.

Saccate: gibbous or inflated toward one end.

Saccule: a little sac or pouch.

Saccus: a lobe of ventral plate of 9th segment in female Lepidoptera.

Saddle: the chitinous plate on the anal siphon of Culicid larvae.

Sagitta: arrow-like spots on the wings of Lepidoptera and other
insects.

Sagittae: the inner pair of forceps in male genitalia of aculeate
Hymenoptera: see stipites.

Sagittal: equivalent to longitudinal.

Sagittal plane: the longitudinal vertical plane which divides an animal
into right and left halves.

Sagittate: shaped like an arrow head: elongate triangular.

Salient: projecting; jutting out.

Saliva: the secretion of the salivary glands that moistens and begins
the digestion of the food.

Salivary glands: glands that open into the mouth or at the beginning
of the alimentary canal, secreting a digestive, irritant or viscid
material.

Salivary receptacle: a small cavity above the opening of the salivary
duct, between labium and hypopharynx.

Salivary pump: applied to the chitinous, cup-like structure at the base
of the labial stylets of piercing Diptera; e.g. mosquitoes.

Saltatoria: that series of Orthoptera in which the posterior legs are
formed for jumping.

Saltatorial or Saltatory: formed for jumping or leaping: a posterior
femur when much enlarged and dilated.

Saltatory appendage: in Collembola = furcula; q.v.

Sanguineous -eus: red like arterial blood [crimson lake].

Sanguinolent: bloody; in color or appearance.

Sapphyrinus: sapphire blue [French blue].

Sarcolemma: the elastic covering of the striated muscular fibres.

Sarothrum: the basal joint of posterior tarsus in pollen gatherers: see
metatarsus.

Saturate: deeply or strongly marked; in a color, means intense.

Saxicolous: species that frequent rocky or stony areas.

Saws: the ovipositors of the saw flies or Tenthredinidae.

Scaber: uneven, rough.

Scabriculous: regularly and finely wrinkled.

Scabrose -ous: rough like a file, with small raised points.

Scalariform: ladder-like; applied to venation when the veinlets
between two longitudinal veins are regularly arranged like the rungs of
a ladder.

Scale: a general term to distinguish Coccidae: specifically the
puparium of a Diaspid, comprising exuviae and excreted matter: the
waxy covering of a male Lecaniid: in Diptera = alula: q.v.

Scales: broad flattened hairs, forming the wing vestiture of
Lepidoptera, and present in various other insects.

Scalloped: an edge marked by segments of circles without intervening
angles.

Scalpellus: a lancet-like piercing structure, as in some Diptera.

Scalpriform: chisel-shaped.

Scansorial: said of feet, when formed for climbing on hair.

Scape: the long basal joint of a geniculate antenna in Coleoptera;
usually applied to the three basal joints, as in Hymenoptera.

Scaphiform: boat-shaped.

Scaphium: a ventral process of the 10th abdominal segment in male
Lepidoptera below the uncus.

Scapula: in Lepidoptera the shoulder tippets, patagia or axillae; q.v.:
in Hymenoptera, the side pieces of the mesonotum; also, a trochanter
of the fore-leg; in Proctotrupidae the lateral lobes on each side of the
parapsidal furrow.

Scapulae: in Hemiptera, the inferior lateral face of mesonotum.

Scapular: the episternum; q.v.: applied to the scapula.

Scapular area: in a wing, is that portion nearest the shoulder: in
Orthoptera, = radial area.

Scapularia: a meso-episternum: see scapula.

Scapular vein: in Orthoptera, = radius.

Scapus: = scape.

Scarabidoid: applied to that stage of a meloid larva in which it
resembles a white grub or Scarabid larva.

Scarified: a surface with irregular depressions, as if clawed or
scratched.

Scariose -ous: dry and scaly.

Scatophagous: feeding upon dung or excrement:= merdivorous.

Scent glands, or organs: glandular structures; sometimes eversible,
sometimes in the form of hair tufts or pencils for diffusing odors that
may be repellant or attractive; most frequently found in males as a
secondary sexual character.

Scent pores: = ostioles; q.v.

Sclerite: any piece of the body wall bounded by sutures.

Scopa: a brush: a covering of short, stiff hair of equal length: in
Hymenoptera, the thick hair covering the posterior tibia of
pollen-gathering forms.

Scopate: furnished with a scopa.

Scopula: a small, dense tuft of hair: the bristles or stiff hairs covering
the inner side of basal joint on the tarsi of pollen-gathering
Hymenoptera.

Scopulipedes: bees which have pollen gathering structures on the feet.

Scraper: the hardened portion of the inner margin of the tegmina in
crickets used in producing the song.

Scriptus: lettered or marked with characters resembling letters.

Scrobes: grooves formed for the reception or concealment of an
appendage specifically, in Rhynchophora, grooves at the sides of the
rostrum to receive the scape of antenna 2: also applied to grooves on
the sides of mandibles: in Hymenoptera, the usually circular
impressions upon the frons, in which the scapes revolve: in
Orthoptera, the pits in which the antenna; are situate.

Scrobiculated: having the surface covered with deep round pits.

Scrotal membrane: the envelope covering the testes in some insects.

Scrotiform: purse-shaped.

Scrotum: = scrotal membrane; q, v.

Sculpture: the markings or pattern of impression or elevation on an
elytra or other body surface.

Sculptured: a surface, when marked with elevations or depressions or
both, arranged in some definite manner.

Scutate-iform: shield or buckler-shaped.

Scutcheon: = scutellum; q.v.: also used by some authors (Walker) for
the pronotum in Homoptera.

Scutel: = scutellum: q.v.

Scutellar angle: of elytra is next to the scutel when wing is expanded.

Scutellar bridge: in Diptera, a small ridge on either side of the
Scutellum, connecting it with the mesonotum.

Scutellar space: in Mantids, an area between antennae and clypeus.

Scutellate: dish- or platter-shaped.

Scutellum: the third dorsal sclerite of the meso- and meta-thorax: in
Coleoptera, the triangular piece between the elytra at base and
universally referred to as the scutellum: in Heteroptera, a similar
sclerite between base of hemelytra: in Diptera, a sub-hemispherical.
body posteriorly cut off by an impressed line from the dorsum of the
meso-thorax.

Scutes: the chitinous shields or plates on the segments of larvae.

Scutiform: = scutate; q.v.

Scutum: the second dorsal sclerite of the meso- and meta-thorax.

Seal-brown: a brilliant deep red-brown: almost like, but darker than
castaneous [between dragon's blood and Indian red].

Sebaceous: fatty or oily; applied to glands secreting such substances.

Sebific: oily; sebaceous; somewhat sticky.

Sebific duct: carries the excretions of the colleterial gland to the bursa
copulatrix.

Second antennal segment: the third or tritocerebral segment of head.

Secondaries: the hind wings; always attached to the meta-thorax.

Secondary sexual characters: features possessed by one sex but not
the other, other than the differences of the reproductive organs
themselves; e.g. color, size, shape, etc.

Second clypeus: see anteclypeus.

Second costal cell: in Hymenoptera (Pack.); is the stigma.

Second inner apical: in Hymenoptera (Nort.), = media 3 (Comst), to the
junction of medial cross-vein; also called sub-marginal nervure in
part.

Second lateral thoracic suture: in Odonata, extends front base of
secondaries to the rear of the third coxa.

Second longitudinal vein: in Diptera:= radius 2 + 3 (Comst). Second
maxilla: the labium: q.v.

Second maxillary segment: the seventh or labial segment of head.

Second median area: see median area; areola.

Second submarginal nervure: Hymenoptera (Nort.), = radius 5
(Comst.).

Secretion: any matter produced by a gland: in Coccidae, specifically,
the waxy, fibrous, cottony or silky substances forming the "scales."

Secretionary supplement: that part of a Diaspid scale extending
beyond or around the pellicles.

Secretory: concerned in the process of secretion.

Sectores coronis: the tearing or cutting structures used by the
Lepidoptera in working out of a cocoon.

Sectors: longitudinal veins in Odonata, which strike the principal
veins at an angle, and usually reach the apex or hind margin: they
are radial, subnodal, principal, nodal, median, short, and upper and
lower of triangle: all of which see.

Secund: pointing one way: unilateral.

Securiform: triangular-compressed; like the blade of a hatchet.

Sedentary: not active: settled or remaining in one place.

Segment: a ring or division bounded by incisions or sutures: a
segment of an insect or of any articulate is a transverse portion
reaching entirely across the body, originally separated on the exterior
by incisions or sutures from the preceding and the succeeding
segments, having attached to it not more than one pair of ventral
appendages, containing internally not more than one pair of nerve
ganglia which supply nerves to the pair of appendages; = somite,
arthromere: fusion of segments frequently obscures, as in the head:
externally the walls of one segment may be composed of a number of
sclerites separated from each other by secondary sutures.

Segmentate: made up of rings or segments.

Segmentation of egg: the division of the originally single celled egg into
a number of coherent cells or blastomeres; = cleavage.

Segregated: detached or scattered into groups.

Segregation: a separation or placing apart.

Sejunctus: separated.

Sellate: saddle-shaped.

Sematophore: a seminal packet, composed of the seminal fluid mixed
with the excretions of the accessory glands.

Sembling: = assembling; q.v.

Semen: the fluid secreted in the testes, containing the spermatozoa.

Semi-: half.

Semicircular: like the half of a circle.

Semi-complete: in metamorphosis, = incomplete; q.v.

Semicordate: half or partly heart-shaped.

Semicoronate: partly surrounded by a margin of spines, hooks or the
like.

Semicoronet: a margin of spines or hooks partly surrounding a
structure or process.

Semi-cylindrical: like a groove or half a cylinder.

Semi-hyaline: hyaline in part only: not altogether transparent.

Semi-looper: a caterpillar in which one or two pairs only of the
abdominal legs are wanting and where in progression, only small
loops are formed: see looper.

Semi-lunar: in the form of half a crescent.

Semi-lunar valve: guards the auriculo-ventricular opening of the
heart.

Seminal ducts: = vasa deferentia; q.v.

Seminal vesicles: enlarged tube or pouch-like structures which serve
to store the seminal fluid of the male, and in which the later stages of
its development may take place.

Seminiferous: semen-secreting.

Semipupa: that stage of the larva just preceding pupation: more
specifically the interpolated stage between the active larva and the
true pupa, in hyper-metamorphosis.

Semi-saggitate: like the longitudinal half of an arrow head.

Semitropical or Gulf strip: is the southern part of the Austro-riparian
area extends from Texas to Southern Florida, covers a narrow strip in
So. Georgia and probably follows the coastal lowlands into South
Carolina.

Sensim: gradually.

Sensoria: the circular openings covered by membrane, on the antenna
or legs of plant lice.

Sensory: relating to or having a sense function.

Sensory pittings: deep pits or punctures through the surface, which
may or may not bear pegs, bristles or seta, and may be open or
covered by a membrane; serving as organs of perception for sounds or
smells.

Septa, Septula: in Odonata, the triangular area of the mesonotum
before the insertion of the primaries: = calli axillary.

Septum: an internal division of a body cavity.

Sequence: the order in which things follow; e.g. species or genera.

Seriatim: placed in longitudinal rows.

Sericeous: silky: clothed with very dense minute hair which gives a
silky lustre.

Sericterium -ies: the silk producing gland or glands in caterpillars: the
spinning structures.

Series: a group of species, genera or families, arranged to show
agreement in a common character which is not of sufficient
importance to warrant the next higher division.

Serific glands: are these which produce a thick, mucous-like secretion
which, on hardening, forms silk.

Serosa: the outer membrane that envelops the forming embryo, the
amnion and the remainder of the egg.

Serpentinous: a dirty, dark green [Hooker's green].

Serra: a saw or saw-like part.

Serrate: saw-toothed, the teeth set toward one end.

Serrato-dentate: toothed, the edges themselves saw-toothed.

Serratulate: with little teeth or serrations.

Serricornia: that series of Coleoptera in which the antenna are serrate
or saw-toothed.

Serriferous: possessing a saw-like ovipositor in the female; the
saw-flies.

Serrulate: with numerous little saw teeth.

Serum: the fluid in which the blood corpuscles float or are suspended.

Sesquialter or Sesquiocellus: a large ocellus including a smaller one.

Sesquitertial: occupying a fourth part.

Sessile: closely seated: the abdomen, when it is closely attached for
nearly or quite its full width to the thorax.

Sessiliventres: Hymenoptera in which the abdomen is sessile.

Seta -ae: a pointed bristle or long stiff hair: slender, hair-like
appendages.

Setaceous: bristle-shaped: slender, gradually tapering to a tip.

Setarious aristate: the dipterous antenna when the arista is simple.

Setiferous: = setigercus; q.v.

Setiform: in the form of a bristle or seta: when a slender short bristle
arises from a thicker basal joint.

Setigenous: the hypodermal cells that give rise to setae.

Setigerous: bearing setae or bristles; e.g. punctures.

Setiparous: producing hair or sets.

Setireme: the hairy, oar-like legs of aquatic insects.

Setose -ous: bristly or set with bristles.

Setula: a small stiff bristle or seta: in Diptera, the small thorn at the
end of the sub-costa.

Setulose: clothed with fine seta or setulae.

Sex: as a number, six: the physical difference between male and
female: usually indicated by the sign of Mars (?) for male, and Venus
(?) for female; workers or undeveloped females have the sign of Venus
without the cross line, or a combination of the two others.

Sexuparae: that generation of plant lice which produces the true
sexes.

Shade: a cloudy, ill-defined streak or band.

Shagreened: a surface roughened with minute tooth-like projections.

Shank: = tibia; q.v.

Shard: a chitinous sheath or elytron.

Sharp: with a pointed tip or thin edge; opposed to blunt.

Sheath of penis: in Odonata, a median, hood-like piece between the
hamules, under which the penis is folded when not in use.

Shin: = tibia; q.v.

Short sector: in Odonata, = media 4 (Comst.).

Shoulder: loosely applied to an obtuse angulation; more generally to
the humeral angle of fore wings or elytra: the anterior angles of
thorax in Lepidoptera; the angles of prothorax in Heteroptera: the
lateral angles of metazona of pronotum in Orthoptera.

Sialisterium: a salivary gland.

Side: the lateral margin of the body.

Side piece: in genitalia of male Culicids the main lateral part of the
clasping organ or basal segment of clasp.

Sides of thorax: in Odonata, includes the pleura of meso- and meta-
thorax, less the meso-episterna.

Sienna: a brownish orange [brown ochre].

Sigmoid: shaped like the Greek letter sigma, or English S.

Signate -us: = with marks or spots; see notate.

Signature: a colored blotch of any size or shape.

Silaceous: = ochraceous.

Silk: the hardened salivary secretion of certain larvae, mainly of
Lepidoptera. similar material is produced by anal glands of some larva
in Neuroptera.

Silk-glands: a pair of modified salivary glands in certain larva, mostly
of Lepidoptera that secrete a viscid fluid which, on contact with the
air, hardens into a silken fibre.

Silvicolous: living in moist, shady woods.

Simple, Simplex: without process, armature, or appendage of any
kind.

Simple eyes: = ocelli; q.v.

Sinciput: in Coleoptera; that part of the vertex between the eyes.

Sinistrad: toward the left.

Sinistral: extending to or at the left from the median line.

Sinistro-caudad: extending obliquely from the left toward the tail.

Sinistro-cephalad: extending obliquely from the left toward the head.

Sinuate: cut into sinuses; applied to lines and margins with an in and
out curve.

Sinuated: winding: with the edge scooped into sinuses.

Sinuato-convex: sinuate and convex.

Sinuato-lobate: sinuate and lobed.

Sinuato-truncate: truncated, with the margin sinuate.

Sinuous: undulating; curved in and out.

Sinus: a curvilinear indentation more or less profound: an excavation
as if scooped out: a curved break in an otherwise straight margin.

Siphon: a tube-like mouth organ in certain insects: the breathing
tube of a Culicid larva: any tubular external process or structure.

Siphonaptera: an ordinal name for insects which are wingless: mouth
formed for piercing and sucking; saltatorial; transformations
complete: the fleas = Aphaniptera; q.v.

Siphonata: = Homoptera or, more specifically, plant lice and leaf
hoppers.

Siphonets: see honey tubes.

Siphonophora: = Coccinellidae; the term is preoccupied in the
Coelenterates.

Siphunculata: the sucking lice.

Siphunculus: the suctorial organ of a louse, contained within the
tubule: in plant lice =honey tubes; q.v.

Situ (in): in its natural place or position.

Sixth longitudinal vein: in Diptera; = 1st anal vein (Comst.).

Skeleton: the hard chitinous parts which externally (exoskeleton) or
internally (endoskeleton) form a protective covering, or serve as points
of attachment, to muscles and other soft organs.

Skippers: a popular term for Hesperid butterflies: the dipterous larva
sometimes found in cheese and other provisions.

Slaty: very dark blackish gray with a reddish tinge [neutral with a
little Indian red].

Slug: in general, any larva that has a slimy viscid appearance, and the
body closely applied to the food plant: more specifically, the larvae of
certain saw-flies and of some Coleoptera.

S. M. interspace: sub-median interspace in the primaries of
Lepidoptera, includes the space between the median and sub-median
veins; (cubitus and 1st anal, Comst.).

Smaltinus: a dull grayish blue.

Smaragdinus: emerald green [pale green].

Smooth: a surface without elevations or indentations.

Snout: the prolongation of the head in Rhynchophora at the end of
which the mouth parts are situated: see rostrum.

Social: living in communities: more especially those species in which
undeveloped or worker forms occur and where the colony has a single
female head.

Soldiers: in termites; forms sexually undeveloped, in which the
mandibles are pincer-like and the head is much enlarged: worker
majors in certain ants.

Solid: applied to an organ usually jointed, when these joints form into
one mass; e.g. the capitulum of certain clavate antennae.

Solitary-arius: occurring singly or in pairs; not in colonies.

Somatic: relating to the body, or abdomen.

Somatotheca: that part of pupa covering abdominal rings:=
gasterotheca.

Somite: = arthromere.

Sonifaction: the production of sound: = stridulation; q.v.

Sonoran faunal areas: see upper and lower Sonoran.

Sonorific: sound producing: applied to stridulating organs.

Sordid: dirty; dull.

Spadiceous: bay brown [dragon's blood + brown ochre].

Spado: the worker or neuter in bees and ants.

Sparse: scattered: single hairs, scales or sculptures set well apart.

Spatha: a median piece in male genitalia of aculeate Hymenoptera,
covering the bases of the sagitte.

Spatula: the breast bone (q.v.) of cecidomyid larvae.

Spatulate: rounded and broad at top, attenuate at base.

Specialization: the adaptation of an organ to a definite purpose, or of
an organism to fit a determinate environment.

Species: an aggregation of individuals alike in appearance and
structure, mating freely and producing young that themselves mate
freely and bear fertile offspring resembling each other and their
parents: a species includes all its varieties and races.

Specific character: a feature common to all individuals of a species, by
means of which they may be distinguished from all other individuals
of other species: = essential character.

Specular: mirror-like: transparent.

Specular membrane: in male Cicada, the inner or posterior mirror-like
membrane of the sound-organ: = mirror.

Speculum: a transparent area or spot on wings of some Lepidoptera;
the glassy areas at base of tegmina in male Orthoptera that serve as
sounding boards: a spot on the neck of some caterpillars.

Sperm: the seminal fluid: in plural form is sometimes used as =
spermatozoa; q.v.

Spermatheca: = spermatotheca; q.v.

Spermatid: the final cells which are converted without further division
into spermatozoa: they arise by division of the second spermatocytes
(Wilson).

Spermatocytes: the cells arising from the spermatogonia. The primary
spermatocyte arises by growth of one of the last generation of
spermatogonia. By its division are formed two secondary
spermatocytes, each of which give rise to two spermatids (Wilson).

Spermatogenesis: the development of spermatozoa.

Spermatogonia: the descendants of the primordial germ cells in the
male. Each ultimate spermatogonium typically gives rise to four
spermatozoa.

Spermatophora: a sac or case containing spermatozoa.

Spermatotheca: the sac or reservoir in the female, that receives the
sperm during coition: = spermatheca and receptaculum seminis.

Spermatozoön-zoa: the male cell or cells which, by uniting with the
ova, fertilize them.

Spherical: in the form of a sphere: a body in which all diameters are
equal.

Spherule: a minute sphere or globule.

Spicula: a slender needle-like process: e.g. the sting in bees: also
employed as = ovipositor: q.v.

Spiculiform: like a slender, needle-like process.

Spiculum: a small spicule or thin, pointed process.

Spinate: produced into an acuminate spine.

Spindle-shaped: cylindrical, elongate, thicker in the middle, tapering
to each end: fusiform.

Spine: a sharp process: in Coccidae there are two, one each side of
each segment of the pygidium.

Spiniferous: bearing, or clothed with spines.

Spiniform: in the form or shape of a spine.

Spinneret: the ligula in bombycid and some other larvae, modified for
silk spinning: any organ consisting of an internal tube, terminating in
a pore, spine or process, producing a silky or waxy fibre: in the
plural, the organs concerned in the emission of the silky or cottony
filaments of which the scales or sacs of Coccidae are produced: =
fusulus.

Spinose -ous -ed: set with acute processes or spines.

Spinous-radiate: beset with spines in a circle, either concatenate,
united at their bases, or setaceous, like bristles.

Spinulae: spinous processes at the apex of the tibia: also called
spines, spurs or heels.

Spinulate -ose: set with little spines or spinules.

Spinules: little spines.

Spira: the coiled ovipositor of Cynipidae.

Spiracle -cula: a breathing pore: q.v.: in the plural the lateral
openings on the segments of the insect body through which air enters
the tracheae:= stigmata.

Spiracular area: the anterior of the three areas between lateral and
pleural carinae on the metanotum of some Hymenoptera: =first
pleural area.

Spiracular line: in caterpillars is that which includes the spiracles: =
stigmatal.

Spiracular sulcus: on the metanotum of Hymenoptera, is a grooved
linear channel extending from spiracle to apical margin.

Spiral: rolled up like a watch spring, or twisted like a cork-screw.
{Scanner's comment: Nowadays it is more correct to regard the
corkscrew as helical and the watch spring as spiral.}

Spiral fibre: the spiral thickening or folding of the chitinous lining of a
trachea, which gives to the latter its characteristic microscopic
appearance as well as its support and elasticity:= ctenidium.

Spirignath: = spiritrompe.

Spiritrompe: the spiral tongue in Lepidoptera.

Splanchnic: applied to the outer embryonic layer of the rudiment of
the mid-intestine: or the inner layer of the mesoderm which,
becoming applied to the walls of the alimentary canal, develops into
the muscle fibres thereof.

Splendens -ent: shining: with a metallic glitter.

Splitter: one who splits or describes species or genera upon minute
characters which the "Lumper" (q.v.) deems insufficient to authorize
them.

Spongioplasm: the net-like structure of protoplasm in a cell.

Spongiose: a soft, elastic tissue resembling a sponge.

Spoon: = bouton; q.v.

Spring: in Collembola. = furcula: q.v.

Spur: a short, stiff, generally blunt process and usually not
articulated at its base: in the plural refers to paired spiniform
processes at or near the end of tibia:.

Spur formula: a numerical expression of their arrangement; as 2-3-4;
 two spurs on fore tibia, 3 on middle, and 4 on posterior; in
Trichoptera.


Spurius: false: applied to aborted anterior legs in some diurnal
Lepidoptera.

Spurious cell: in Diptera (Pack.), = 3d anal (Comst.).

Spurious veins: certain folds or thickenings in the wing surface which
resemble a vein so nearly as to be readily mistaken and sufficiently
constant to be useful in classification.

Squama: in Odonata, the sclerite that bears the palpus of both maxilla
and labium: the scale-like first abdominal segment of some ants: a
scale-like appendage covering the base of primaries in Lepidoptera,
and so = patagium; q.v.: a small scale above the halteres in Diptera:
in this order Packard uses squama for the lobed scale and restricts
alula to the lobe-like appendage: Osten-Sacken uses squama for the
posterior scale alone and antisquama for the anterior.

Squames: the flattened, fimbriated or spine-like marginal processes of
the pygidium in Diaspinae, other than the lobes and true spines: =
"plates," of Comst.; or "scaly hairs" of Maskell.

Squamiform: having a scale-like form.

Squamose -ous: scaly or covered with scales.

Squamula: a small corneous scale covering the base of primaries in
some insects: = tegula, q.v.: in Diptera, = alula.

Squarrous: scurfy: clothed with rough scales differing in direction,
standing upright, or not parallel to the surface.

Stadium -ia: the interval between the molts of larvae:= instar q.v.:
any one period in the development of an insect.

Stage: refers to the period of development; e.g. larval, pupal, etc.

Stalked bodies: = gyri cerebrales; q.v.

Stellate: star-shaped; with four or five radiating lines.

Stelocyttares: social wasps in which the comb layers of the nest are
supported by pillars and not connected with the envelope: see
poecilocyttares and phragmocyttares.

Stemapoda: the modified filamentous anal legs of Cerura and other
Notodontid larvae.

Stemmata: simple eyes or ocelli; q.v.

Stem-mother: in plant lice; that form hatching from the winter egg,
which starts a series of agamic summer generations.

Stenocephalous: with a narrow, elongate head.

Stenorhynchan: narrow beaked or snouted.

Stenothorax: a supposed ring between pro- and meso-thorax.

Stercoral: relating or pertaining to excrement.

Sterile: not capable of reproducing its kind.

Sternal orifice: in Perlids; a peculiar slit on each side of the sternum,
extending inward and ending blindly := furcal orifice.

Sternal spatula: = breast-bone; q.v.

Sternauli: the short and often obsolete furrows on either side of the
mesosternum in Hymenoptera.

Sternellum: the second sclerite of the ventral part of each thoracic
segment frequently divided into longitudinal parts which may be
widely separated.

Sternite: the ventral piece in a ring or segment.

Sternopleura: in Diptera, the lower part of the pleura, below the
sternopleural suture and above the front coxa.

Sternopleural bristles: in Diptera, are situated on the sternopleura
below the sternopleural suture.

Sternopleural suture: in Diptera, is below and nearly parallel with
dorso-pleural suture, separating the mesopleura from the
sternopleura.

Sterno-rhabdite: a sternal rhabdite.

Sternorhynchi: that series of Homoptera in which the beak or rostrum
apparently arises from the sternum between the anterior coxae; e.g.
plant lice, etc.

Sternum -a: the breast: the middle portion of the under surface of
thorax, between the coxal cavities.

Stethidium: the trunk: the entire thorax with all its appendages.

Stigma: a spiracle or breathing pore: a dense, often discolored portion
of the costal margin of a wing, usually at the end of the radius; see
anastomosis: in Diptera, a colored wing spot near the tip of the
auxiliary vein: in Lepidoptera, the specialized patch of black scales on
the primaries of Hesperidae.

Stigmata: the spiracles: also applied to the two spots, orbicular and
reniform, in the cell of the primaries of certain moths.

Stigmatal line: in caterpillars, = spiracular; q.v.

Stigmatiferous: applied to processes or structures bearing spiracles or
stigmata.

Stimuli: the small acute spines on some larva, especially wood-borers

Sting: the modified ovipositor in aculeate Hymenoptera.

Stipes: the foot-stalk of the maxilla; articulated partly to the head,
partly to the cardo, and bearing the movable parts: modified into a
piercing structure in some Diptera and into a lever for flexing the
proboscis in others.

Stipitate: supported on a stalk or pedicle.

Stipites: the outer pair of forceps in male genitalia of aculeate
Hymenoptera see sagittae.

S. T. line: sub-terminal line; crosses the primaries of many moths
just before the outer margin.

S. T. space: the area between the t.p. line and s. t. line in moths.

Stirps: a stock or stem: a division of classification similar to
super-family: not used at present.

Stoma -ata: a breathing pore or pores:= stigma; q.v.

Stomach: that portion of the alimentary canal, immediately following
the gizzard and preceding the ileum, into which most of the digestive
juices are poured = chylific ventricle.

Stomatodaeum: that invagination of the ectoderm that forms the
mouth, pharynx, oesophagus, crop and gizzard.

Stomatogastric: that system of nerves and ganglia, lying along the
dorsal and lateral surfaces of gullet and crop.

Stomatotheca: that part of the pupa covering the mouth structures.

Stramineous -eus: straw yellow [pale clay yellow].

Strangulate: constricted, as if by bands or cords.

Stratified: arranged or made up in layers.

Strepsiptera: twisted-wing: an ordinal term proposed for the parasitic
Stylopidae, now ranged as a family of Coleoptera = Rhipiptera.

Stria: in Coleoptera, a longitudinal depressed line or furrow,
frequently punctured, extending from base to apex of elytra: in
Lepidoptera, a fine transverse line: in general, any longitudinal
impressed line.

Striate -ed: marked with parallel, fine, impressed lines; or, in
Lepidoptera, with numerous fine transverse lines.

Stridulate: to make a creaking noise by rubbing together two ridged or
roughened surfaces.

Stridulation: a creaking sound produced by rubbing together two
striated or otherwise roughened surfaces: the act of stridulating or
the noise produced by it.

Striga: a narrow, transverse line or slender streak, either surface or
impressed. {Scanner's note: the proper plural is strigae}

Strigate: having striga: applied to a surface on which the striga are
impressed as in the elytra of some beetles, or to an ornamentation
composed of fine, short lines. {Scanner's note: sic; the proper plural is
strigae}

Strigile -is: maculation that consists of parallel longitudinal lines: a
deep sinus near base of first joint of anterior tarsus.

Strigillate -ation: = stridulate -anon; q.v.

Strigose: clothed with rigid bristles that are thickest at base: rough,
with sharp bristles: = hispid.

Strigula: a fine short transverse mark or line.

Strigulated: with numerous strigulae.

Striolate -us: with finely impressed parallel lines.

Stripe: a longitudinal streak of color different from the ground.

Style: in Aphids, the slender tubular process at the end of the
abdomen: in Coccids, a long spine-like appendage at the end of the
abdomen of the male; = genital spike: in Diptera, the ovipositor
(Loew); the single immovable organ immediately below the forceps in
male Tipulidae (O-S.) a thickened jointed arista at or near the tip of
the third antennal joint in the plural form applied to small, usually
pointed, exarticulate appendages, most frequently found on the
terminal segments of abdomen.

Stylet: a small style or stiff process: one of the piercing mouth
structures in Diptera and Hemiptera.

Styliform: in the shape of a stylus: terminating in a long slender point,
like the antenna in some Diptera.

Stylopized: infested by a member of the Stylopidae.

Stylotrachealis: with a long tube bearing a stigma, from the head case;
as the pupa of some Diptera.

Stylus: a small, pointed, non-articulated process.

Sub-: as a prefix, means that the main term is not entirely applicable,
but must be understood as modified in some way; e.g. sub-ovate,
may be either more or less than ovate and may be irregular in outline.

Sub-aduncate: somewhat hooked or curved.

Sub-anal plate: Orthoptera; = sub-genital lamina; q.v.

Sub-apical lobe: of male genitalia in Culicids is the inner sub-apical
lobe of the side piece.

Sub-apterous: almost wingless; with rudimentary wings only.

Sub-clavate: somewhat thickened toward tip; but not quite
club-shaped.

Sub-coriaceous: somewhat leathery.

Sub-cortical: beneath the bark; as in larval borings, etc.

Subcosta: (Comst.); that longitudinal vein extending parallel to the
costa and reaching the outer margin before the apex; not branched as
a rule of Packard, in Hymenoptera, = radius (Comst.).

Subcostal cell: in Diptera (Schiner), = marginal cell (Loew), = radial 1
(Comst.) in the plural (Comst.), all those cells anteriorly margined by
the subcosta first s.c. cell in Hymenoptera (Pack.), = radial and first
radial 1 (Comst.).

Subcostal crossveins: in Odonata, are between subcosta and media on
the basal side of the first antecubital.

Subcostal fold or furrow: lies between costa and radius.

Subcostal nervule: Lepidoptera, on secondaries:= media 1 (Comst.):
s.c. 1 = radius 1 (Comst.); s.c. 2:= radius 2 (Comst.) s.c. 3 = radius
3 (Comst) s.c. 4 = radius 4 (Comst.) s.c. 5 = radius 5 (Comst.).

Subcostal vein: in Diptera (Schiner), = 1st longitudinal vein (Meigen)
radius 1 (Comst.): in Lepidoptera, runs from base, parallel to costa, to
or beyond the middle, giving rise to branches which extend to the
outer margin and thus = radius (Comst.).

Sub-cristate: with a moderately elevated ridge or keel on pronotum, in
Orthoptera.

Subcutaneous: under the skin: applied to larvae that feed under the
skin of animals or within the substance of a leaf.

Sub-dorsal: the space between the dorsum and the stigmata.

Sub-dorsal line: in caterpillars is to the side of the dorsal and between
it and the lateral or, if there is an addorsal line, between that and the
lateral.

Sub-dorsal ridge: in slug caterpillars, extends longitudinally along the
sub-dorsal row of abdominal tubercles.

Sub-equal: similar, but not quite equal in size, form or other
characters.

Sub-eroded: wing margins when somewhat, but irregularly, indented.

Sub-falcate: when a wing is only a little excavated below the apex.

Subfamily: a division of classification containing a group of closely
allied genera; different from other allied groups, yet not so as to make
a family series: opinionative, and ending in -inae.

Sub-fossorial: legs used in digging: yet not greatly modified.

Sub-frontal: close to the front; immediately behind the front margin.

Sub-fulcrum: a sclerite between mentum and palpiger: rarely present.

Sub-fusiform: somewhat spindle-shaped.

Subgalea: a maxillary sclerite or segment, attached to the stipes, and
bearing the galea or outer lobe.

Sub-geniculate: applied to antennae that are articulated from a short,
thick scope.

Subgenital lamina or plates: plates underlying the genital organs in
Orthoptera.

Subgenus: a division within a genus, based upon a character not
sufficient for generic separation; opinionative.

Subglossa: in Odonata; a sclerite between the two halves of the
mentum (Graber): is really the true mentum.

Sub-imago: sometimes applied as = nymph: that stage in Ephemerida
just after emergence from the pupa and before the final molt during
flight: that stage in the development of insects with free pupa when
the insect is fully colored but yet retains its pupal position.

Sub-labrum: =epipharynx; q.v.

Sublingual: beneath the tongue; applied to a pair of salivary glands in
bees.

Submargin -al: an imaginary portion of a surface outside of the disk
and within the margin: a line is submarginal when it is well within
the margin but close to it.

Submarginal area: of secondaries, lies between the costal margin and
the 1st strong vein.

Submarginal cells: in Hymenoptera (Norton) = radial cells (Comst.): in
Diptera (Will.); = radial 3 (Comst.).

Submarginal nervure: in Hymenoptera (Nort.); the irregular line of
veins extending on the whole parallel with the outer margin;
composed in part of media 1, 2, 3 and 4, the medial cross vein and
cubitus 1 (Comst.).

Submedian cells: in Hymenoptera (Pack.); 1st = cubital + cubital 1
(Comst.) 2d = medial 3 (Comst.); 3d = 2d medial 2 (Comst.).

Submedian vein: in Odonata, =cubitus (Comst.); in Lepidoptera, = 1st
anal (Comst.), runs from base of primaries to the hind angle, close to
the inner margin and is v. 1 of the numerical series.

Submental: pertaining to the sub-mentum.

Submental peduncle: in Coleoptera, the prolonged portion of the gula
supporting the mentum.

Submentum: the basal sclerite of the labium, by means of which it is
attached to the head.

Subnodal sector: in Odonata, = radial sector (Comst.).

Sub-nymph: applied to the resting or pupal stage of female Coccidae;
also to a supernumerary stage before the formation of the pupa, and
thus = pseudo-pupa.

Sub-ocellate: an ocellate spot that is blind or without a pupil.

Sub-ocular: beneath or below the eyes.

Sub-oesophageal ganglion: situated in the head below the
oesophagus, formed by a union of the posterior three primitive head
ganglia.

Sub-order: a division of an order higher than a family, based on a
character common to a large series of species; e.g. the Homoptera
and Heteroptera in the order of Hemiptera.

Sub-pedunculate: in Coleoptera, when the constriction between
pro- and meso-thorax is so great as to give the appearance of
a narrow waist.

Subreniform: a rounded spot or outline, below and sometimes
attached to the reniform spot in Catocala and some allied Noctuids.

Sub-parallel: nearly parallel.

Sub-primary sub-ventral tubercle: on the thoracic and abdominal
segments of caterpillars; sub-ventral, posterior, not present in the
primitive first stage; it is VI of the abdomen, V of the thorax:
constant.

Sub-sellate: nearly like or approaching the form of a saddle.

Sub-servate: denticulate.

Subspecies: a well-marked form of a species differing from the type in
some character of color or maculation which is recognizable but does
not prevent a fertile union: an indefinite and opinionative division.

Subspiracular line: in caterpillars, margins the spiracles inferiorly.

Substigmatal: that portion of the marginal cell below the stigma, in
bees: = 1st radial 1 (Comst.): applied to a line in caterpillars =
subspiracular.

Sub-teres: nearly but not quite cylindrical.

Subtile -is: slightly; feebly; small; pretty; graceful.

Subtriangular space: = internal triangle: see triangle.

Subtus: beneath; at the under surface.

Subulate: awl-shaped: linear at base, attenuate at tip.

Subulicornia: with awl-shaped antennae; applied to a combination of
Odonata and Ephemerida.

Subuliform: formed like an awl: = subulate.

Sub-ventral line: in caterpillars, extends along the sides just above the
base of the feet at lie edge between lateral and ventral.

Sub-ventral ridge: in slug caterpillars extends longitudinally along the
sub-ventral series of abdominal tubercles.

Sub-ventral space: in slug caterpillars is the area on each side,
between the lateral ridge and the lower edge of the body, and contains
the spiracles.

Succincti: those chrysalids of butterflies which are held in place by a
silken cord passing around the body: see suspensi.

Succineous: resembling amber in color or appearance.

Sucking pump: in sucking insects, a thick-walled muscular
enlargement of the oesophagus that serves to draw up the liquid food
= pharyngeal pump.

Sucking spears: the mandibles and maxillae of Hemerobiid larvae,
used for puncturing prey and sucking its juices.

Sucking stomach: a thin-walled muscular pouch connected with the
end of the oesophagus; serves as a food reservoir and is not commonly
present except in some Lepidoptera.

Suctoria: an ordinal term proposed for fleas.

Suctorial: adapted for sucking: see haustellate.

Suctorial vesicles: bladder-like structures connected with the
oesophagus in mosquitoes supposed to assist in blood-sucking; but
this is disputed.

Suffused: clouded or obscured by a darker color.

Suffusion: a clouding, or a spreading of one shade over another.

Sulca: grooves, furrows or channels: plural of sulcus.

Sulcated: grooved; furrowed with broad, concave, parallel impressed
lines.

Sulciform: resembling a sulcus.

Sulcus: a furrow or groove: a groove-like excavation.

Sulphureous -eus: bright, sulphur yellow [chrome lemon].

Superans: exceeding in size and length.

Superciliary: placed above the eyes.

Supercilium: an arched line over an ocellate spot.

Super-family: a division of classification less than an order, including
a series of family groups more closely related to each other than to
similar groups within the order: opinionative and ending in oidea:
sometimes hardly different from suborder; but lower than suborder
when both terms are employed.

Superficies: the upper surface.

Supericornia: those Heteroptera having the antenna inserted on the
upper parts of the sides of the head; e.g. Coreidae: see infericornia.

Superior wings: the primaries; q.v.

Superlinguae: the lateral pair of organs of hypo-pharynx in
Thysanura.

Superlingual segment: the fifth segment of head.

Superne: denotes all those parts belonging to the upper surface.

Supernumerary: additional or added cells, veins or other structures.

Supernumerary segment: in Cecidomyidae, between the head and first
thoracic segment.

Super-order: a group of allied orders, like the Linnaean Neuroptera.

Superposed: placed one above the other, as the frontal tufts in some
moths.

Supplementary sectors: interposed sectors; q.v.

Suppression: the non-development of a part normally present.

Supra-: over; above.

Supra-alar bristles: in Diptera, are situated, one on the post-alar
callus, one on the alar frenum, the third on the edge of the supra-alar
depression.

Supra-alar cavity: = supra-alar groove.

Supra-alar depression: in Diptera = supra-alar groove.

Supra-alar groove: in Hymenoptera, a groove or depression just above
the base of wings: in Diptera, a groove on the meso-thorax just above
the root of the wings.

Supra-anal: situated above the anus.

Supra-anal hook: in male of most Lepidoptera, a curved hook attached
to the plate covering the genital cavity: = uncus.

Supra-anal plate: a triangular sclerite covering the anal cavity above;
present in many insects, sometimes in one sex only, often in both:
see anal operculum.

Supra-cerebral: applied to that pair of salivary glands situated above
the brain in bees.

Supra-clypeal mark: in bees; a patch of light color above the clypeus.

Supra-clypeus: = post-clypeus; q.v.: = nasus.

Supra-Oesophageal: situated above the oesophagus: applied to two
large ovoid ganglia so situated, and connected by a short, thick
commissure; - the brain.

Supra-orbital: situated above the eye.

Supra-spinal: above the spine or nerve cord: applied to a cord or band
of connective tissue lying above the central nervous system in adult
Lepidoptera also to a sinus or vessel acting as a ventral heart.

Supra-spiracular line: in caterpillars, margins the spiracles superiorly.

Supra-stigmatal line: = supra-spiracular lines.

Supra-triangular cross-veins: in Odonata, cross the supra-triangular
space.

Supra-triangular space: in Anisoptera, an area just above the triangle,
occupying nearly the same position as the quadrilateral of Zygoptera:
hyper-trigonal space.

Suranal: = supra-anal.

Suranal plate: the middle dorsal plate attached to the l0th abdominal
segment of the male grasshoppers, above the anal opening: a supra-
anal tergite of a caterpillar.

Sursum: directed upwardly.

Suspensi: the chrysalids of butterflies that are suspended by the tail
only: see succincti.

Suspensoria: are those muscles or ligaments that hold the viscera and
other internal structures in place.

Sustentors: the two posterior projections of a butterfly chrysalis.

Suture: a seam or impressed line indicating the division of distinct
parts of body wall: the line of junction of elytra in Coleoptera.

Suturiform: an articulation soldered together so that only a slight
impressed line is visible.

Swarming: the concerted departure from a hive of a large number of
worker bees, accompanied by a queen; this forming the nucleus of a
new colony.

Swimmerets: gill or plate-like structures in the aquatic larvae of some
Neuroptera, serving as oars or organs of locomotion.

Swimming paddles: terminal appendages of mosquito pupae.

Swoked: smoky, suffused with gray or blackish.

Sylvan: species inhabiting forests or woodland areas.

Symbiogenesis: the method of origin of social symbiotic relation
among ants and other insects.

Symbiosis: a life relationship existing between different kinds of
animals or plants, or between animals and plants: true symbiosis is
where both parties to the relation benefit: see also parasitism,
commensalism. Among the ants social symbiosis exists in its most
highly developed form and distinctive terms have been proposed for
the various types of relations:

     Calobiosis, is that association in which one species, often only the
female, lives in the nest of and at the expense of another species,
either for a time, = temporary - or altogether, = permanent
calacobiosis. {Scanner's note: sic}

     Cleptobiosis, is where one species of ant lives in or near the nest of
another, preying upon its larvae or pupae or stealing the food supply.

     Dulosis, is that mingling of colonies which owes its origin to the
enslavement of one species by another.

     Hamabiosis, is that relation where two species of any insects, one of
which may be an ant, live side by side without obvious motive or
known advantage to one or both.

     Lestobiosis, is where the workers of one ant colony "hold up" those of
another species and rob them of the food they are carrying to the nest.

     Parabiosis, is where different species of ants form colonies with
inosculating galleries, and have their households strangely
intermingled, but not blended.

     Phylacobiosis, is the relation existing between ants and Termites, the
ants living in the doorways of the Termites and functioning as guards.

     Synclerobiosis, is an association of two species of ants that usually
inhabit independent colonies, for purposes that are not clearly
understood.

     Trophibiosis, is the relationship between ants on the one hand and
aphids, coccids and the like on the other; these species being sought
and attended by the ants for their own benefit: see myrmecophily.

     Xenobiosis, is where one species of ant lives as a guest
in the nest of another, maintaining its own household, and mingling
freely with the host species, the two living on terms of
mutual toleration.

Symbiotic: species that live together in a state of symbiosis.

Symmetrical: evenly developed on both sides.

Symmetry: that regular arrangement of organs or parts which is
capable of division into similar halves or similar radii.

Sympathetic nervous system: applied to the nerves and ganglia of the
alimentary canal and sonic other viscera which they innervate; =
vagus; visceral nervous system.

Symphily: the relation borne to ants by the true guests which inhabit
their nests and are fed and tended: rendering in return some
substance or service desired by the ants: see metochy and synechtry.

Symphyla: a group name for apterous species resembling myriapods
in appearance, with functional abdominal legs and the genital
openings on the last abdominal segment: regarded by some as
connecting forms between insects and myriapods, e.g.
Scolopendrella.

Symphysis: where two sclerites are joined together by a soft
membrane, permitting a slight motion.

Synaptera: originally wingless insects without metamorphosis; the
Thysanura.

Synarthrosis: an articulation without motion.

Syncerebrum: the compound brain of insects.

Synchronous: happening at the same time.

Synciput: that portion of the vertex lying between the eyes.

Syncitium: masses of protoplasm with nuclei, found in ovarian tubes;
giving rise to ova, nutritive cells or both.

Syndesis: that method of articulation where two parts are connected
by a membrane which permits of considerable motion between them.

Synechtry: the relation borne to ants by insects inhabiting their nests
in spite of the efforts of the ants to destroy them: see symphily and
metochy.

Synista or Synistata: those Neuropterous insects in which the mouth
structures are undeveloped, forming an imperfect tubular structure:
see elinguata.

Synoecy: the relation that exists between ants and those guests that
are indifferent to and tolerated by them:= metochy, and see symphily
and synecthry.

Synonym: a name applied to a species or genus that has been
previously named and described.

Synonymous: words of different derivation applied to the same
conception.

Synthlipsis: the basal constriction of the notocephalon in Notonectids.

Syntype: = co-type; q.v.

Syringe: in Hemiptera, a chamber into which the salivary ducts open
and by means of which the secretion is forced forward between the
seta or lancets.

System: an order of arrangement.

Systematic: in definite order, or arranged according to a system.

Systole: that regular contraction of the heart that sends the blood
outward: see diastole.




T

T. A. line: transverse anterior line; crosses the primaries of certain
moths one-third or less from the base: = antemedial line.

Tactile: used for touching; an organ that has the sense of touch.

Taenia: a broad longitudinal stripe.

Taeniate -us: with broad longitudinal markings.

Taenidium -ia: the band or chitinized fibre forming a part of the spiral
thread in the trachea of insects.

Tail: an elongated terminal segment of the abdomen: the cauda in
plant lice: elongated processes on the secondaries, in some
Lepidoptera and Neuroptera.

Tangential: set in or meeting at a tangent; applied to ornamentation
and processes.

Tarsal: relating to the tarsi, or feet.

Tarsal lobes: membranous appendages arising from the underside of
the tarsal joints in some Coleoptera.

Tarsus -i: the foot; the jointed appendage attached at the apex of tibia.
bearing the claws and pulvilli.

Taste cups: specialized pits or cups, with or without a peg or hair,
connected with ganglionated nerve cells: occur on the mouth
structure and evidence the sense of taste.

Tawny: a brownish yellow, like the color of a tanned hide [pale
cadmium yellow + Indian red].

Taxonomical: systematic: relating to classification.

Testate: covered; concealed: also used as = tectiform.

Tectiform: roof-like, sloping from a median ridge, like the primaries of
Cicada.

Tegmen: a covering: sometimes used for the anterior wings in
Orthoptera and Neuroptera.

Tegmina: the thickened primaries serving as wing covers in
Orthoptera.

Tegulae: small, more or less cup-like scales at the base of primaries in
many insects; specifically in Hymenoptera: in Lepidoptera, = the
patagia or shoulder tippets; but the homology is disputed; also
applied to the lappet-like pieces forming the collar: in Diptera, the
alulae, q.v.: the latter use is unfortunate and should be abandoned;
the first definition should limit the use of the term: see aileron.

Tegument: a covering surface or skin.

Teleodont: applied to those forms of male Lucanids bearing the largest
mandibles: see mesodont, amphiodont, priodont.

Telescopic: arranged so that one portion of an organ or process may
be drawn into another, like the joints of a telescope.

Telson: a terminal tubercle bearing the anal opening: the anal
segment of the insect embryo.

Telum: a spear, or spear-shaped process.

Temple: the posterior part of the gena; behind, before or beneath the
eye.

Tempora: the temples.

Temporal margins: in Mallophaga, the lateral margins of the hind
head.

Tenaculum: in Collembola, a small organ which holds the furcula in
position when at rest: = catch.

Tenant hair: see tenent hair.

Tendo: the anal area of secondaries when it forms a groove for the
abdomen: has also been called frenum and frenulum: in Trichoptera,
a small elliptical space at base of hind wings near base of anal veins
and behind the trochlea.

Tendon: the slender, chitinous plates, bands, strap- or cup-shaped
pieces, to which muscles are attached for moving appendages: see
apodeme.

Tenent hair: specialized hair adapted for clinging or clasping.

Teneral: that state of the imago just after its exclusion from pupa or
nymph, in which neither coloring nor clothing is fully developed.

Tensor: a muscle which stretches a membrane.

Tentacle: a flexible sensory or tactile process; in some cases retractile:
usually prefixed by a descriptive term indicating the structure to
which it is attached.

Tentacular -um: retractile processes on the larvae of Lepidoptera.

Tentaculate: a margin when fringed with soft tactile processes.

Tentiform: shaped like a tent: see mines.

Tentoria: Diptera; two hollow, cylindrical struts which pass from the
ventral border of the occipital foramen to the cheeks.

Tentorium: a chitinous frame-work within the head, upon which the
brain rests.

Tenuis: thin, slender; long drawn out.

Terebra: a borer or piercer: an ovipositor fitted for boring or cutting as
in saw-flies: a mandibular sclerite articulated to the basalis; forms
the point of the structure and = the galea of the maxilla.

Terebrant: with an ovipositor fitted for piercing or boring.

Terebrantia: Hymenoptera with sessile abdomen and valved
ovipositors: Thripids in which the ovipositor of female is borer-like.

Teres, Terete: cylindric or nearly so.

Tergal: belonging to the primitively upper surface: see dorsal.

Tergal suture: the Y shaped dorsal suture on the head of many insect
larvae.

Tergite: the primitively dorsal part of a segment, especially when that
part consists of a single sclerite; usually applied to the abdomen.

Tergo-pleural: the upper and lateral portion of a segment.

Tergo-rhabdites: the lower pair of corneous appendages forming the
ovipositor in grasshoppers: plates on the inner dorsal surface of the
abdominal wall.

Tergum: the primitively upperor dorsal surface whether it consists of
one or more than one sclerite and specifically of the abdomen: in
Odonata and Orthoptera, applies to thorax as well.

Termen: the outer margin of a wing, between apex and hind or anal
angle.

Terminal: situated at the tip or extremity; opposed to basal.

Terminal line: in Lepidoptera, runs along the outer margin of the
wings.

Terminal space: the area between the s. t. line and terminal line in
certain Lepidoptera.

Terminology: the technical nomenclature of any science.

Termitarium: a nest, natural or artificial, or a colony of Termites.

Terrestrial: living on or in the land; opposed to aquatic.

Tessellated: checkered; more or less like a chess-board. {Scanner's
comment: More correctly, it means "tiled", covered with possibly
regularly shaped areas or pieces.  They may or may not be square or
otherwise regular.}

Test: the secretionary covering of Coccidae, and especially such as are
waxy, horny or glassy.

Testaceous: dull yellow brown; tile colored [pale cadmium
yellow+burnt sienna].

Testes: the tubular structures in the male, in which the production of
spermatogonia, and often also of later stages in the development of the
sperm takes place.

Testicular follicles: in the larva, are those structures which in the
adult form the tubes composing the testes; in the adult applied also to
the tubes forming the testes.

Testudinate -us: resembling the shell of a tortoise.

Tetra-: four: a combining form.

Tetrachaetae: applied to those Diptera in which the mouth structures
consist of four longitudinal blades or piercing structures.

Tetradactyle: with four fingers or finger-like processes.

Tetragonal: having four sides or angles: quadrangular.

Tetramera: applied to Coleoptera with four-jointed tarsi.

Tetramerous: having four-jointed tarsi.

Tetrapoda: applied to those butterflies in which the anterior legs are
atrophied in whole or in part.

Tetraptera: a term proposed for all insects with four naked,
membranous reticulated wings.

Thamnophilous: applied to species living in thickets or dense
shrubbery.

Theca: a case or covering: specifically applied to the fleshy covering of
the fly-mouth; to the cases of the Trichopterous larvae; to the lower
piece of the male genitalia in Homoptera; and to the outer covering of
the pupa.

Thelyotoky: parthenogenetic reproduction when the progeny are all
females see Arrhenotoly and Deuterotoky.

Thigh: see femur.

Thigmotactic: contact-loving: applied to species that tend to live close
together or in touch, one with the other.

Third longitudinal vein: in Diptera (Will.):= radius 5 (Comst.).

Third posterior cell: in Diptera, = 2d medial 2 (Comst.).

Third submarginal cross-nervure: in Hymenoptera (North.):= radius 4
(Comst.).

Thoracic: belonging or attached to the thorax.

Thoracic dorsal bristles: in Diptera, the specialized bristles on the
dorsum of the thorax.

Thoracic feet: the jointed legs on the thoracic segments of larvae, as
distinguished from abdominal or pro-legs.

Thoracico-abdominal: the first segment of the abdomen when united
with the thorax so as to form part of it: =propodeum.

Thoracic pleural bristles: in Diptera, the specialized bristles situated
on the pleural region of the thorax.

Thoracotheca: = cytotheca: q.v.

Thorax: the second or intermediate region of the insect body, bearing
the true legs and wings: made up of three rings, named in order, pro-,
meso-, and meta-thorax: when the pro-thorax is free as in Coleoptera,
Orthoptera, and Hemiptera, the term thorax is commonly used in
descriptive work for that segment only: in Odonata, where the
prothorax is small and not fused with the larger and united meso- and
meta-thorax, the term thorax is commonly used for these latter two
united, excluding the prothorax.

Thread-plate: an epithelial plate of the embryo from which the
terminal threads of the ovarian tubes originate.

Thyridial cell: in Trichoptera: the cell formed by the first fork of
median vein; the cell behind Thyridium.

Thyridiate: applied to a wing vein that at one point seems broken so
as to permit of a folding or bending; either to pack into a small
compass or to enfold the body.

Thyridium -ii: small, whitish or almost transparent spots near the
anastomosis of the disc of the wings in some Neuroptera, or in the
recurrent veins in the cubital cellule in some Hymenoptera; also the
apical margin of the gastrocoeli, often alone visible: in Trichoptera,
specifically, a hyaline spot on second fork of median vein.

Thyrsus: a cluster.

Thysanoptera: fringe-winged: an ordinal term, applied to species with
four narrow, similar wings, lengthily fringed; mouth parts fitted for
puncturing and scraping; metamorphosis incomplete: the Thripids.

Thysanura: fringe-tails; wingless, mandibulate insects without
metamorphosis; with anal appendages; body covered with scales;
thoracic segments similar.

Tiarate -us: turban or tiara-like.

Tibia -ae: the shank: that part of the leg articulated to the femur
basally and which bears the tarsus at the distal end.

Tibial epiphysis: a movable process attached near the base of the
inner side of the anterior tibia in many Lepidoptera.

Tibial membrane: in male Cicada, the drum-like vibratory membrane
that produces the sound.

Tip: the extremity; the part furthest removed from the base.

Titillator: a small process just below the penis in some Orthoptera.

Tomentose: covered with fine hair, so matted together that particular
hairs cannot be separated.

Tomentum: a form of pubescence composed of matted, woolly hair: in
Diptera applied to a covering of short, flattened, more or less
recumbent, scale-like hair which merges gradually into dust or pollen.

Tongue: an indefinite term, applied usually to the coiled mouth
structure of Lepidoptera; the lapping organ of flies; the ligula of bees
and wasps and, sometimes also to the hypopharynx of other insects.

Tooth: an acute angulation: a short pointed process from an
appendage or margin.

Topomorph -ic: a geographic form, variety or subspecies of a widely
distributed species: developed by local environment.

Topotype: is a specimen collected in the exact locality whence the
original type was obtained.

Tornal: relating to or concerning the tornus.

Tornus: in Lepidoptera, the junction of the termen and dorsum of
wing: = hind or anal angle; q.v.

Torose: swelling into knots or protuberances.

Torpid: lying motionless by reason of cold or other natural conditions
that unfavorably affect the organism.

Torqueate: with a ring or collar.

Torquillus: = rotula.

Tortilis: twisted.

Tortulose-us: hump-backed; a surface with a few large elevations:
beaded; moniliform.

Tortuose -us: irregularly curved and bent; snake-like.

Tortuous: = Tortuose.

Torulus: the basal socket joint of the antenna upon which the organ is
articulated for movement in all directions.

Totidem: in all parts; entirely.

T.P. line: transverse posterior line; crossing the primaries of certain
Lepidoptera, two-thirds or more from base: = post medial line.

Trabecula: rounded, lobular masses of the procerebrum, from which
arise the stalks bearing the mushroom bodies: a paired movable
appendage in front of the antennae in certain bird-lice.

Trachea -ae: the spirally ringed breathing tube or tubes of insects.

Tracheal gills: the flattened or hair-like processes in aquatic larvae
through which oxygen is absorbed from the water.

Tracheary: relating to or composed of tracheae.

Tracheate: supplied with trachea: a general term applied to all
articulates that breathe by means of spiracular openings into a
system of tubular structures that extend to all parts of the body.

Tracheation: the arrangement or system of distribution of trachea.

Tracheoles: the capillary trachea of the adult as they develop in
masses in the larva: very small, slender tracheae.

Transection: a cut across, at right angles to the body: transverse
section.

Transition zone: is the transcontinental belt in which the austral and
boreal elements overlap: it is divided into a humid or Alleghanian
area; a western arid area; and a Pacific Coast humid area: all of
which see.

Transitory: lasting for a short time only.

Translucent: semi-transparent; admitting the passage of light but not
of vision.

Translucid: clear: transparent enough to be seen through.

Transparent: so clear as not to obstruct vision.

Transverse: when the longest diameter is across the body.

Transverse incision: = transverse sulci.

Transverse sulci: the transverse grooves of pronotum in many
Orthoptera.

Transverse suture: in Diptera, a transverse groove extending inward
from the root of wing and obsolete in the middle of dorsum.

Trapeziform: in the form or shape of a trapezium.

Trapezium: a four-sided figure in which no two sides are parallel.
{Scanner's comment: sic This is presumably an error in editing the
original text.  A trapezium has two sides parallel. Compare next item.}

Trapezoid -al: a four-sided plane of which two sides are parallel and
two are not.

Tri-: three; a combining form.

Triangle: in Odonata: a small, triangular cell at the junction of cubitus
with cubitus 1: a similar cell adjoining it basally is the internal
triangle discoidal triangle: cardinal cell; q.v.

Tri-articulate: composed of three joints or articles.

Tribe: a term of classification less than a sub-family: opinionative and
ending in ini: but this is not universally adhered to.

Tri-carinate: with three keels or carinae.

Trichogen: a hair-forming hypodermal cell in caterpillars, etc.

Trichoptera: hairy-winged: insects with hairy primaries with many
longitudinal veins and cells, covering the broader secondaries which
are usually folded lengthwise; mouth mandibulate but rudimentary:
head free; thorax agglutinate: metamorphosis complete.

Trichostical bristles: in Diptera, a fan-like row, situated on the
meta-pleura: conspicuous in some families.

Trichotomous: divided by threes.

Trichroism: the condition when any given part exhibits three different
colors in different individuals of the same species: e.g. in
Lepidoptera, the hind wings of certain Heliconids.

Tricuspidate: ending in three points: with three cusps or teeth.

Tridactyle -ous: having three toes or claws.

Trifid: cleft into three parts or ends.

Trigonal: triangular: an area bounded by a triangle.

Trigonate: three-cornered; approximately triangular.

Trigoneutism: where three broods occur in one season.

Trigonulum: in Odonata, = triangle.

Trimera: that series of Coleoptera, in which there are only three tarsal
joints present.

Trimerous: species which have the tarsi three-jointed.

Trinomial: that method of nomenclature in which a varietal or
subspecific name follows the specific term without an intervening
mark or indications of its rank.

Tripectinate: when an antenna has three branches or processes to
each joint.

Triquetral: = triquetrous.

Triquetrous: with three flat sides.

Tri-regional: divided into three distinct parts or regions.

Trito-cerebral segment: see second antennal segment.

Trito-cerebrum: the posterior portion of the brain, formed by the
ganglion of the third primary segment; also termed labro-frontal lobe.

Tri-undulate: with three waves or undulations.

Triungulin: the first larval stage of a meloid beetle.

Trivial: applied to a name, means specific as opposed to generic, or
popular as opposed to technical.

Trivittate: with three stripes or vitta.

Trochalopoda: Heteroptera in which the posterior coxae are nearly
globose and the articulation is a ball and socket joint: see pagiopoda.

Trochanter: a sclerite, sometimes divided, between the coxa and femur
sometimes fused with the femur.

Trochanterellus: see apophysis.

Trochantine: the basal part of the trochanter when it is two-jointed: in
Coleoptera, a piece often present on the outer side of and sometimes
movable on the coxa; also the small sclerite connecting the coxa with
the sternum in Dytiscidae: in Neuroptera and Trichoptera the
posterior separated part of the coxa: in Orthoptera, a narrow
longitudinal sclerite between mandible and gena.

Trochiformis: cylindro-conic.

Trochlea: the thickened base of the hind wings in Cicada: in
Trichoptera a small elliptical space at base of hind wing behind origin
of median vein.

Trochlearis: pulley-shaped; like a cylinder contracted medially.

Trochus: that part of an articulated body inserted between the joints.

Trophi: the mouth parts collectively, including the labrum: see buccal
appendages.

Trophobiosis: see Symbiosis.

Tropical: is that faunal region which covers the southern part of the
peninsula of Florida, the greater part of Central America, the lowlands
of southern Mexico south of the table land, and a narrow strip on
each side of Mexico which follows the coast northward into the United
States.

Tropico-politan: occurring in all tropical regions.

Trumpets: breathing tubes of mosquito pupae.

Truncate: cut off squarely at tip.

Truncature: the truncation or point squarely cut off.

Truncus: the trunk or thorax.

Trunk: the thorax as a whole: the body.

Tryptic: acting like tripsin, the proteolytic ferment of the pancreatic
fluid.

Tube: a slender, hollow, cylindrical body: specifically applied to the
anal siphon or respiratory tube of mosquito larvae.

Tubercle: a little solid pimple or small chitinous button: really a ring,
which may or may not give rise to a seta.

Tubercles: on the thoracic and abdominal segments of caterpillars are
anterior trapezoidal; posterior trapezoidal; lateral; posterior stigmatal;
anterior stigmatal; sub-primary subventral; pedal and adventral: all
of which see.

Tubercula: an elevated triangular process at the anterior angle of the
thorax specifically in Hymenoptera.

Tuberculate -ose: formed like a tubercle: a surface covered with
tubercles.

Tubercule -ulum: a small tubercle.

Tuberculiform: shaped like a pimple or tubercle.

Tuberculose -ous: covered or set with tubercles.

Tubulifera: Hymenoptera, in which the terminal segments of abdomen
are retracted, but may be extended, tube-like: Thysanoptera in which
there is no ovipositor and the terminal segments of abdomen are
tubular.

Tubulous -ose: formed like a tube: fistulous.

Tubulus: the slender, flexible abdominal segments forming the
ovipositor in Diptera.

Tubus: a term used to designate the corneous base of a ligula: the
sheath of the tongue.

Tumescence: a swelling or tumid enlargement: a puffed up area.

Tumescent: a little swollen or puffed up.

Tumid: swollen; enlarged; puffed up.

Tunica intima: the inner layer of the silk glands: an inner lining or
membrane.

Tunica propria: a layer of epithelial cells and connective tissue lining
the interior of the hind gut: the outer layer of the silk glands: a
covering or investing membrane.

Tunicate: composed of concentric layers, enveloping one another: said
of antennae when each successive joint is buried in the preceding
funnel-shaped one.

Turbinate: top-shaped; nearly conical: differs from pyriform in being
shorter and more suddenly attenuated at base: applied to an eye =
pillared eye; q.v.

Turgid: swollen.

Turritus: towering: a surface rising cone-like.

Tylo: = tylus; q.v.

Tylus: the anterior central lobe of the head in Hemiptera.

Tympana: the ears in Orthoptera.

Tympanal: applied to organs covered with a tympanum or stretched
membrane supposed to function as ears.

Tympanic spiracle: in Diptera, the thoracic spiracle at base of wing.

Tympanules: small openings covered by a membrane, having otoliths
and serving as ears.

Tympanum: any membrane stretched like the head of a drum:
specifically applied to the membrane covering the auditory organs in
Orthoptera.

Type: a unique or single specimen selected from a series and labelled
by the describer to represent his name and description: if male or
female  be added to the label, the specimen typifies that sex, and in
case of an erroneous association the male type stands for the species
unless the author has specifically designated the other example as
representing the name: see also co-type; homotype; meta-type;
paratype; topotype.

Typical: the normal or usual form of a species; agreeing with the type
form.




U

Uliginous: muddy, or pertaining to mud.

Ulnar: in Homoptera, a wing vein between the radial vein and claval
suture; = cubitus: in Orthoptera, = cubitus; q.v.

Ulnar area: in Orthoptera, = median area; q.v.

Ulona: the thick, fleshy mouth parts of Orthoptera.

Ulonata: a Fabrician. term for Orthoptera, based on the character of
the mouth structures.

Ultimate: last or final: that larval stage just before pupation.

Ultramarine: an intense deep blue [cobalt blue].

Ultra-nodal sector: in Odonata, runs parallel with and between media
1 and 2, or principal and nodal sectors: = postnodal sector.

Umbilicate: navel-shaped, or resembling a navel.

Umbilicus: a navel, or navel-like depression.

Umbonate: bossed; with an elevated knob in the centre.

Umbone: an embossed, elevated knob situated on humeral angle of
elytra.

Umbones: two movable spines on the sides of prothorax in some
Coleoptera.

Umbrosa: shaded or clouded: a cloud or shade.

Unarmed: without spurs, spines or armature of any kind.

Unarticulate: not jointed nor segmented.

Unci: thick, hooked processes, forming the borders of the anal
opening.

Uncinnate: hooked at the end.

Uncus: in Lepidoptera, Diptera, and elsewhere, the curved book
directed downward from a triangular dorsal plate in the male and
shielding the penis: the genital hamule.

Undate: wavy or waved.

Undulated: obtusely waved in segments of circles.

Unequal: unlike in size, form, development or other characters.

Ungues: the tarsal claws.

Unguiculate: armed with a hook, nail or claw.

Unguiculus: a small terminal claw or nail-like process.

Unguis: one of the claws at the end of the tarsus: also applied to a
short process on the 6th antennal joint in some Aphids.

Ungula: a hoof, claw or talon.

Ungulate: shaped like a hoof.

Uni-: one, a combining form.

Unicolorous: of one color throughout.

Unidentate: with one tooth only.

Uniplicate: with a single fold or line of folding.

Unique: one only: unlike any other.

Unisexual: of one sex only: applied to Aphids and Cynipids where only
parthenogenic females are known.

Upper austral zone: is divided into an eastern humid or Carolinian
area, and a western arid or upper Sonoran area, which pass
insensibly into each other near the 100th meridian: see Carolinian
and upper Sonoran.

Upper field: in tegmina, = anal field; q.v.

Upper margin: of tegmina (Thomas), corresponds to the posterior or
anal margin of most authors.

Upper median area: see areola.

Upper radial: in Lepidoptera, = media 1 (Comst.), and is vein 5, or the
independent, of the numerical series.

Upper sector of triangle: in Odonata, = cubitus 1 (Comst.).

Upper Sonoran faunal area: that arid part of upper austral west of
100th meridian; covers most of plains in eastern Montana and
Wyoming, s. w. South Dakota, west. Nebraska, Kansas, Oklahoma
and Texas, and east. Colorado and New Mexico; covers plains of
Columbia, Malheur and Harney in Oregon and Washington. In
California encircles Sacramento and San Joaquin Valleys and forms a
narrow belt around Colorado and Mohave deserts. In Utah covers Salt
Lake and Sevier deserts. In Idaho the Snake plains. In Nevada and
Arizona irregular areas of suitable elevation.

Uranidin: a yellow coloring matter in some Coleoptera and
Lepidoptera.

Urceolate: pitcher-shaped; swelling in the middle.

Ureter: the stalk connecting the malpighian tubules, when they form
large tufts, with the intestine.

Uric acid: the characteristic nitrogenous excretion of the malpighian
or urinary tubules: composition, C5H4N4O3 (von Furth).

Urinary vessels: = malpighian tubules; q.v.: has also been applied by
older authors, to anal glands.

Urite: an abdominal segment and, specifically, its ventral portion.

Uromere: any of the abdominal segments of an arthropod.

Uropoda: any of the abdominal feet of arthropods.

Uropygium: the ovipositor when it is a mere extension of the
abdominal segments.

Urosome: the abdomen.

Urosternite: the sternal or under piece of the uromeres.

Urticating: nettling; applied to specialized hairs or processes on the
bodies of certain caterpillars, which cause a stinging or burning
sensation on the skin.

Ustulatus: scorched: applied to a maculation that has the appearance
of having been burned in.

Uterus: the vaginal portion of oviduct: the sometimes enlarged
portion of the vagina at junction of the oviducts: = calyx, q.v.

Uterus masculinus: a pouch or sac into which the ductus
ejaculatorius opens in the Symphyla.

Utriculi breviores: small vesicular sacs connected with the seminal
vesicles in crickets and some other insects.

Utriculi majores: large vesicular sacs or tubular structures connected
with the seminal vesicles in crickets and some other insects.

Utriculus: a little bag or hollow vesicle.





V

Vacuolate: with vacuoles or small cavities, empty or filled with a
watery fluid.

Vagina: the tubular structure formed by the union of the oviducts in
the female, opening externally to admit the passage of the egg to the
ovipositor: receives the penis of the male in copulation and is
sometimes called oviduct: "every part, the office of which is to cover,
protect or defend the tongue": "the bivalve coriaceous sheath or cover
of the spicula": generally, a sheath.

Vaginata: sheathed: an obsolete ordinal term for Coleoptera.

Vaginate: inclosed in a bivalved sheath.

Vagus: sympathetic nervous system; q.v.

Valgate: enlarged at bottom: club-footed.

Valve or Valvulae: the expanded plate-like galea of the maxilla in
many Hymenoptera.

Valve: a small, transverse or triangular piece behind the last full
ventral segment, at base of plates in male Jassidae and allies.

Valves: in Orthoptera, the corneous pieces of the ovipositor:=
corniculi in Lepidoptera, sometimes used to = harpes; q.v.

Valvula = vagina in its application to Dipterous mouth parts.

Valvulae: in Hymenoptera, branches of the genital forceps of male.

Valvular: when two parts join so as to form a valve between them.

Valvular process: in Odonata, a slender, unjointed process at the apex
of each genital valve.

Valvule: any small, valve-like process.

Variation: a departure in color or form, from the normal: the sum of
the departures from a mean type of any species: it is continuous
when there is no break between the extremes; discontinuous when
there are gaps without intermediate forms.

Variety: any departure from the normal type of a species which, while
retaining the specific characters, is yet recognizably different because
of climatic, seasonal or other influences; may occur with the type form
or as a geographical race.

Variola: a deep, rounded impression with defined edges.

Variolate -ose: with large, rounded impressions like pock-marks.

Vas deferens: = vasa deferentia, q.v.

Vasa deferentia: tubes from the seminal vesicles or testes of each side,
which usually unite into a single ductus ejaculatorius; q.v.

Vasa varicosa: the malpighian tubules.

Vascular: relating to the blood-vessels or circulatory system.

Vasiform orifice: in Aleurodidae, an ovate, triangular or semicircular
opening on the dorsum of the last abdominal segment.

Veinlets: in Orthoptera, are the minute transverse ribs or ridges
between the longitudinal veins.

Veins: the chitinous, rod-like structures supporting the wings, and
especially those extending longitudinally from base to the outer
margin nerves nervures; nervules.

Velum: a membranous appendage of the spurs at the apex of anterior
tibia in bees a broad process at inner end of fore tibia.

Velum penis: the thin membranous covering of the male intromittent
organ also applied to ether covering or shield-like structures of the
penis.

Velutinous: velvety: clothed with dense, soft, short hair, like velvet.

Vena: a vein.

Vena dividens: that longitudinal vein of secondaries that marks the
beginning of the anal area: = anal 1 (Comst.).

Vena plicata: on the wings of Dermaptera, the vein around which the
folding occurs.

Vena spuria: = spurious vein: q.v.

Venation: the system of chitinous frame-work supporting the wings: in
Lepidoptera, the veins are usually referred to by numbers which are
as follows: on primaries: 1 = anal; 2 = cubitus 2; 3 = cubitus 1: 4 =
media 3; 5 = media 2; 6 = media 1; 7 = radius 5; 8 = radius 4; 9 =
radius 3; 10 = radius 2; 11 = radius 1; 12 = subcosta:
on secondaries: 1, 1a, 1b = anal; 2 = Cubitus; 3 = cubitus 1; 4 =
media 3: 5 = media 2; 6 = media 1; 7 = radius 1; 8 = sub-costa. See
plate III for typical venations of all orders.

Venter: the belly: under surface of abdomen as a whole and of each
ring.

Ventose: inflated; puffed out.

Ventrad: extending or directed toward the under side.

Ventral: pertaining to the under surface of abdomen: in Diptera, that
face of the leg which is inferior when laterally extended.

Ventral chain: refers to the series of ganglia of the nervous system.

Ventral comb: in Trichoptera, a transverse row of fine teeth on venter.

Ventral diaphragm: is a fine membrane covering the central nerve
cords and ganglia: also called ventral heart.

Ventral heart: = ventral diaphragm, q.v.

Ventral plate: a thickening of the blastoderm of an egg from which the
embryo, but not the amnion or serosa is formed.

Ventral scale: in Diaspinae, the under part of the puparium,
interposed between the insect and the plant.

Ventral tube: in Collembola, a tube or tubercle proceeding from the
ventral side of the first abdominal segment.

Ventricose: with a big belly: distended; inflated.

Ventriculus: the true stomach, = chylific ventricle; q.v.

Ventri-meson: the middle line of the ventral surface of the body.

Ventro-cephalad: toward the lower side and anteriorly.

Ventro-dorsad: extending from belly to back.

Venules: the branches of the main veins.

Vermian: worm-like.

Vermicular: worm-like, tortuous: resembling the tracks of a worm.

Vermiculate: worm-like in form: a marking with wormlike tracings.

Vermiform: worm-shaped.

Vernal: appearing in spring.

Vernantia: the molting or shedding of the skin.

Verriculate: with thick-set tufts of parallel hairs.

Verricule: a dense tuft of upright hairs.

Verrucose: having little hard lumps or wart-like elevations.

Versatile: moving freely in every direction.

Versicolored: with several colors, indeterminately restricted.

Vertex: the top of the head between the eyes, front and occiput: in
bees, that part of the head adjacent to and occupied by the ocelli: in
Notonectids, "the imaginary anterior margin of the notocephalon."

Vertexal: occurring on or near the vertex, or directed toward it.

Vertical cephalic bristles: in Diptera, are two pairs, inner and outer,
inserted more or less behind the upper and inner corner of the eye;
erect, or the inner pair convergent, the outer pair divergent.

Vertical margin: in Diptera, the limit between front and occiput.

Vertical triangle: in male Diptera, the small triangle upon which the
ocelli are situated; limited behind by vertex, in front by eyes.

Verticil: one of the whorls of long fine sensitive hair arranged
symmetrically on the joints of the antennae in certain Diptera.

Verticillate: placed in whorls: antennae in which the joints have a
circle of long, fine hair as in Cecidomyiids.

Vesicant: blistering: able to produce a blister.

Vesicle of penis: in Odonata, a sac with chitinous walls, attached to
the sternum behind the penis.

Vesicles: little sacs, bladders or cysts: applied to extensible organs
producing odors or secretions, as in some beetles and caterpillars.

Vesicular: bladder-like; beset with spherical prominences.

Vesicula seminalis: see seminal vesicles.

Vestibule: the space around the ovipositor formed by the projecting
margins of the surrounding segments: the space between the
occluding structure of the spiracle and the valve opening into the
trachea itself.

Vestigial: small or degenerate: only a trace or remnant of a previously
functional organ.

Vestiture: the surface clothing, whether of a hairy or scaly character.

Vexhillum: in Hymenoptera, an expansion on the tip of tarsi of certain
fossorial groups.

Vibrant: having a rapid motion to and fro.

Vibratile: formed for vibratory motion: used to express the almost
continual movement of the antennae of some Hymenoptera, and the
wings of some Diptera.

Vibrissae: curved bristles or hairs in some Diptera, situated between
the mystax and the antenna: whiskers.

Villi: soft hairs or papillate processes: plural of villus, q.v.

Villose -ous: soft-haired or clothed with soft, short hair.

Villus: a short, hair-like or papillate process on the surface of certain
absorbent and sensory organs.

Vinous: wine-color: a deep, transparent red-brown, like claret [purple
madder].

Violaceous: violet colored: a mixture of blue and red [violet carmine].

Virescent or Viridescent: greenish or becoming green.

Viridis: green, like verdigris [French blue + chrome yellow + white].

Viscera: the internal organs of the body.

Visceral: relating or attached to the viscera.

Viscid: sticky: covered with a shiny, resinous or greasy matter.

Viscous: thick, sticky or semi-fluid.

Vis formatrix: the creative or formative force.

Vitelligenous: producing the vitellus or yolk: said of certain cells in the
ovaries, believed to have that function.

Vitelline -us: yellow, with a slight tinge of red, like yolk of an egg.

Vitelline membrane: the delicate tissue surrounding the yolk of an
egg.

Vitreous: glassy; transparent.

Vitta: a longitudinal, colored line.

Vitta frontalis: = frontal stripe: q.v.

Vittate: striped.

Viviparous: applied to insects which bear living young.

Vocal cords: specialized organs on the thoracic spiracles of Diptera, by
means of which they produce a humming or singing sound.

Volant: flying or capable of flight.

Vulgar: common; not conspicuous: obscure in appearance and
abundant in number.

Vultus: face: that part of head below front and between the eyes.

Vulva: the orifice of the vagina in the female.

Vulvar lamina: in Odonata, the posterior margin of sternum of
segment 8.

Vulvar scale: = v. lamina.




W

Wart: a spongy excrescence, more or less cylindric, with a nearly
truncated tip: the enlarged, common base of a group of seta: in
Trichoptera, a pitted elevation.

Wax: a ductile substance excreted by bees and other insects from
glandular structures in various parts of the body, used in building
cells or in forming a protective covering.

Wax-cutter: the pincer-like structure formed by the hind tibia and
metatarsus in social bees.

Wax-glands: any glands in any part of the body which secrete a waxy
product in either a scale, string or powder: in Coccidae, the
circumgenital and parastigmatic glands; q.v.

Wax-pincer: = wax cutter.

Wax-scale: one of the scales secreted in the wax pocket or gland of a
worker bee.

Whitlows: = paronychia; q.v.

Whorl: a ring of long hair arranged around a centre, like the spokes
around the hub of a wheel.

Wing, Wings: membranous reticulated organs of flight; one pair, the
primaries, attached to the meso-thorax; the other, the secondaries,
attached to the meta-thorax.

Wing covers: those parts of the chitinous cuticle of larvae, nymphs or
pupae which cover the rudiments of the wings of the imago: the
forewings of an imago when they are thicker than the hind wings and
cover them when at rest: see elytra; tegmina.

Wings of the heart: the series of diagonal and other muscular fibres
above the diaphragm in the pericardial cavity: see pericardial
diaphragm.

Wing cells: areas inclosed by veins: reference should be had to the
figures illustrating venation and to the special terms applied to the
cells.

Winglets: small, concavo-convex scales, generally fringed at tip, under
the base of the elytra in Dytiscidae.

Wing-pads: undeveloped wings of pupa or nymph.

Wing-scale: in Hymenoptera, = tegula; q.v.

Workers: the undeveloped females in the social Hymenoptera; also
those sexually undeveloped Termites that are not soldiers.




X

Xanthophyll: the yellow of autumn leaves; one of the substances
found in the blood of insects.

Xenobiosis: see symbiosis.

Xerophilous: applied to species living in dry places.

Xylophaga: wood-eaters: applied in several orders.

Xylophagous: feeding in or upon woody tissue.

Xyphus: a spinous or triangular process of the meso-sternum in many
Hemiptera, and some other insects.




Y

Yellow: used without modification is sulphur or lemon yellow.

Yolk: the nutritive matter of an egg as distinguished from the living,
formative material; = deutoplasm.




Z

Zona: a belt or zone; as of distribution.

Zonite: = arthromere or somite; q.v.

Zoönite or Zoönule: = zonite.

Zygoptera: those Odonata, having the fore and hind wings subequal in
width, venation comprising a quadrilateral, not a triangle; nymphs
with caudal tracheal gills.






ADDENDA.

Calacobiosis: see symbiosis.

Cleptobiosis: see symbiosis.

Dulosis: see symbiosis.

Coxal file: in some aquatic Coleoptera a series of striations just above
the hind coxa of male and, perhaps, a stridulating organ.

Coxal plates: plate-like expansions or dilations of the coxa: specifically
in aquatic Coleoptera on the posterior pair.

Ecto-parasite: one that is attached to the external surface of the host.

Ento-parasite: one that feeds within the body of the host.

Embioptera: an ordinal term proposed for the Neuropterous family
Embidae.

Hamabiosis: see symbiosis.

Heliophobic: loving darkness: applied to species that shun the light,
like, e.g. Termites.

Heliotactic: light loving: applied to species that live in the open and in
daylight.

Lestobiosis: see symbiosis.

Meron: in Neuroptera, a sclerite posterior to the coxa and below the
epimeron: corresponds to the trochantine in Lepidoptera.

Metasternal wing: in some aquatic Coleoptera a leaf-like expansion
above the coxal plates.

Myrmecophily: is the relation existing between ants and those guests
that seek their company primarily for their own individual advantage.

Phylacobiosis: see symbiosis.

Prosternal process: in aquatic Coleoptera a modification of the
prosternum used in the differentiation of species.

Sub-clypeal pump: in some Diptera, the enlarged, more or less bulb-
like structure at the anterior entrance of the oesophagus.

Sub-clypeal tube: in Diptera: see pharynx.







EXPLANATION OF PLATES.

PLATE 1. Structures of the External Body Wall.

1. Harpalus caliginosas showing the underside, and the head from
above, to show the regions and the position of the sclerites.



2. Thorax of a Dipteron to show location of bristles.



3. Lateral view of a denuded Lepidopteron to show arrangement of
sclerites.

4. Abdominal segment of a caterpillar to show the position of the
tubercles.

5. Lateral view of a dragon fly to show the body sclerites.

All the abbreviations used in this plate are readily understood.



PLATE II.  Structures of Head, Mouth, Thorax & Genitalia

1. Head of wasp from front.

2. Head of honey bee with mouth parts extended.

3. Head of Locustid from front, to show regions.

4. Head of a Lepidopteron from front.

5. Head of a cricket from front.

6. Labium of a cricket showing all usual parts.

7. Maxilla of Harpalus caliginosus, with all sclerites marked.

8. Mandible of Copris carolina with all sclerites defined.

9. Thorax of a Hymenopteron from above.

10. Genitalia of a male mosquito with all parts named.

11. Genitalia of a male Noctuid from below: the parts separated out.



PLATE III. Venation According to the Comstock System.

1. Wing venation of a Noctuid.

2. Wing venation of a Hepialid.

3. Wing venation of a Locustid.

4. Wing venation of a Hymenopteron.

5. Wing venation of a Dipteron.

6. Wing venation of an Odonat.

7. Wing venation of a Cicada.



Abbreviations are as follows:

C. Costa, except in figure 1, where on the outer margin C occurs
instead of Cu. In the cells it means Costal.

Sc. Subcosta, when it refers to a vein and subcostal in a cell.

R. Radius, when it refers to a vein and radial when in a cell.

M. Media, when it refers to a vein and median in a cell.

Cu. Cubitus, when it refers to a vein and cubital in a cell.

A. Anal veins or cells.

c-v. cross-vein.

m-cu. medio-cubital cross-vein.

r-m. radio-medial cross-vein.

m. median cross-vein.

h. humeral cross-vein.

st. stigma.

ar. arculus.

br. bridge.

n. nodus.

o. oblique vein.

t. triangle.

i. internal triangle.

al. anal loop.

Antn-c-sp. Antenodal costal spaces.

Ptn-c-sp. Postnodal costal spaces.

Ptn-r-sp. Postnodal radial spaces.

All cells are named after the vein that bounds them anteriorly and are
numbered, if more than one, from base outwardly, as 2M3 = second
median 3, etc.

In figure 1, M, in the outer margin between C1 and M2, should be M3:
the 3 was accidentally cut out by the engraver.



Plate 1


Plate 2

Plate 3

COLOR PLATE.

Nomenclature of Windsor and Newton's Water Colors.
 1. Vermilion.
 2. Carmine.
 3. Crimson lake.
 4. Alizar crimson.
 5. Salmon.
 6. Rose.
 7. Purple madder.
 8. Mauve.
 9. French blue.
10. Purple lake.
11. Violet carmine.
12. Lilac.
13. Cobalt blue.
14. Lavender.
15. Blue gray.
16. Greenish gray.
17. Chrome lemon.
18. Gamboge.
19. Chrome orange.
20. Pale cadmium yellow.
21. Brown pink.
22. Pale clay yellow.
23. Hooker's green.
24. Prussian green.
25. Olive green.
26. Apple green.
27. Nile green.
28. Pale green.
20. Blue green.
30. Neutral.
31. Gray.
32. Ultra ash gray.
33. Indian red.
34. Dragon's blood.
35. Burnt sienna.
36. Brown ochre.
37. Cologne earth.
38. Roman sepia.
39. Van Dyke brown.
40. Pale brown.







End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Explanation of Terms Used in Entomology, by 
John. B. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK TERMS USED IN ENTOMOLOGY ***

***** This file should be named 22748-8.txt or 22748-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/2/7/4/22748/

Produced by Jon Richfield

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
