Project Gutenberg's Christmas Holidays at Merryvale, by Alice Hale Burnett

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Christmas Holidays at Merryvale
       The Merryvale Boys

Author: Alice Hale Burnett

Illustrator: Charles F. Lester

Release Date: November 20, 2007 [EBook #23569]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS AT MERRYVALE ***




Produced by Suzanne Shell, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net











THE MERRYVALE BOYS

By ALICE HALE BURNETT

       *       *       *       *       *

Six real stories for small boys, each complete in itself, telling about
the many interesting doings of "Toad" and "Chuck" Brown, and their
friends, "Fat," "Reddy" and others.

The books are written so the boy may read and understand them and the
action faithfully portrays boy life in a small town.

       *       *       *       *       *

=CIRCUS DAY AT MERRYVALE=

"Toad" and "Reddy," by good fortune, each earn two tickets to the
circus, although they find watering elephants a harder task than it at
first seemed. A jolly party of boys visit the circus.

=FATHER BROWN'S INDIAN TALE=

Dad's story is followed by an unexpected visitor who at first startles
then interests all of the little party gathered around the fireside.

=THE PICNIC AT MERRYVALE=

Did you ever go to a picnic in a large farm wagon, filled with boys and
girls? Then did you catch a fine lot of trout and broil them before a
camp-fire? "Toad" and "Reddy" did these very things and had a day long
to be remembered.

=CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS IN MERRYVALE=

Daddy Williams' Toy Shop is the center of interest to "Toad" and his
friends long before Christmas arrives. They plan a surprise that brings
joy to a poor family. The boys erect snow forts and the two sides have a
battle royal.

=MERRYVALE BOYS ON THE FARM=

"Toad's" grandmother invites him and "Reddy" to spend a month in the
country. Their experiences at Sunnyside farm, with its horses, cows,
pigs and chickens, are most entertainingly told, and they have the time
of their lives boating, swimming and fishing in the creek.

=HALLOWE'EN AT MERRYVALE=

For many days the boys had been looking forward to the party to be held
at Toad Brown's house, but the evening finally arrived and a number of
new games were played, although a few things happened which were not on
the program.

_Illustrations in Color 12mo. Cloth 40c per Vol., Postpaid_

=THE NEW YORK BOOK CO., 201 E. 12th St., New York=

[Illustration: "Wish my dad would get me a new sled like that flyer,"
sighed Toad.]




_THE MERRYVALE BOYS_

CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS AT MERRYVALE

BY
ALICE HALE BURNETT

        AUTHOR OF "HALLOWE'EN AT MERRYVALE,"
        "MERRYVALE BOYS ON THE
        FARM," ETC.

        PICTURES BY
        CHARLES F. LESTER

        THE NEW YORK BOOK CO.

        201-213 EAST 12TH STREET NEW YORK


        _Copyright_, 1916, BY
        AMERICAN AUTHORS PUBLISHING CO.




CONTENTS


        CHAPTER                           PAGE

           I. TOAD'S WISH                    9

          II. THE SNOW FIGHT                15

         III. THE VICTORY                   19

          IV. CHUCK'S RUDE AWAKENING        26

           V. THE ADVENTURE IN THE SNOW     33

          VI. TOAD'S UNSELFISHNESS          40

         VII. THE BOYS PLAN A SURPRISE      46

        VIII. WHAT MIKE FOUND               52

          IX. CHRISTMAS MORNING             59




CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS AT MERRYVALE




CHAPTER I

TOAD'S WISH


"Hurrah!" shouted "Reddy." "School is out and no more lessons for two
weeks!" and he threw his cap into the air.

"Let's go home by the way of the village, so we can look into Daddy
Williams' toy shop," suggested his friend Thomas Brown, better known as
"Toad," who ran up to join him.

"All right," agreed Reddy, "and I'll show you what I want for
Christmas," and they started down the street.

"Looks as though it might snow by night," said Toad, "don't you wish
there would be a big one? Then we could get all the boys together and
have a battle."

"It's the best fun I know of, next to swimming in the creek," was the
answer.

"Here we are," he cried a few minutes later and both boys stopped in
front of a small shop window that looked very gay with a wonderful
display of Christmas toys.

"See those skates hanging up by that sled. That's the kind I want,"
pointed out Reddy. "You screw them right into the heels of your shoes
and you bet they can't ever come off."

"They're fine," agreed Toad, "but look at that engine and train. It
goes right through the tunnel and up over the bridge. I wonder how fast
it can run."

"That's a dandy mitt there," said the other, pointing to a baseball
outfit. "I wouldn't be afraid to stop any kind of a ball with that on."

"Wish my dad would get me a new sled like that flyer," sighed Toad. "I
finished mine last winter when I ran into that tree with you and Herbie
on board."

"You surely did," was the laughing answer. "I remember how we all went
flying head first into a snow drift."

"There's a nice pocket knife," was Toad's next remark. "I mean the one
with the pearl handle, just next to that doll with the pink dress on."

"Oh!" exclaimed Reddy, "here's what just suits me," catching sight, for
the first time, of a punching bag.

"How do you work it?"

"Why, you see there's an elastic rope on each end of it, and one of them
you tie to a ring in the floor and the other to something overhead. Then
when you give it a punch it comes back to you with a bang."

"Well, I'd rather have a football; then maybe we could get up a regular
team," remarked Toad.

"I'll bet all those reals would cost about ten dollars," ventured the
other, pointing to a box of marbles toward the front of the window. "If
I was rich I'd buy them."

"What for? You have plenty. You won nearly all mine away from me.
Look!" he added in a low voice, "there goes Herbie's mother into the
store. Let's see what she buys."

"Hello, Daddy," greeted both the boys, as old Mr. Williams, with his
white hair, red cheeks and dancing blue eyes, came to the doorway of the
shop and smiled at them.

"Merry Christmas, Merry Christmas!" he replied. "Have you been good
boys?"

"I should say we have," cried Toad. "Everybody's good before Christmas."

"Well, run along home then, and I'll tell your mas just what you want,"
promised Daddy. "Herbie's ma's in here now and she doesn't want you boys
to know what she buys."

"All right," answered Reddy. "Don't forget to say I want a punching bag
and a pair of skates."

"And I want a new sled," chimed in Toad, as they both started off.

"Shucks, I didn't see half the things, did you?" protested Reddy.

"Oh, well, we can come down again this afternoon," was the cheering
answer. "Come on over to my house, anyway," he called as they parted.




CHAPTER II

THE SNOW FIGHT


By evening the snow that Toad and Reddy had so eagerly awaited had come,
and by morning many inches had fallen. A crowd of boys had gathered on
the Brown's lawn, for the news of a snow battle had carried far.

"First chooser!" cried Charley Brown, a happy-faced boy who bore the
name of "Chuck" among his friends.

"Second," shouted Reddy, and when the sides were chosen Toad found
himself with Herbie, a boy with whom he played very often, and four
others on Reddy's side.

It was then decided by the choosers, who were also the captains, to
build two forts, ten yards apart, and a half hour was agreed upon as
time enough in which to do the work.

"We must hurry," Reddy told the boys he had chosen, "and I think," he
added in a low voice, "three of us had better build the fort while the
other three make snowballs, as we want a lot on hand so we wont have to
stop firing to make them.

"Work fast," he ordered as he selected two of them to help him build the
fort.

Toad piled up great heaps of snow while Reddy and Herbie packed it down
with wooden spades into a wall which curved like a new moon.

"How are the snowballs getting on, boys?" asked Toad of the three boys
who were working hard making them.

"We're stacking them up so they'll be easy to get at," answered one.

"They're good hard ones," said another. "It's fine packing snow."

"We're going to have plenty, too," laughed the third.

"Wonder what Fat's doing?" cried Reddy. "He's bringing a pail of water
from the house."

Frank, called "Fat" by the other boys, because of his size, was Reddy's
older brother.

"I wonder," mused Toad. "He's pouring it on the walls of their fort. Oh,
don't you see," he added a moment later, "it's to make it freeze."

"Let's do that too," proposed Herbie. "I'll get the water," and he
started for the house.

Ten minutes later the walls of the fort were like a solid mass of ice,
and the snowballs were inside in four heaps so all were anxious for the
fun to begin.

[Illustration: "Charge!" shouted Reddy, on the run, the others close
upon his heels.]




CHAPTER III

THE VICTORY


"Hey, Captain of the enemy!" shouted Chuck from the other fort, "are you
ready?"

"All ready," came the answer. "Fire!"

A storm of snowballs flew through the air and Reddy barely had time to
duck his head as they whizzed by.

"Looks as though they had plenty of balls, too," exclaimed Toad, hastily
picking up an armful and running outside to get within closer range.

"I don't think so," protested Herbie. "I could see all of them working
on the fort. We have lots more, I'm sure."

"Well," cried the Captain, "let everybody take a pile of snowballs and
we'll run out together and maybe we can drive them from their fort."

Each boy carried as many as he could in one arm, this leaving the other
one free to throw with.

"We'll have to make a quick run for it and throw just as fast and hard
as we can," said Herbie, as Toad, who had at that moment returned to the
fort in a great hurry, his hat covered with snow, exclaimed:

"They got me, but I hit two or three of them!"

"All ready!" shouted the Captain, and the others, following close on his
heels, dashed out.

Such a hail of snowballs met them that they halted for a moment, then
dashed onward right up to the enemy's fort.

"Don't waste any ammunition until you get close," ordered Reddy, and his
company obeyed. "Now let her fly," he directed, as they surrounded the
fort.

The boys threw with a will and were vigorously answered by the defenders
of the fort, and for a time it was hard to see which side would win.
Finally, after the ammunition of the attacking force was used up,
Captain Reddy ordered a retreat back to their own fort.

"I have a better plan this time," he announced after they were safely
inside. "When we charge again, two of you fellows must keep running back
to our own fort so as to bring us supplies of snowballs. Then we can
keep up a much longer fight and when anyone gets tired throwing," he
added, "he can change places with one of the fellows that have been
carrying the balls."

At this moment, Herbie, who had been on the lookout, suddenly cried:

"They're coming to charge us."

"Get ready to give it to them," ordered the Captain and each boy,
snatching up an armful of snowballs, prepared to repel the attack.

"Fire!" Reddy shouted, as the enemy drew near, and when they met that
rain of balls it didn't take them long to get back to the cover of their
own fort.

"That was great!" cried Herbie. "Come on, let us charge this time before
they have a chance to get ready for us."

"Hey, I'm the Captain," insisted Reddy. "Nobody gives any orders but
me," and he pulled his woolen cap well down over his ears in preparation
for the coming attack.

"Well, hurry up and give them, then!" shouted Toad. "I'm all loaded up."

"Charge, charge on!" shouted Reddy, starting out on the run with the
others close upon his heels, and after a few minutes of hard fighting
they had forced their way to the walls of the fort.

The balls were flying so thick and so fast, from both sides, that it
looked like a snow storm of enormous flakes shooting in all directions.

The boys carrying balls to supply the invaders were kept busy, but
before long it was noticed that there were fewer coming from inside the
fort.

"They've used up all they have," shouted Toad. "Let's get closer."

"Close in," cried Captain Reddy, "and aim well!"

In another minute you could plainly tell that each of the enemy, after
throwing one snowball, had to stop long enough to make another one and
this was the time for which Captain Reddy had been waiting.

"Charge the walls!" he ordered, and with wild cries the boys dashed
forward.

Up over the walls they went and once inside the victory was easily won
for the boys inside the fort were empty handed and couldn't defend
themselves.

"We win, we win!" exclaimed Toad, throwing his hat into the air. "Three
cheers for Captain Reddy!"

"Hurrah!" shouted all the boys.




CHAPTER IV

CHUCK'S RUDE AWAKENING


The day before Christmas dawned bright and cold. Mother Brown, who had
been up early, made some wonderful Christmas pies and a pudding before
Toad and Chuck were awake.

It was eight o'clock before Toad opened one eye.

"What's the use of getting up," he thought, "I'm so warm and comfortable
here in bed. My, but something smells awfully good. Wonder if it's
breakfast."

Suddenly he sat up straight in bed.

"Look at that lazy thing," he declared. "Bet he'd sleep until noon if
I'd let him, and with all we have to do to-day."

Chuck continued to snore peacefully.

"But I won't--I'll have some fun," thought Toad, as quietly, with as
little noise as possible, he crept from his bed to the basin in one
corner of the room. It took him only a few seconds to wet a large sponge
with cold water, then, creeping very carefully back to the foot of
Chuck's bed, he took careful aim.

The sponge flew through the air true to its mark and landed "kersplash"
on Chuck's tousled brown head.

"W-w-w-what's the matter?" spluttered Chuck, sitting up and blinking
his eyes. Then, as he felt the water trickling down his cheeks and
caught sight of Toad, doubled up with laughter, he jumped out of bed
and, running across the room, he pushed Toad flat on his back on the bed
and sat upon his chest.

"Let me up," pleaded Toad. "I couldn't help it, you looked so sweet."

"What'll you give me if I do?" laughed Chuck. "You've got to pay for
that smart trick before I let you up."

"Nothing!" gasped Toad, trying very hard to free himself.

"Oho!" laughed Chuck. "You won't, eh? Well," he added, "I don't mind
sitting here all day. I'm real comfortable."

At this moment there came a knock at the door and before either of the
boys could answer Father Brown entered.

"What's up?" he inquired.

"Toad hit me in the face with a wet sponge while I was asleep,"
explained Chuck, "and he's going to give me something for it."

"Then why are you sitting on him?" asked Father.

"Because he says he won't," replied Chuck with a grin.

"I suppose you'll have to pay up Thomas," laughed Father. "Anyway, I
hope you'll both be down to breakfast soon," he added--"before all the
cakes are gone. I've a terrible appetite this morning," and with these
words he left the room.

"Do you give up now?" asked Chuck.

"No, sir," persisted Toad.

"Remember what he said about the cakes. They'll be hot ones with lots of
maple syrup," teased Chuck.

"Well, you're missing them, too," retorted Toad.

"I guess I'll let you off this time," relented Chuck, "but if you ever
do it again," he threatened, "I'll hold you down for a week, cakes or no
cakes."

"You'd starve to death in that time," argued Toad, with a laugh as he
commenced to hurry into his clothing.

The boys were seated at the table, a half hour later, and had just eaten
the last of the griddle cakes, when Reddy's whistle was heard. Toad,
jumping up from the table, ran over to the window and beckoned to Reddy
to come into the house.

"What are you going to do this morning?" was Reddy's first remark as he
entered the room.

"We're going for Christmas greens and Dad's going to cut our tree from
away up on the hillside," Toad told him, "and," he added, "we're going
to take one of the horses with us to drag it home."

"Oh, that's great!" replied Reddy. "Do you start soon?"

"Don't you want to go, too?" asked Chuck. "And maybe we can get Fat and
Herbie, too," he added.

"If such a crowd goes, and everybody gathers greens," laughed Toad,
"what will we ever do with all of them?"

Mother Brown answered him from the doorway.

"Why not take some of them to the church? I'm sure the ladies who are
trimming it will be glad to use all that you can give them."

"That's a splendid idea," declared Father Brown, rising from his seat by
the fireplace. "Come, boys, bundle up well, because it's going to be a
cold drive."

"I'll run ahead to get the others," called Chuck as he hurried from the
room.




CHAPTER V

THE ADVENTURE IN THE SNOW


"I'm glad we brought the sleigh," Father Brown remarked, as they were
driving along at a fair pace, a little later, "as we never could have
gotten through with a wagon in this deep snow."

They were now starting up the hill and the horse's feet sank deeply into
the snow drifts, although his load was not heavy, as the boys took turns
walking, so that only two of them were riding at a time.

"When we reach the first clearing," Father proposed, "we'll cut the
greens and then leave them in a pile by the roadside, for it is likely
we shall have to go up still higher before we can find the tree we
want."

After going on a few yards more he shouted:

"Here's the place; all hands to work!" and the boys started in with a
will, bringing to the roadside great heaps of boughs and woodvines, some
of them covered with red berries and others with grey.

Within a short time they had gathered a large pile of the greens, so
they decided it was time to start out to find the tree.

"The tree must be full and the top perfect," declared Father Brown, "so
keep your eyes open for it."

"What's the matter with that one?" demanded Toad, pointing to a big fir
some distance away.

"Nothing at all the matter with it," laughed Chuck, "only the house is
too small to hold it."

"There's a nice one," called out Herbie, pointing to the one he meant.

"Yes, that's a beauty," agreed Father Brown, "and easy to get at, too."

After clearing away the smaller branches near the ground, by chopping
them off with the axe, Father Brown then started to work on the trunk of
the tree.

"Wouldn't it be nice," suggested Fat, "if we didn't have to cut it down
at all,--just trim it outside? It would save so much time and trouble."

"Oh, yes, that would be great," agreed Reddy. "We'd just sit around on
the snow eating ice cream and look at the tree," and he gave a hearty
laugh in which all the others joined.

"Well, I'll bet they do it in Greenland and Iceland," persisted Fat, "so
why couldn't we?"

"Because we don't wear white Polar bear clothes," laughed Chuck.

"There she comes,--she's falling!" cried the boys.

"Stay where you are until it's down," called Father Brown to the boys.

[Illustration: "There she comes! She's falling!" cried the boys.]

There was a sharp creak and a swish of branches as the tree came down,
and the boys now rushed over to help tie up the branches.

When that part of the work was finished, Reddy sang out:

"All together! Lift her on the sled. One, two, three!" and up it went.

"Nobody gets a ride home," called out Chuck, "because the greens have to
go on top of the tree."

"Oh!" wailed Fat, "if I can't ride I'll roll down. I hate to walk."

By the time they had reached the fields the worst part of the trip was
over.

"We'll cut over to the road that runs past the church," said Father
Brown, "and leave some of the greens there," at which the horse was
headed in that direction.

As they came to the road they saw a short distance from them an object
in the snow and as they drew nearer it proved to be a little fellow,
deep in a snow drift. His hands were blue with the cold and as Father
Brown picked him up in his arms he tried to speak, but couldn't.

"I know who he is," volunteered Herbie. "He's Patsy O'Reilly, and he
lives over there," pointing to a small house up the road. "His brother
Mike goes to school with me," he continued.

"I'll carry him home," said Father, "as you boys are able to handle
things all right now," saying which, he started off to the little house
with Patsy in his arms.

Chuck, to whom Father Brown had handed the reins now started to drive
the horse toward home.

When the boys arrived at the church and had carried in the greens, the
ladies were delighted, and one of them even tried to kiss Reddy, but he
hurried away just in time.




CHAPTER VI

TOAD'S UNSELFISHNESS


When they reached home Chuck drove the sleigh up to the side door, where
the boys quickly unloaded the greens. They then lifted the tree to the
piazza and when this had been done Chuck drove the horse to the stable.

"Let's go in and get our hands warm before we take in the greens,"
suggested Toad, and soon they were all laughing and talking before the
great fire in the library.

Fat had just asked the others if they remembered the day Mr. Brown had
told them about the Indians that used to live in the woods where they
found the tree, when a man's voice was heard from the hall.

"It's going to be a sad Christmas for them, I'm afraid, for both parents
are ill and the three helpless children are waiting for Santa Claus to
come," the boys heard Father Brown say.

"How sad," was Mrs. Brown's answer, as they both went into the kitchen
and the boys could hear no more.

"They must be talking about the O'Reillys," commented Fat. "Mike's a
friend of mine and I'm sorry he isn't going to have any Christmas."

"So am I," echoed Herbie, after a short silence.

Chuck said he'd hate to awaken Christmas morning and not find any
presents.

"Guess I've been mighty selfish wanting so many things," he thought.

Toad and Reddy, who had moved away from the other boys, were talking
together in low, excited whispers. Then, when the others went to the
window to look at the green outside, they slipped from the room and
hurried down the hall to the kitchen.

"Mother," called Toad from the doorway, "may we speak to you for a
minute?"

Mother Brown handed the bowl in which she had been stirring something
to the cook and crossed the room toward the boys, saying as she did so:

"I can only spare a few minutes to-day, Thomas, for I am very busy."

"But, Mother," exclaimed Toad, "we have a great idea!"

"It's a Christmas surprise party," chimed in Reddy, "for the O'Reillys,"
and together the two boys went on to tell Mrs. Brown of their plans.

"If we could just have the horse and sleigh to get around in," ventured
Toad. "Do you think Father would allow us to hitch old Meg to the big
sleigh?"

"It's a wonderful idea," agreed Mother Brown. "Suppose you ask him. But
how about presents for the three children? Have you thought of that?"

"If it were only after Christmas we could give away some of our new
things," sighed Toad.

"But would you give them away?" asked his mother. "Supposing you were
going to get a sled,--the kind you have been wanting," and she paused to
hear Toad's answer.

He thought very hard for a moment, then answered:

"Yes, because I always get a lot of things and it might be the only
present Mike would get."

"Well," remarked his mother, "I have bought you a sled, and you may give
it to him."

Reddy looked at Toad, as Mother Brown turned toward the kitchen.

"Are you sorry now that you said 'yes'?" he asked.

"No, I'm not," returned Toad.

"Well, I'll ask Mother to let me give them something new of mine, too,"
declared Reddy consolingly, putting his arm about Toad's shoulder.




CHAPTER VII

THE BOYS PLAN A SURPRISE


At two o'clock the sleigh was ready, for Father Brown had willingly
given the boys permission to use it that afternoon. It was planned to
have Chuck drive, for Toad, Reddy, Fat and Herbie expected to be too
busy calling at the different houses to gather the presents which they
hoped to collect for the O'Reillys.

"Let's stop at Bailey's first," suggested Fat, "as we're sure to get
something there."

"Who'll go to the door?" questioned Herbie.

"All go," answered Chuck. "That's the best way." So in a group they rang
the bell and waited, Chuck remaining in the sleigh.

No one came in answer to their ring.

"All out," sighed Fat; but Toad gave the bell another pull.

"Bet they're all in the kitchen baking things and didn't hear it," he
remarked.

"There's someone coming now," whispered Reddy, and as the door opened:

"Good afternoon," said all the boys in chorus.

"Mercy upon us, where did you all come from?" exclaimed Mrs. Bailey,
and, as Toad held forth a card that Father Brown had printed for them,
she asked:

"Am I to read this?"

"Yes, Mrs. Bailey, that explains everything," Reddy told her.

She read:--

        "In one little home there may be no Christmas
        cheer; the father and mother are both ill.
        There are three children; a boy of nine years,
        another of five, and a girl of seven. They need
        coal, clothing, food and toys. _What will you
        give?_"

"So you're all playing at being Santa Claus," remarked Mrs. Bailey with
a smile. "Well, I believe I can find something that will please you, so
just stop in on your way back and I'll have it all ready for you."

"Oh, thank you!" cried all the boys, together, as they started for the
sleigh, happy over the success of their first call.

"Have any luck?" asked Chuck. "But I can see you did, because you're all
grinning," he added, as they told him what Mrs. Bailey had promised.

After several more visits, with the promise of something from each place
if they would call later, Herbie proposed that they stop at Mrs. Lee's
home, as Mary Lee had a great many dolls and might give them one of them
for the little O'Reilly girl.

"That's a good idea," they all agreed, and the idea was carried out.

When Mrs. Lee had read the card she asked the boys if there was anything
they needed that had not been promised.

"We wondered," replied Herbie, "if Mary would give us a doll for that
little girl?"

Mrs. Lee smiled and said:

"I think I can promise you that she will. If you will call later it will
give me a chance to get her."

"We'll be glad to," promised the boys, "and thank you."

At five o'clock a sleigh piled high with bundles and boys was seen
turning into the Brown's driveway.

"What'll we do now?" asked Toad of the others.

[Illustration: Framed in the doorway stood a boy gazing at a heap of
bundles.]

"Let's drive into the barn and leave the things in the sleigh,"
suggested Chuck; "then we can meet here early tonight and take the
things to the O'Reillys."

"All right," assented the others. "What time shall we meet?"

"At seven o'clock," said Toad.




CHAPTER VIII

WHAT MIKE FOUND


After dinner that night Chuck and Toad spent a little time helping to
trim the big tree that had been put in place in the library during their
absence of the afternoon. Chuck was on the top of a stepladder, tying
shiny colored balls to the upper branches, when Toad, who had been busy
with candy canes and popcorn balls, suddenly stopped and looked at the
clock on the mantel.

"It's seven o'clock, Chuck," he cried, "and the others will be
wondering why we don't come out," and at this he ran into the hall to
get into his coat and cap.

Chuck took but a second to follow Toad out into the yard to meet the
boys.

Mother Brown had sent her bundle and Toad's new sled to the barn by
John, the stableman, who put them into the sleigh with the other things
while the boys were at dinner.

"Hello, boys! Everybody here?" inquired Toad as he joined the group of
boys in front of the barn.

"All but Fat," laughed Reddy, "and he'll be along in a minute. He said I
walked too fast for him."

"Is everything in the sleigh?" asked Herbie, as John was hitching up.

"Everything's in all right," Toad assured him.

When about to start they found that the sleigh was so full of bundles
that some of the boys had to stand on the runners. Just as they reached
the street, Fat was seen coming toward them.

"Hurry up, lazy bones," called Reddy, "or you'll get left," but John
good-naturedly stopped the horse until Fat had climbed aboard.

There was a full moon and the sky was bright with stars. The snow was
hard beneath the horse's feet, which made the going easy, so they
traveled along at a brisk pace.

"Where shall I stop?" asked John as they drew near the O'Reilly's
cottage.

"Just a little this side of the house," directed Toad, "so they won't
hear us."

"All off, now," ordered Reddy, as John pulled up the horse, "and help
unload. Don't let's make any more noise than we can help."

"We can pile everything on the front steps," whispered Herbie, as the
boys, each heavily laden with packages of all sizes and shapes, walked
very quietly up the path toward the house.

Each carefully placed his bundles or boxes where Herbie had suggested
and just as silently they now returned to the sleigh.

"Suppose someone comes along and takes all the things before they get up
in the morning?" argued Fat. "I don't think it's safe to leave them
there all night, do you?"

"Well, maybe we'd better throw some snowballs at the door," proposed
Chuck, "to bring them out now."

This was accepted as a good plan, and "Bang, bang, bang!" went the balls
against the door.

The sleigh, in which the boys took refuge, was well hidden behind a pine
tree, so they could not be seen from the house.

"There's a light!" said Reddy in a low voice. "Someone is opening the
door."

"It's Mike!" answered Herbie, excitedly. "I'll bet he can't believe his
eyes."

It did seem to the others that what Herbie said was true, for, framed in
the doorway of the cottage stood a boy, gazing at a great heap of
bundles and boxes on the steps before him as if dazed. Once he rubbed
his eyes as if to make sure he was awake, then he slowly stretched out
one hand toward the beautiful new sled, hardly daring to believe it was
real. Then suddenly, as the boys watched eagerly, the sled was in his
arms and he was jumping up and down with joy, calling to those of his
family who could, to come out to see the wonderful surprise.

"Time for us to be getting home now," whispered Chuck, and Toad, feeling
very happy, answered:

"I guess you're right."

By nine o'clock Chuck and Toad were sound asleep, and the stockings,
tied to the end of each bed, fell limp and empty.




CHAPTER IX

CHRISTMAS MORNING


"Merry Christmas! Merry Christmas!" shouted Toad.

It was seven o'clock and Chuck awoke with a start and looked around him.

"Merry Christmas," he answered, and both boys scrambled down to the foot
of their beds to untie the stockings full to overflowing with candies,
nuts, oranges and many small gifts.

"Oh!" cried Chuck, "see what I have," holding his stocking up by the
foot and shaking the contents out on the bed. "A big knife, and a top,
and some reals."

"So have I! By jinks, I'm glad to get the knife,--it's a beauty, three
blades!"

Chuck, who by this time had a whole candy apple in his mouth, could only
nod his head in reply.

"Let's hurry up and dress so we can go down to see the tree," proposed
Toad. "I'll bet there will be lots more things for us down there," and
this the boys hastened to do.

"Merry Christmas," greeted Mother Brown, a few minutes later, as the
boys, now fully dressed, came to her door.

"Merry Christmas, boys," called their father from the hall below, as
Mother Brown and the boys hurried downstairs.

As they entered the library the very first thing that met Toad's eyes
was a beautiful new sled, much larger than the one he had given the
night before to Michael O'Reilly.

"Oh, is that for me?" he cried in delight as he pounced upon it. "I
didn't expect to get one."

"Yes, my son," answered his father, "it is for you."

"Oh, wait until Reddy sees this!" and Toad fairly hopped about in his
delight.

Chuck was very much excited over a new building game, the very thing he
had hoped for, but Toad hardly had time to look at his other gifts from
his many aunts and uncles, so anxious was he to go out doors to try his
new sled.

After breakfast Mother Brown helped him into his coat and found his
mittens and cap, for they always seemed to run away and hide while Toad
slept.

"Come on, Chuck!" he cried. "Aren't you coming out?"

"Nope, I'm going to see if I can build a derrick," was the reply, so
Toad started off alone.

As he reached the hill down which most of the boys liked best to coast,
he met Reddy, trudging along with his sled.

"Hey, Merry Christmas," he shouted. "Look at what Dad gave me!"

"Merry Christmas," answered Reddy. "Jingoes, that's a beauty!"

"Did you get the football you wanted?" he was asked.

"You bet I did, and a punching bag, too."

"Like the one in Daddy Williams' window?" inquired Toad.

"Just like it, and when you give it a punch, whack! it comes back at
you, quick as a flash."

"What did Fat get?"

"Oh, a lot of books and a pair of ice skates," replied Reddy, "so he's
gone over to White's pond to try them."

"Chuck got his building game; you know, the one he wanted, and he
wouldn't come out," declared Toad in fine disgust. "He's making things
with it."

"Who's that just starting?" and Reddy pointed up the long hill where
some one was getting ready to coast down. "Well, if it isn't Mike
O'Reilly!" he exclaimed,--"here ahead of us."

Then, as the sled with Mike lying flat on it shot past them, they
greeted him with a shout.

"Hello," returned Mike, his face all aglow with joy, "look at what I got
for Christmas."

"Bet you're glad now that you gave it to him," said Reddy as the two
boys reached the top of the hill. "Let me go down with you the first
trip?"

"You bet!" Toad assented.

"Merry Christmas," Reddy shouted, giving the sled a push from behind.
"One, two, three, we're off," and down they flew.

"She's speedy, all right," he declared as the cold north wind stung his
cheeks.

"And she steers like a bird," echoed Toad.


THE END




THE MERRYVALE GIRLS

By ALICE HALE BURNETT

       *       *       *       *       *

Four delightful books for the smaller girls, each a complete story in
itself, describing in simple language the interesting experiences of
Beth, Mary and Jerry, three little maids of Merryvale.


       *       *       *       *       *


BETH'S GARDEN PARTY

The three girls take part in a very formal little affair on the lawn of
Beth's home. Each of the guests receives a present in the shape of a
downy white kitten. The drive home in Beth's pony cart furnishes a few
exciting moments, but Patsy bravely comes to the rescue.


A DAY AT THE COUNTY FAIR

The girls are taken to the fair in a motor, but a slight delay occurs on
the way. How they finally arrived at the fair ground and their amusing
experiences are most entertainingly told.


GERALDINE'S BIRTHDAY SURPRISE

Geraldine, whom of course we know better as Jerry, plays the part of
hostess to her many friends, although it must be admitted that her
guests knew of the affair before she did. A jolly evening is spent by
the girls which is shared in by some of our young Merryvale boy friends.


MARY ENTERTAINS THE SEWING CLUB

Mary entertains the club at her home, and the efforts of some of the
members cause many outbursts of merriment. The girls decide to hold a
"fair of all nations" for the benefit of the Merryvale Day Nursery.
Their many friends aid them and their plans succeed beyond their
expectations.


_12mo. Cloth. Illustrations in Color. 40c per vol., postpaid_

THE NEW YORK BOOK CO., 201 E. 12th St., New York

       *       *       *       *       *

Transcriber's Note: Obvious punctuation errors were repaired.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Christmas Holidays at Merryvale, by 
Alice Hale Burnett

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK CHRISTMAS HOLIDAYS AT MERRYVALE ***

***** This file should be named 23569.txt or 23569.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/2/3/5/6/23569/

Produced by Suzanne Shell, Emmy and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
