The Project Gutenberg eBook, The Cat and the Mouse, Edited by Hartwell
James, Illustrated by John R. Neill


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: The Cat and the Mouse
       A Book of Persian Fairy Tales


Editor: Hartwell James

Release Date: January 31, 2008  [eBook #24473]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-646-US (US-ASCII)


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CAT AND THE MOUSE***


E-text prepared by Michael Gray (Lost_Gamer@comcast.net)



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original illustrations.
      See 24473-h.htm or 24473-h.zip:
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/4/7/24473/24473-h/24473-h.htm)
      or
      (https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/4/7/24473/24473-h.zip)





Persian Fairy Tales

Altemus' Fairy Tales Series

THE CAT AND THE MOUSE

A Book of Persian Fairy Tales

Edited with an Introduction by

HARTWELL JAMES

With Forty Illustrations by John R. Neill






Philadelphia
Henry Altemus Company

      *      *      *      *      *

Altemus'
Illustrated
Fairy Tales Series


The Magic Bed
     A Book of East Indian Tales
The Cat and the Mouse
     A Book of Persian Tales
The Jeweled Sea
     A Book of Chinese Tales
The Magic Jaw Bone
     A Book of South Sea Islands Tales
The Man Elephant
     A Book of African Tales
The Enchanted Castle
     A Book of Tales from Flower Land

Fifty Cents Each

      *      *      *      *      *

Copyright, 1906
by Henry Altemus




INTRODUCTION

Persia is rich in folk lore. For hundreds and hundreds of years the
stories in this book, and many others as well, have been told to the
wondering boys and girls of that country, who, as they hear them,
picture their native land as one of roses and tulips, where beautiful
fairies build their castles in the rosy morn, and black gnomes fly
around in the darkness of midnight.

A land, too, where the sun gleams like a fire above the blue mountains,
and the water lilies are mirrored in the deep lakes. A land where the
eyes of the tigers gleam through the reeds by the riverside, and
dark-eyed, sunburned people are quick to love and quick to hate.

The belief in the "Ghool," or "Old Man of the Desert," is still
prevalent in Persia, which probably accounts for the popularity of the
story of "The Son of the Soap Seller." The other stories selected for
this volume are great favorites, but the story of "The Cat and the
Mouse" is perhaps the most popular of all.

The frontispiece to this volume is a reduced facsimile of a whole page
in a Persian book, showing both the pictures and the reading as they
were published in Persia. The other illustrations for "The Cat and the
Mouse" are copies of drawings by a Persian artist.

"Two friends on one carpet may with contentment sleep;
  Two monarchs in one kingdom the peace can never keep.
  While earth revolves, and little children play,
  Cats over mice will always hold the sway."

                                         H. J.



CONTENTS

   The Cat and The Mouse
   The Son of the Soap Seller
   The King's Treasure
   The King and The Fisherman


LIST OF ILLUSTRATIONS

   Frontispiece
   "Nobody was happier than this cat"
   "'Now will you take off my head?'"
   "The cat had a rosary of beads"
   "The mice began to make merry"
   "Discreetly they bore their gifts"
   "And they went forward trembling"
   "Five mice he caught"
   "The King was sitting on his throne"
   "The armies fell upon each other"
   "So he mounted his elephant"
   "The lion sprang upon the Princess"
   "'O brothers, buy my pure soap'"
   "Things became blacker and blacker"
   "Leading a fine lion by a chain"
   "They set forth on their journey"
   "The rain fell in torrents"
   "'Give me a drink of water'"
   "They ran here and there"
   "'Sleep, my son, while I keep watch'"
   "A beautiful young woman appeared"
   "Every morning Ahmed looked in the cup"
   "Ahmed sprang upon the figure"
   "'Ask for anything in reason'"
   "A brass vessel full of round white stones"
   "Lived in a sheltered valley"
   "Abdul Karim was lost in wonder"
   "Priests were calling the people to prayer"
   "The noise and bustle of the crowded streets"
   "'Two hundred krans!' repeated Abdul Karim"
   "'Get out of my shop!'"
   "'Here are eight krans'"
   "Came in sight of his cottage"
   "He hid most of the treasure"
   "'Is this fish male or female?'"
   "Begged that he would accept the fish"
   "'The matter is closed'"
   "'Are you a human being or a beast?'"
   "The fisherman fell on his knees"
   "His bag laden with money"



THE CAT AND THE MOUSE




PERSIAN FAIRY TALES


The Cat and the Mouse


Showing how one may be lost in wonder at the story of the cat and the
mouse, when related with a clear and rolling voice, as if from a
pulpit.


ACCORDING to the decree of Heaven, there once lived in the Persian city
of Kerman a cat like unto a dragon--a longsighted cat who hunted like a
lion; a cat with fascinating eyes and long whiskers and sharp teeth.
Its body was like a drum, its beautiful fur like ermine skin.

Nobody was happier than this cat, neither the newly-wedded bride, nor
the hospitable master of the house when he looks round on the smiling
faces of his guests.

This cat moved in the midst of friends, boon companions of the
saucepan, the cup, and the milk jug of the court, and of the dinner
table when the cloth is spread.

Perceiving the wine cellar open, one day, the cat ran gleefully into it
to see if he could catch a mouse, and hid himself behind a wine jar. At
that moment a mouse ran out of a hole in the wall, quickly climbed the
jar, and putting his head into it, drank so long and so deeply that he
became drunk, talked very stupidly, and fancied he was as bold as a
lion.

"Where is the cat?" shouted he, "that I may off with his head. I would
cut off his head as if on the battlefield. A cat in front of me would
fare worse than any dog who might happen to cross my path."

The cat ground his teeth with rage while hearing this. Quicker than the
eye could follow, he made a spring, seized the mouse in his claws, and
said, "Oh, little mouse, now will you take off my head?"

"I am thy servant," replied the mouse; "forgive my sin. I was drunk. I
am thy slave; a slave whose ear is pierced and on whose shoulder the
yoke is."

"Tell fewer lies," replied the cat. "Was there ever such a liar? I
heard all you said and you shall pay for your sin with your life. I
will make your life less than that of a dead dog."

So the cat killed and ate the mouse; but afterwards, being sorry for
what he had done, he ran to the Mosque, and passed his hands over his
face, poured water on his hands, and anointed himself as he had seen
the faithful do at the appointed hours of prayer.

Then he began to recite the beautiful chapter to Allah in the Holy Book
of the Persians, and to make his confession in this wise:

"I have repented, and will not again tear the body of a mouse with my
teeth. I will give bread to the deserving poor. Forgive my sin, O great
Forgiver, for have I not come to Thee bowed down with sorrow?"

He repeated this so many times and with so much feeling that he really
thought he meant it, and finally wept for grief.

A little mouse happened to be behind the pulpit, and overhearing the
cat's vows, speedily carried the glad but surprising news to the other
mice. Breathlessly he related how that the cat had become a true
Mussulman; how that he had seen him in the Mosque weeping and
lamenting, and saying:

"Oh, Creator of the world, put away my sin, for I have offended like a
big fool." Then the mouse went on to describe how that the cat had a
rosary of beads, and made pious reflections in the spirit of a true
penitent.

The mice began to make merry when they heard this startling news, for
they were exceedingly glad. Seven chosen mice, each the headman of the
village, arose and gave thanks that the cat should at last have entered
the fold of the true believers.

All danced and shouted, "Ah! Ah! Hu! Hu!" and drank red wine and white
wine until they were very merry. Two rang bells, two played castanets,
and two sang. One carried a tray behind his back laden with good
things, so that all could help themselves; some smoked water-pipes;
another acted like a clown; others played various tunes on different
instruments of music.

A few days after the feast, the King of the mice said to them, "Oh,
friends, all of you bring costly presents worthy of the cat!" Then the
mice scattered in search of gifts, but soon returned, each bearing
something worthy of presentation, even to a nobleman.

One brought a bottle of wine; another a dish full of raisins; others
came with salted nuts and melon seeds, lumps of cheese, basins of
sugar-candy, pistachio nuts, little cakes iced with sugar, bottles of
lemon juice, Indian shawls, hats, cloaks and many other things.

Discreetly they bore their gifts before the King of the Cats. When in
the royal presence, they made humble obeisances, touching their
foreheads on the ground, and saluting him, said:

"Oh, master, liberator of the lives of all, we have brought gifts
worthy of thy service. We beseech thee to deign to accept of them."

Then the cat thought to himself, "I am rewarded for becoming a pious
Mussulman. Though I have endured much hunger, yet this day finds me
freely and amply provided for. Not for many days have I broken my fast.
It is clear that Allah is appeased."

Then he turned to the mice, and bade them come nearer, calling them his
friends. And they went forward trembling. So frightened were they that
they were hardly aware of what they were doing. When they were close
the cat made a sudden spring upon them.

Five mice he caught, each one the chief of a village; two with his
front paws, two with his hind ones, and one in his mouth. The remaining
mice barely escaped with their lives.

Picking up one of their murdered brothers, they quickly carried the sad
news to the mice, saying: "Why do ye sit still, oh mice? Throw dust on
your heads, oh young men, for the cruel cat has seized five of our
unsuspecting companions with teeth and claws and has killed them."

Then for the space of five days they rent their clothes as do the
mourners, and cast dust on their heads. Then they said: "We must go and
tell our King all that has befallen the mice. We must not fail to tell
him this calamity."

Whereupon they all rose up and went their way in deep sorrow; one
beating the muffled drum, one tolling the bell; all had shawls around
their necks; their tears the while running in little streams down their
whiskers.

Arrived where the King was sitting on his throne, the mice paid homage
to him, saying: "Master, we are subjects and thou art King. Behold the
cat has treated us cruelly since he became a pious follower of Mahomet.
Whereas, before his conversion he was wont to catch only one of us in a
year, now that he is a sincere Mussulman his appetite has so increased
that only five at a time will satisfy him."

Whereupon the King fell into such a violent rage that he resembled a
saucepan boiling over. But to the deputation of mice he spoke very
kindly, calling them his newly-arrived and welcome guests, and to
comfort them vowed that he would give the cat such a chastisement that
the news of it should circulate through the world.

Then, observing their grief, he commanded that the dead mouse should be
buried with all pomp and ceremony. Accordingly they made lamentation
for a whole week, as though it had been for one of royal degree; and
having prepared delicious sweetmeats, they placed them in baskets and
carried them with streaming eyes to the grave.

After the burial service, the King ordered the army to assemble on a
given day on the great sandy plain that stretches as far as the eye can
see around the city. Then he addressed them, saying:

"Oh, men and soldiers, inasmuch as the cat has so cruelly ill-treated
our countrymen, he being a heretic and an evil doer, and brutal in
nature, we must now go to the city of Kerman and fight him."

So three hundred and thirty thousand mice went forth, armed with
swords, guns, and spears; and with flags and pennons bravely flying. A
passing Arab from the desert, skilfully balancing himself on the back
of a swift-traveling camel by means of a long pole, spied the great
army in motion, and was so overcome with astonishment that he lost his
balance and fell off. Several regiments of mice were put out of action
by his fall; but nothing daunted, the army pressed on.

When the army was ready for battle, the King again addressed them
saying: "O young men, an ambassador must be sent to the cat, one who is
able, discreet, and eloquent." Then they all shouted: "The King's
orders shall be carried out! Upon our heads be it."

Now, there was present a learned and eloquent mouse, the ruler of a
province, and he it was that the King commanded to go as an ambassador
to the cat in the city of Kerman. Almost before his name was out of the
King's mouth, he had jumped out of his place in the ranks, and,
traveling swiftly as the winds of the desert, he went in boldly before
the cat and said:

"As an ambassador from the King of the Mice am I come, bowed down with
grief and fatigue. Know this, my master has determined to wage war, and
is even now come with his army to take off your head."

The cat roared out in reply, "Go tell your King to eat dust! I come not
out of this city except at my good pleasure!" Then he sent messengers
to bring up quickly some fighting and hunting cats from Khorassan--the
land of the sun--to Kerman.

As soon as the cat's army was ready, the King of the Cats gave them
marching orders, promising to come himself to the battle on the next
day. The cats came out on horseback, each one like a hungry tiger. The
mice also mounted their steeds, armed to the teeth, and boiling with
rage. Shouting "Allah! Allah!" the armies fell upon each other with
unsheathed swords.

So many cats and mice were killed that there was no room for the
horses' feet. The cats fought valiantly, their fierce attacks carrying
them through the first line of the mice, then through the second, and
many Ameers and chiefs were killed. The mice, thinking the battle lost,
turned to flee, crying out:

"Throw dust upon your heads, young men!"

But afterwards, rallying again, they faced their pursuers and attacked
the right wing of the cat's army, shouting their battle cry of "Allah!
Allah!"

In the thickest of the fray a mounted mouse speared the King of the
Cats, so that he fell fainting to the ground. Before he could rise, the
mouse leaped upon him and brought him captive to the King. So the cats
were defeated on that day and sullenly retreated to the city of Kerman.

Having bound the cat, the mice beat him until he became unconscious.
Then the plain echoed with the beating of tom-toms and shouts of joy.
Then the King of the Mice seated himself on his throne and ordered the
cat to be brought before him.

"Scoundrel!" he said to him, "Why hast thou eaten up my army? Hear now
the King of the Mice." The cat hung his head in fear, and remained
silent. After a few minutes, he said: "I am thy servant, even to
death." Then the King replied:

"Carry this black-faced dog to the execution ground. I will come in
person without delay to kill him in revenge for the blood of my
slaughtered subjects."

So he mounted his elephant, and his guard marched proudly before him.
The cat, with his hands tied together, stood weeping. Upon arriving at
the execution grounds and discerning that the cat was not yet executed,
the King said angrily to the hangman: "Why is it this prisoner is still
alive? Hang him immediately!"

At that very moment a horseman came galloping furiously from the city
and besought the King, saying: "Forgive this miserable cat; in future
he will do us no harm." However, the King turned a deaf ear to his
entreaties, ordering that the cat be killed at once. The mice
hesitated, being unwilling, through fear, to carry out the order.

Of course, this made the King very angry. "O foolish mice!" he cried,
"Ye will all take pity on the cat, in order that he may again make a
sacrifice of you."

Directly the cat saw the horseman, his courage revived. With one bound
he sprang from his place as does the tiger on his prey, burst his bonds
asunder, and seized five unfortunate mice. The other mice, filled with
dismay and terror, ran hither and thither, crying wildly:

"Allah! Allah! Shoot him! Cut off his head, as did Rastam his enemies
on the day of battle!"

When the King of the Mice saw what, had happened, he fainted; whereupon
the cat leaped on him, pulled off his crown, and placing the rope over
his head, hanged him, so that he died immediately.

Then he darted here and there, seizing and slaying, and dashing mice to
the earth, till the whole army of mice was routed, and there was none
left to oppose him.




THE SON OF THE SOAP SELLER


PERSIAN FAIRY TALES


The Son of the Soap Seller


Cleverly proving that a princess with a necklace can frustrate the
intentions of a Ghool, and that every king should have near his person
the owner of a crystal cup.


THERE once dwelt a poor but worthy man named Abdullah in Meshed, the
Holy City, the place of pilgrimage, whose beautiful mosque with the
golden dome is the glory of the kingdom of Persia. He barely managed to
get a living by the sale of soap.

All day long, from sunrise to sunset, he tramped the city, crying out:
"O brothers, buy my pure soap. There is none better in the city, as
every one knows. Even the little babes would say so if they could but
speak."

Still, if you looked closely at it, you would never guess it to be
soap; it was black and coarse, and more like wood than anything else.
If any unlucky pilgrim used it on his face or hands, it would make his
skin burn like fire. But this did not often happen, for the people in
Persia do not use much soap on themselves, or their clothes, and sand
does very well for cleaning cooking pots and pans. So it was that there
were many days when poor Abdullah did not sell enough to buy sufficient
bread for himself and his little boy Ahmed.

At such times, the father would creep sadly into his wretched mud-built
hovel, and bury his face in his hands, so that he might not see his son
trying to keep back the tears caused by hunger. The little fellow,
however, now ten years of age, would comfort his father by saying:

"Inshallah"--if God wills--"to-morrow you will sell more soap than you
have done for weeks past." And the father, looking into the bright,
open face of his boy, would take courage, and pray that this might be
so.

But the days went on and things became blacker and blacker, when one
day an adventure befell little Ahmed. He was on his way to school, and
as the sun was very hot, he sought the shelter of the big plane-trees
that lined the banks of the stream flowing down the center of the
principal street.

Women were filling their water jugs, or washing clothes; a string of
camels were drinking; several donkeys were rolling playfully over and
over in the water, and some dyers were wringing out newly-dyed
garments, causing waves of many colors to flow past.

Just as Ahmed had stopped to look, a dervish, leading a fine lion by a
chain, and some runners with curious hats and coats rushed past,
shouting:

"Make way for the King! Turn your faces to the wall!" And there was the
great King, seated on a beautiful Arabian horse, surrounded by
soldiers. Then there passed a palanquin borne on the backs of four
mules.

The party stopped just opposite to Ahmed, and from the palanquin there
alighted a lady closely veiled, evidently wishing to inspect some
beautiful Meshed silver work. Before she could reach the shop, a great
tumult arose among the people. The lion had broken his chain and was
madly leaping here and there, tearing and rending and dashing people to
the ground. Women fainted, men fled, little children stood still and
cried pitifully, some jumped into the stream; the frightened horses
dashed madly through the crowd. All was terror and confusion.

Then with a roar the lion sprang upon the princess, and bore her to the
ground; but ere he could tear her to pieces, Ahmed had sprang forward,
seized a piece of iron, one end of which was red hot, from the shop of
a blacksmith, and thrust it furiously into the face of the lion. With a
cry of pain and rage the lion left the princess and bounded off to the
bazaars, where he did great damage.

As soon as the princess had recovered from her fright, she beckoned to
Ahmed to come near, and removing her veil, told him he was a brave
little fellow, and ordered one of her servants to give him a purse of
gold. Ahmed had never seen anyone so beautiful, and was so lost in
wonder, that before he could find words of thanks, the party had passed
on.

But when the money was spent, Ahmed and his father began to be in want
again. A Jewish pedlar having told him how much better trade was in the
capital, they determined to set forth to that city, though the way was
long and full of danger. "Better to die in the desert, than in the
heart of a great city," said Ahmed.

So they set forth on their journey, sometimes climbing up winding paths
among the mountains, at other times traversing the desert, footsore,
and weary almost to death, often hungry and thirsty, tormented by the
thought that they would fall into the hands of the man-stealing robbers
who haunted this great pilgrim road.

On account of the intense heat and the cruel robbers, they traveled by
night. In every shadow cast by the moon upon the ground, they thought
they saw a robber on his big horse. During the day they slept at
wayside inns, and in return for little services rendered by Ahmed to
the muleteers, they would give him a handful of rice or bread, or a few
dried fruits which kept them from starvation.

So it went on until one night, when searching for the bridge that
crosses the Salt River, the sky became suddenly overcast, the rain fell
in torrents, and soon the river was in flood. There was nothing to be
done but to sit down and wait until the moon should rise. The fierce
wind buffeted them, the rain drenched them; they had lost their way,
and were at the mercy of wild beasts.

Once, when the wind dropped for a little, out of the darkness came a
groan. "Keep still as death, my son," said the father to Ahmed, "for it
is the Old Man of the Desert."

Now Ahmed had never before heard of the Old Man of the Desert, and
therefore knew no fear, so despite his father's warning, he got up and
went in the direction from whence came the groans. As he reached the
spot, the moon came out from behind a bank of clouds, and Ahmed saw a
poor dervish lying on the sand. He had a leopard skin thrown over his
shoulders; by his side lay a big stick studded with sharp nails, and a
basin made of the outer skin of a pumpkin in which he collected alms.

"For the sake of the Prophet," he moaned when he saw Ahmed, "give me a
drink of water." And Ahmed, filling his pitcher from the river gave him
to drink, though the water was somewhat salty.

The water revived the dervish, and he said: "I am Ali, the dervish, and
am known throughout Persia. Two months ago I left Mazandaran to go to
Meshed. But yesterday the fever seized me. This is the third attack,
and, as you know, it is always fatal.

"Stay with me, my son, in this dark hour when I shall pass through the
valley of the shadow of death. And when my soul shall have crossed the
Bridge of Death, take this little leather bag hanging round my neck,
and therein you shall find a tiny cup, cut from a crystal, which if
used rightly, shall lift thee to great power and wealth.

"Each morning when you rise, place a drop of pure water in the cup, and
look intently therein, and should any danger threaten you or those near
and dear to you, it will be made manifest. And if--" but here his
strength failed him, his head fell back, and he passed away. Ahmed
found the bag and the beautifully cut crystal, just as the dervish had
said, and returning to his father, told him all that had happened.

Ahmed did as the dervish had directed him for several mornings, but
seeing nothing in the crystal, he dropped the practice. There came a
day, however, when they were overtaken by a dreadful dust storm. From
across the wide stretch of sand, the wind raged, the sky and sun were
blotted out, the air was laden with dust, and the small pebbles and
stones carried in the wind cut them until they cried with pain. Shelter
there was none.

In fear and pain they ran here and there, and when after several hours
of misery, the storm had passed, they could not see each other. They
were lost in the cruel desert, with no food, and worse still, no water.
Sobbing in despair, Ahmed straggled on. He went like one in a dream.
Time after time he fell tripping over rocks and bushes, but he pressed
onward. Then came a time when he could go no further, and he lay down
to die.

For a long time he slept, and then he was awakened by being shaken.
Looking up, he saw an old man smiling and saying: "Why, it's little
Ahmed, the son of Abdullah, the Soap Seller. Don't you know me, Ahmed?
I am your uncle. Don't cry because you have lost your way. Come, take
my hand and we will soon find your father."

Now Ahmed wondered why he had never seen or even heard his father speak
of this particular uncle, but he took the old man's hand, and together
they set forth. Mile after mile they went, but no trace of his father
could be found. Then he sat down crying, and said: "I am so tired, I
can go no further." And the old man replied: "Sleep, my son, while I
keep watch."

But just as Ahmed was closing his eyes, the old man turned, and Ahmed
saw that he had thin legs like those of a sheep. "The Ghool! the
Ghool!" he shrieked, and fainted. Then this wicked ogre of the desert
began to open Ahmed's coat in order to suck his blood.

But another cry answered that of the boy, and then appeared on the
scene a beautiful young woman, carrying in her harid a necklace of gold
and silver beads. Casting but one glance at the beads, the old man flew
swifter than the wild sheep of the mountains, for the sight of metal
rendered him powerless to do harm.

Of course, it was the princess whose life Ahmed had saved in Meshed.
The King, her father, happened to be returning from a pilgrimage, and
to give a fright to her servants, she had scampered off the track, and
thus had found Ahmed. At her request, Ahmed became one of the King's
followers, and together with his father, whom they found the next day,
they journeyed to the capital.

Some three days' march from the capital, in the mountains near Kazveen,
there lived the Old Man of the Mountains, or as he is generally known,
the King of the Assassins, with his followers. So great was his power
that he had but to say the word and any of his men would throw
themselves from the topmost crags to the valleys beneath and be dashed
to pieces, or at his bidding, they would travel forth to the most
distant parts of the world in order to kill any persons, however great
they might be.

When he heard that the King of Persia was collecting an army to destroy
both him and his tribe, he became very angry, and said to one of his
followers: "Go, rid me of the King of Persia;" and the mart-took bread
and water and a sharp dagger, and went.

Now after his narrow escape from the Old Man of the Desert, Ahmed took
pains every morning to place a drop of water in the crystal cup and
look therein. Nothing appeared until one morning he saw in the bead of
water a vision of the King asleep, and standing by him a robber with an
uplifted dagger, about to strike. Hurrying to the King's presence, he
warned him of the danger, but the King only laughed, for he trusted his
guards.

Nevertheless, Ahmed determined to keep watch. Darkness came, and the
guards slept. The palace was silent. The hours slipped by, and Ahmed,
weary with much waiting was about to retire, when he perceived a dark
shadow creeping into that part of the palace where the King slept.

The figure noiselessly made its way to the very threshold of the King's
room, when Ahmed sprang upon it, at the same time giving the alarm. The
whole palace was aroused and the murdered secured.

When the messenger did not return, the Old Man of the Mountains sent a
second, and then a third, and finally the most daring and skilful of
all his followers; but thanks to Ahmed's crystal cup, all attempts upon
the life of the King failed.

Then the King sent for Ahmed, and said: "Ask for anything in reason,
and it shall be given thee." And though he was trembling in every limb,
Ahmed replied: "Neither wealth nor power does thy slave desire, save
the hand of thy daughter."

"If she loves you, it shall be so," replied the King, and she did love
him; they were married, and Ahmed became the King's Prime Minister.



THE KING'S TREASURE

PERSIAN FAIRY TALES


The King's Treasure


Accurately relating how a marked advance in material and political
prosperity accrued to Abdul Karim, and the part played by a monarch
whose philosophy included the immediate advancement of a worthy
subject.


A LABORING man named Abdul Karim, with his wife, Zeeba--"the beautiful
one"--lived in a sheltered valley, surrounded by hills, the sides of
which were covered with fine gardens, in which the peach, the grape,
the mulberry, and other delicious fruits grew in great profusion.

Although his wife's name was Zeeba, as a matter of fact, she was very
plain in appearance. But from having been named Zeeba, she really
thought she was beautiful, and thus it came about that, moved by
vanity, her two children were named, the boy, Yusuf, or Joseph, who as
you know, was sold by his brethren into Egypt and became next to the
King; and the girl, Fatima, after Fatima, the favorite daughter of
Mahomet, and the wife of the famous Ali.

Now Abdul Karim was only a laborer on the land, receiving no wages,
merely being paid in grain and cloth sufficient for the wants of
himself and family. Of money he knew nothing except by name.

One day his master was so pleased with his work that he actually gave
him ten "krans," equivalent to about a dollar of our money. To Abdul
Karim this seemed great wealth, and directly his day's work was done,
he ran home to his wife and said: "Look, Zeeba, there's riches for
you!" and spread out the money before her. His good wife was delighted,
and so were the children.

Then Abdul Karim said: "How shall we spend this great sum? The master
has also given me a day's holiday, so if you don't mind, I will go to
the famous city of Meshed, which is only twenty miles from here, and
after placing two krans on the shrine of the holy Imam, I will then
visit the bazaars and buy everything you and the children desire."

"You would better buy me a piece of silk for a new dress," said Zeeba.

"I want a fine horse and a sword," said little Yusuf.

"I would like an Indian handkerchief and a pair of gold slippers," said
Fatima.

"They shall be here by to-morrow night," said the father, and taking a
big stick, he set off on his journey.

When he had come down from the mountains to the plain below, Abdul
Karim saw stretched before him the glorious city, and was lost in
wonder at the sight of the splendid domes, where roofs glittered with
gold, and the minarets, from the tops of which the priests were calling
the people to prayer.

Then coming to the gate of the shrine, he asked an old priest if he
might enter. "Yes, my son," was the reply. "Go in and give what thou
canst spare to the mosque, and Allah will reward thee."

So Abdul Karim walked through the great court, amidst worshipers from
every city in Asia. With open-mouthed astonishment he gazed on the
riches of the temple, the jewels, the lovely carpets, the silks, the
golden ornaments, and with humility he placed his two pieces of money
on the sacred tomb. Then through the noise and bustle of the crowded
streets, he went until he found the bazaars.

He found the sellers of fruits in one place, in another those who sold
pots and pans, then he came to the jewelers, the bakers, the butchers,
each trade having its own part of the bazaar, and so on, until he
reached that part where there were only those who sold silks.

He entered one of the shops and asked to see some silks, and after much
picking and choosing, fixed upon a superb piece of purple silk with an
embroidered border of exquisite design. "I will take this," he said.
"What is the price?"

"I shall only ask you two hundred krans, as you are a new customer,"
said the shopkeeper. "Anybody else but you would have to pay three or
four hundred."

"Two hundred krans," repeated Abdul Karim, in astonishment. "Surely you
have made a mistake. Do you mean krans like these?" taking one out of
his pocket.

"Certainly I do," replied the shopkeeper, "and let me tell you it is
very cheap at that price."

Abdul Karim pictured the disappointment of his wife. "Poor Zeeba," he
sighed.

"Poor who?" said the silk merchant.

"My wife," said Abdul Karim.

"What have I to do with your wife?" asked the merchant, getting angry
because he saw that all his trouble was in vain.

"I will tell you about it," said Abdul Karim. "Because I did my work
well, my master gave me ten krans, the first time I ever have had any
money. After giving two krans to the shrine, I intended to buy a piece
of silk for my wife, a horse and sword for my little boy Yusuf, and an
Indian handkerchief and a pair of gold slippers for my little girl
Fatima. And here you ask me two hundred krans for one piece of silk.
How can I pay you and buy the other things?"

"Here I have been wasting my time and rumpling my beautiful silks for a
fool like you," cried the angry merchant. "Get out of my shop! Go home
to your stupid Zeeba and your stupid children. Buy them some stale
cakes and some black sugar, and don't put your head in my shop again,
or it will be worse for you."

Then he took off his slipper, and with many blows drove poor Abdul
Karim out into the street. Then Abdul Karim went to the horse market,
only to find that the lowest-priced horse would cost two hundred and
fifty krans.

The horse dealer mocked him when they found he had only eight krans,
and suggested that he buy the sixteenth part of a donkey for his little
son. As for a sword, he found that it would cost at least thirty krans;
while a pair of golden slippers would run into many hundreds of krans;
and for an Indian handkerchief, the price was twelve krans.

As poor Abdul Karim bent his weary way home, he met a beggar crying:
"Dear friend, give me something, for to-morrow is Friday"--the
Mahommedan Sunday. "He that giveth to the poor, lendeth to the Lord,
and of a certainty the Lord will pay him back a hundredfold."

"Of all the men I have met to-day, you are the only one with whom I can
deal," said simple Abdul Karim. "Here are eight krans. Use them in the
service of God, and don't forget to pay me back a hundredfold."

Wrapping up the eight krans very carefully, the cunning beggar promised
some day to return them a hundredfold.

At last Abdul Karim came in sight of his cottage, and little Yusuf, who
had been all day on the look-out for him, ran breathlessly to meet him.
"Where's my horse and sword, father?" he cried. And Fatima, who had
just come up, called out, "And my handkerchief and golden slippers?"
And Zeeba asked for her bit of silk.

Poor Abdul Karim looked so confused, that his wife said: "Be quiet, my
dears. Your father could not bring them all with him, so he has packed
them on Yusuf's horse and left him in charge of a servant, who will be
here presently." But when she heard his story, and above all that he
had given eight krans to a beggar, she got very angry, and marched off
and told the master.

But the master was still more angry, and said: "What! the blockhead
gave his eight krans to a beggar? Send him to me." And when Abdul Karim
came before him, he said scornfully: "You must fancy yourself a big
man, Abdul. I never give more than a copper coin to a beggar, but your
Excellency gives them silver. The beggar promised that you should be
repaid a hundredfold, did he? And it shall be so, even now." Then as
Abdul's face brightened, he laughed and said: "Not in money, but in
stripes." And his servants threw Abdul on the ground and gave him one
hundred blows on his bare feet.

The next day, Abdul's master sent for him again, and after calling him
a fool, said: "I have a nice little job for you, that will bring you to
your proper senses. Go into the field and dig for water, day after day
until you find it."

So for many days Abdul labored under the scorching sun, until he had
dug down to a depth of about thirty feet, and then he came upon a brass
vessel, finely chased, full of round white stones, which fairly dazzled
his eyes in the fierce sunlight. He put one in his mouth and tried to
break it with his teeth, but could not.

Then he said to himself, "The master has planted some rice and it has
turned into stones. Perhaps there are some more." And going down a few
feet lower, he found another pot filled with sparkling stones of
various colors.

Then he remembered that he had seen pretty pieces of glass like these
for sale in Meshed, and made up his mind that on the first opportunity
he would again visit the city and take the stones with him. Meanwhile,
he would hide them, and say nothing.

Abdul did not have to wait long for a holiday, for on finding water a
little lower down, his master was so pleased that he gave him a
well-deserved rest, and then Abdul set off for Meshed. But before
entering the city, he hid most of the treasure at the foot of a tree
under a big stone. Then with still a pocket full, he went straight to
the shop where he had seen such stones, and spoke to the shopkeeper who
was seated at the entrance to his shop, calmly smoking his water-pipe.

"Do you want to buy any more stones like those?" he asked, pointing to
some in a brass tray. "Yes, have you got one?" replied the merchant,
for Abdul did not look like a man who was likely to have more than one,
if any.

"I have a pocket full of them," said Abdul.

"You have a pocket full of pebbles, more likely," said the jeweler. But
when Abdul took out a handful and showed him, he was so astonished that
he could hardly speak. Trembling in every limb, he bade Abdul wait a
minute, and leaving his apprentice in charge, he hastily left the shop.
When he returned, the chief of the police was with him.

"I am innocent," cried the jeweler. "There is the man. His pockets are
filled with diamonds, rubies, emeralds, and pearls of great price.
Without doubt he has found the long-lost treasure of Cyrus."

Then Abdul was searched; the precious stones were found upon him; and
when they had brought Zeeba and the children, the whole family were
sent under a guard of five hundred soldiers to the capital.

While all these things were taking place, the King saw in his dreams,
for three nights, one after the other, the Holy Prophet, who, looking
steadfastly at him, exclaimed: "Abbas, protect and favor my friend."
And on the third night, the King took courage and said to the Prophet:
"And who is thy friend?" And the answer came:

"He is a poor laboring man, Abdul Karim by name, who of his poverty
gave one-fifth to the shrine at Meshed, and now, because he has found
the King's treasure, they have bound him, and are bringing him to this
city to oppress him."

So the King went forth two days' journey to meet Abdul. First came one
hundred horsemen. Next, poor Abdul, seated on a camel, with his arms
bound tightly. Walking behind the camel were the weeping children and
their mother. Then came the foot soldiers guarding the treasure. The
King made the camel kneel down, and with his own hands undid the cruel
bonds.

Then with tears running down his face, Abdul knelt before the King and
pleaded for his dear ones, saying: "If thou slay me, at least let these
innocent ones go free!"

Lifting Abdul from the ground, the King then said: "I am come to honor,
not to slay thee. When thou hast rested, thou shalt return to thine own
province, not as a prisoner, but as the Governor thereof." And smiling,
he added:

"Already is the silk dress prepared for Zeeba; the horse and sword for
Yusuf; and the Indian handkerchief and the golden slippers for Fatima
have not been forgotten." For the King had read in the report of the
chief of police all the details of Abdul's case.

And so it was that Abdul's piety and gift to the shrine had come back,
not a hundredfold, but beyond his wildest dreams, and the shrine and
the poor benefited greatly thereby.



THE KING AND THE FISHERMAN


PERSIAN FAIRY TALES


The King and the Fisherman


Illustrating the advantage of being able to formulate a judicious reply
to an embarrassing question, especially when material plenitude may
ensue.

THE countries washed by the great rivers Tigris and Euphrates were once
ruled by a certain King who was passionately fond of fish.

He was seated one day with Sherem, his wife, in the royal gardens that
stretch down to the banks of the Tigris, at the point where it is
spanned by the wonderful bridge of boats; and looking up spied a boat
gliding by, in which was seated a fisherman having a large fish.

Noticing that the King was looking closely at him, and knowing how much
the King liked this particular kind of fish, the fisherman made his
obeisance, and skilfully bringing his boat to the shore, came before
the King and begged that he would accept the fish as a present. The
King was greatly pleased at this, and ordered that a large sum of money
be given to the fisherman.

But before the fisherman had left the royal presence, the Queen turned
towards the King and said: "You have done a foolish thing." The King
was astonished to hear her speak in this way, and asked how that could
be. The Queen replied:

"The news of your having given so large a reward for so small a gift
will spread through the city and it will be known as the fisherman's
gift. Every fisherman who catches a big fish will bring it to the
palace, and should he not be paid in like manner, he will go away
discontented, and secretly speak evil of you among his fellows."

"Thou speakest the truth, light of my eyes," said the King, "but can
not you see how mean it would be for a King, if for that reason he were
to take back his gift?" Then perceiving that the Queen was ready to
argue the matter, he turned away angrily, saying: "The matter is
closed."

However, later in the day, when he was in a more amiable frame of mind,
the Queen again approached him, and said that if that was his only
reason for not taking back his gift, she would arrange it. "You must
summon the fisherman," she said, "and then ask him, 'Is this fish male
or female?' If he says male, then you will tell him that you wanted a
female fish; but if he should say female, your reply will be that you
wanted a male fish. In this way the matter will be properly adjusted."

The King thought this an easy way out of the difficulty, and commanded
the fisherman to be brought before him. When the fisherman, who by the
way, was a most intelligent man, stood before the King, the King said
to him: "O fisherman, tell me, is this fish male or female?"

The fisherman replied, "The fish is neither male nor female." Whereupon
the King smiled at the clever answer, and to add to the Queen's
annoyance, directed the keeper of the royal purse to give the fisherman
a further sum of money.

Then the fisherman placed the money in his leather bag, thanked the
King, and swinging the bag over his shoulder, hurried away, but not so
quickly that he did not notice that he had dropped one small coin.
Placing the bag on the ground, he stooped and picked up the coin, and
again went on his way, with the King and Queen carefully watching his
every action.

"Look! what a miser he is!" said Sherem, triumphantly. "He actually put
down his bag to pick up one small coin because it grieved him to think
that it might reach the hands of one of the King's servants, or some
poor person, who, needing it, would buy bread and pray for the long
life of the King."

"Again thou speakest the truth," replied the King, feeling the justice
of this remark; and once more was the fisherman brought into the royal
presence. "Are you a human being or a beast?" the King asked him.
"Although I made it possible for you to become rich without toil, yet
the miser within you could not allow you to leave even one small piece
of money for others." Then the King bade him to go forth and show his
face no more within the city.

At this the fisherman fell on his knees and cried: "Hear me, O King,
protector of the poor! May God grant the King a long life. Not for its
value did thy servant pick up the coin, but because on one side it bore
the name of God, and on the other the likeness of the King. Thy servant
feared that someone, not seeing the coin, would tread it into the dirt,
and thus defile both the name of God and the face of the King. Let the
King judge if by so doing I have merited reproach."

This answer pleased the King beyond all measure, and he gave the
fisherman another large sum of money. And the Queen's wrath was turned
away, and she looked kindly upon the fisherman as he departed with his
bag laden with money.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE CAT AND THE MOUSE***


******* This file should be named 24473.txt or 24473.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
https://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/2/4/4/7/24473



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
https://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

