Project Gutenberg's Briefless Ballads and Legal Lyrics, by James Williams

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Briefless Ballads and Legal Lyrics
       Second Series

Author: James Williams

Release Date: May 2, 2008 [EBook #25281]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIEFLESS BALLADS AND LEGAL LYRICS ***




Produced by Bryan Ness, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)









BRIEFLESS BALLADS




BY THE SAME AUTHOR


 SIMPLE STORIES OF LONDON
   VERSES SUITABLE FOR RECITATION
     _Crown 8vo, cloth, price 1s. 6d._


 ETHANDUNE
   AND OTHER POEMS
     _Crown 8vo, cloth, price 2s. 6d._




                   BRIEFLESS BALLADS
                          AND
                      LEGAL LYRICS

                     SECOND SERIES


                   BY JAMES WILLIAMS


 "You will think a lawyer has as little business with
 poetry as he has with justice. Perhaps so. I have been
 too partial to both."
                 --THOMAS LOVE PEACOCK, in _Melincourt_


                         LONDON
                 ADAM AND CHARLES BLACK
                          1895




[_All Rights Reserved_]


Transcriber's Note:

    Hyphenation has been standardised. Minor typographical errors have
    been corrected without note. The oe ligature is represented by [oe].




CONTENTS


(The First Series was published anonymously in 1881, and is now out of
print. Some of the following pieces have already appeared in
periodicals.)

                                        PAGE
 JUSTINIAN AT WINDERMERE                   9
 A VISION OF LEGAL SHADOWS                15
 THE SQUIRE'S DAUGHTER                    21
 HER LETTER IN CHAMBERS                   25
 LAW AND POETRY                           27
 SOMEWHERE                                30
 ROMAN LAW                                34
 BOLOGNA                                  36
 A GARDEN PARTY IN THE TEMPLE             37
 THE SPINNING-HOUSE OF THE FUTURE         41
 HOW WE FOUND OUR VERDICT                 44
 A GREEK LIBEL                            47
 LE TEMPS PASSÉ                           50
 LAWN TENNIS IN THE TEMPLE GARDENS        52
 A BALLADE OF LOST LAW                    53
 COM[OE]DIA JURIS                         56

 CASES--
   MYLWARD _v._ WELDON                    59
   HAMPDEN _v._ WALSH                     61
   WILLIS _v._ THE BISHOP OF OXFORD       62
   DASHWOOD _v._ JERMYN                   66
   _EX PARTE_ JONES                       70
   FINLAY _v._ CHIRNEY                    71
   POLLARD _v._ PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPANY      71
   THE MINNEAPOLIS CASE                   73
   COMMONWEALTH _v._ MARZYNSKI            77

 TRANSLATIONS--
   GREEK ANTHOLOGY                        81
   MARTIAL                                89
   CINO DA PISTOIA                        92
   PEDRO LOPEZ DE AYALA                   94
   PIRON                                  94




    _Interioris amat Templi jam Pegasus aulas
        Pieria in Medio plenior unda ruit._




Justinian at Windermere


    We took a hundredweight of books
      To Windermere between us,
    Our dons had blessed our studious looks,
      Had they by chance but seen us.

    Maine, Blackstone, Sandars, all were there,
      And Hallam's _Middle Ages_,
    And Austin with his style so rare,
      And Poste's enticing pages.

    We started well: the little inn
      Was deadly dull and quiet,
    As dull as Mrs. Wood's _East Lynne_,
      Or as the verse of Wyatt.

    Without distraction thus we read
      From nine until eleven,
    Then rowed and sailed until we fed
      On potted char at seven.

    Two hours of work! We could devote
      Next day to recreation,
    Much illness springs, so doctors note,
      From lack of relaxation.

    Let him read law on summer days,
      Who has a soul that grovels;
    Better one tale of Thackeray's
      Than all Justinian's novels.

    At noon we went upon the lake,
      We could not stand the slowness
    Of our lone inn, so dined on steak
      (They _called_ it steak) at Bowness.

    We wrestled with the steak, when lo!
      Rose Jack in such a hurry,
    He saw a girl he used to know
      In Suffolk or in Surrey.

    What matter which? to think that she
      Should lure him from his duty!
    For Jack, I knew, would always be
      A very slave to beauty.

    And so it proved, alas! for Jack
      Grew taciturn and thinner,
    Was out all day alone, and back
      Too often late for dinner.

    What could I do? His walks and rows
      All led to one conclusion;
    I could not read; our work, heaven knows,
      Was nothing but confusion.

    Like Jack I went about alone,
      Saw Wordsworth's writing-table,
    And made the higher by a stone
      The "man" upon Great Gable.

    At last there came a sudden pause
      To all his wanderings _solus_,
    He learned what writers on the laws
      Of Rome had meant by _dolus_.

    The Suffolk (was it Surrey?) flirt
      Without a pang threw over
    Poor Jack and all his works like dirt,
      And caught a richer lover.

    We read one morning more to say
      We had not been quite idle,
    And then to end the arduous day
      Enjoyed a swim in Rydal.

    Next day the hundredweight of books
      Was packed once more in cases,
    We left the lakes and hills and brooks
      And southward turned our faces.

    Three months, and then the Oxford Schools;
      Our unbelieving college
    Saw better than ourselves what fools
      Pretend sometimes to knowledge.

    Curst questions! Jack did only one,
      He gave as his opinion
    That of the Roman jurists none
      Had lived before Justinian.

    I answered two, but all I did
      Was lacking in discretion,
    I reckoned guardianship amid
      The _vitia_ of possession.

    My second shot was wider still,
      I held that _commodata_
    Could not attest a prætor's will
      Because of _culpa lata_.

    We waited fruitlessly that night,
      There came no blue _testamur_,[A]
    Nor was Jack's heavy heart made light
      By that sweet word _Amamur_.

[A] Since the above was written, the _testamur_, like many other
institutions dear to the old order of Oxford men, has been superseded.




A Vision of Legal Shadows


    A case at chambers left for my opinion
      Had taxed my brain until the noon of night,
    I read old law, and loathed the long dominion
                    Of fiction over right.

    I had consulted Coke and Cruise and Chitty,
      The works where ancient learning reigns supreme,
    Until exhausted nature, moved with pity,
                    Sent me a bookman's dream.

    Six figures, all gigantic as Gargantua,
      Floated before my eyes, and all the six
    Were shades like those that once the bard of Mantua
                    Saw by the shore of Styx.

    The first was one with countenance imperious,
      His toga dim with centuries of dust;
    "My name," quoth he, "is Aulus and Agerius,[B]
                    My voice is hoarse with rust.

    "Yet once I played my part in law proceedings,
      And writers wrote of one they never saw,
    I gave their point to formulæ and pleadings,
                    I lived but in the law."

    The second had a countenance perfidious;
      What wonder? Prætors launched their formulæ
    In vain against Numerius Negidius,
                    And not a whit cared he.

    With voice of high contempt he greeted Aulus;
      "In interdicts thou wast mine enemy,
    Once passed no day that students did not call us
                    As parties, me and thee.

    "On paper I was plaintiff or defendant,
      On paper thou wast evermore the same;
    We lived apart, a life that was transcendant,
                    For it was but a name.

    "I hate thee, Aulus, hate thee," low he muttered,
      "It was by thee that I was always tricked,
    My unsubstantial bread I ate unbuttered
                    In dread of interdict.

    "And yet 'twas but the sentiment I hated:
      Like thee I ne'er was drunk e'en _vi_ or _clam_,[C]
    With wine that was no wine my thirst was sated.
                    Like thee I was a sham."

    Two country hinds in 'broidered smocks next followed,
      Each trundled him a cart-wheel by the spokes,
    Oblivion now their names hath well-nigh swallowed,
                    For they were Stiles and Nokes.

    They spake no word, for speech to them was grievous,
      With bovine eyes they supplicated me;
    "We wot not what ye will, but prithee leave us,
                    Unlettered folk are we."

    "Go," said I, "simple ones, and break your fallows,
      Crush autumn apples in the cider press,
    Law, gaffer Stiles, thy humble name still hallows,
                    Contracted to J. S."

    Another pair of later time succeeded,
      With buckles on their shoes and silken hose,
    A garb that told it was to them who heeded
                    John Doe's and Richard Roe's.

    "Ah me! I was a casual ejector,[D]
      In the brave days of old," I heard one say;
    "I knew Elizabeth, the Lord Protector
                    I spake with yesterday."

    To whom in contradiction snarled the other,
      "There was no living blood our veins to fill.
    Both you and I were nought but shadows, brother,
                    And we are shadows still."

    Room for a lady, room, as at Megiddo
      The hosts made way for passage of the king,
    For from the darkness crept there forth a widow
                    In weeds and wedding ring.

    "I am the widow, I, whereof the singers
      Of Scotland sang, their cruel words so smote
    My tender heart, that ofttimes itched my fingers
                    To take them by the throat.

    "He scoffed at me, dour bachelor of Glasgow,[E]
      If I existed not for him, the knave,
    'Twas all his fault who let some bonnie lass go
                    Unwedded to her grave."

[B] Aulus Agerius and Numerius Negidius are names continually occurring
in the Roman institutional writers as typical names of parties to legal
process, corresponding very much to the John Stiles and John Nokes of
the older English law-books, and the Amr and Zaid of Mohammedan law.
John Stiles was frequently contracted to J. S.

[C] _Vi_ and _clam_ were part of the form of the interdict, which was a
mode of procedure by which the prætor settled the right of possession of
landed property.

[D] The casual ejector was John Doe, who was, like Richard Roe, an
entirely imaginary person, of much importance in the old action of
ejectment abolished in 1852.

[E] The allusion is to the "Advocates' Widows Fund," subscribed to by
all members of the Scottish bar, married or unmarried. The non-existent
widow of the unmarried advocate has been a frequent subject of legal
verse. See "The Bachelor's Dream," by John Rankine, (_Journal of
Jurisprudence_, vol. xxii. p. 155), "My Widow," by David Crichton (_id._
vol. xxiv. p. 51).




The Squire's Daughter


    We crawled about the nursery
      In tenderest years in tether,
    At six we waded in the sea
      And caught our colds together.

    At ten we practised playing at
      A kind of heathen cricket,
    A croquet mallet was the bat,
      The Squire's old hat the wicket.

    At twelve, the cricket waxing slow,
      With home-made bow and arrow
    We took to shooting--once I know
      I all but hit a sparrow.

    She took birds' nests from easy trees,
      I climbed the oaks and ashes,
    'Twas deadly work for hands and knees,
      Deplorable for sashes.

    At hide and seek one summer day
      We played in merry laughter,
    'Twas then she hid her heart away,
      I never found it after.

    So time slipped by until my call,
      For out of the professions
    I chose the Bar as best of all,
      And joined the Loamshire Sessions.

    The reason for it was that there
      Her father, short and pursy,
    Doled out scant justice in the chair
      And even scanter mercy.

    As Holofernes lost his head
      To Judith of Bethulia,
    So I fell victim, but instead
      Of Judith it was Julia.

    My speech left juries in the dark,
      Of Julia I was thinking,
    And once I heard a coarse remark
      About a fellow drinking.

    I practised verse in leisure time
      Both in and out of season,
    It was indubitably rhyme,
      Occasionally reason.

    I lacked the cheek to tell my woes,
      Had not concealment fed on
    My damask cheek, but left my nose
      With twice its share of red on?

    Too horrible was this suspense,
      At last, in desperation
    I went to Loamshire on pretence
      Of death of a relation.

    The Squire was beaming; "Julia's gone
      To London for a visit,
    But with a wedding coming on
      That's not surprising, is it?

    "Old friends like you will think, no doubt,
      That she is young to marry,
    But ever since she first came out,
      She's been engaged to Harry."




Her Letter in Chambers


    I sat by the fire and watched it blaze,
      And dreamed that she wrote me a letter,
    And for that dream to the end of my days
      To Fancy I owe myself debtor.

    Next day there came the postman's knock,
      The morning was bright and sunny,
    And showed me a sheaf of circulars, stock
      Attempts to get hold of my money.

    'Mid correspondence of this dull kind
      A dainty notelet lay hidden,
    It seemed as though it had half a mind
      To consider itself forbidden.

    The writing was like herself, complete,
      With a touch of her queenly bearing,
    So Venus wrote when she ordered in Crete
      Her doves to take her an airing.

    Inside it was just as promising,
      'Twas a pressing invitation
    To dine at her house to-morrow, and bring
      My book for her approbation.

    For I have published, be it confessed,
      A little volume of verses,
    And in the volume whatever is best
      The praise of herself rehearses.

    I sit by the fire, and again I dream
      A happier dream than ever,
    I see her beautiful eyes soft gleam
      As she murmurs, "How lovely--how clever!"

    Her criticism may be commonplace,
      But who can be angry after
    Now sweet with pity he marks her face,
      Now bright with impulsive laughter?




Law and Poetry


    In days of old did law and rime
      A common pathway follow,
    For Themis in the mythic time
      Was sister of Apollo.

    The Hindu statutes tripped in feet
      As daintily as Dryads,
    And law in Wales to be complete
      Was versified in triads.

    The wise Alfonso of Castile
      Composed his code in metre
    Thereby to make its flavour feel
      A little bit the sweeter.

    But law and rime were found to be
      A trifle inconsistent,
    And now in statutes poetry
      Is wholly non-existent.

    Still here and there some advocate
      Before his fellows know it
    Has had bestowed on him by fate
      The laurel of the poet.

    Let him who has been honoured so,
      In truth a _rara avis_,
    Find precedents in Cicero
      And our Chief Justice Davis;

    And more than all in Cino; he,
      So plaintive a narrator
    Of fair Selvaggia's cruelty,
      Won fame as a glossator.

    Let him remember Thomas More
      And Scott and Alciatus,
    And Grotius with an ample store
      Of most divine afflatus.

    But let him, if his bread and cheese
      Depend on his profession,
    Bethink him that the art of these
      Was not their sole possession.

    The stream that flows from Helicon
      Is scarcely a Pactolus,
    A richer prize is theirs who con
      Dull treatises on _dolus_.

    'Tis well that some bold spirits dare
      To cut themselves asunder
    From bonds of law like old Molière,
      While lawyers gaze in wonder.

    The world had been a poorer place
      Had Goethe lived by pleading
    Or Tasso won a hopeless case
      With Ariosto leading.




Somewhere


    Somewhere in a distant star,
    Cities of Cocaigne there are,
    Paradises of the Bar.

    Somewhere 'neath another sun
    Counsel cease to see the fun
    Lurking in a judge's pun.

    Somewhere courts are fair to see,
    Beauty joins utility,
    Ushers answer courteously.

    Somewhere there are bailiwicks
    Which for dock defences fix
    Nothing under three-five-six.

    Somewhere rises struggle sore
    For revisorships no more,
    Every shire has half a score.

    Somewhere educated thought
    Scientifically taught
    Cross-examines as it ought.

    Somewhere judgments are obeyed,
    Executions are not stayed,
    Fees are almost always paid.

    Somewhere County Councils press
    Banquets on the circuit mess,
    Fleshpots in the wilderness.

    Somewhere at Assizes grow
    Prosecutions row on row,
    Every man has six or so.

    Somewhere, eager but for right,
    Court and counsel cease to cite
    Pointless cases recondite.

    Somewhere headnotes give the ground
    Whereupon the judges found
    Judgments generally sound.

    Somewhere juries use their sense,
    Basing on the evidence
    Verdicts of intelligence.

    Somewhere rich embroideries
    Woven cunningly of lies
    Part in twain at truth's clear eyes.

    Somewhere justice grows from wrong,
    Till the right that suffered long
    Sings at last its triumph song.

    Somewhere--even in a place
    Peopled by a perfect race--
    One side holds a losing case.

    Somewhere since the world began
    Heaven hath made an honest man,
    Somewhere in Aldebaran.




Roman Law


    I am a "coach" in Roman law by fate,
      But Nature must have meant me for a poet,
    And while I struggle with a rule or date,
      Poetic thoughts intrude before I know it.

    The changing sunshine on the summer sea
      Drives forth the law of _cessio bonorum_,
    _Peculium castrense_ speaks to me
      Of Horace and his _Dulce et decorum_.

    I see the matine bee among the flowers
      Instead of _testamentum militare_,
    And wander far away from agent's powers
      To picture me again some Maud or Mary.

    In truth there is no sequence in the thought,
      Why should the title _De Societate_
    Suggest, not trading partners, as it ought,
      But visions of my last night's valse with Katie?

    But worse than this, when I have done my task,
      Stern law again asserts her domination,
    'Tis cruel 'mid the new-mown hay to bask,
      And find one's mind is running on novation;

    Or in the dusk, when glow-worms light the moss,
      To hear the distant voice of Philomela
    Expound the three varieties of _dos_
      And wax right eloquent about _tutela_.

    I had a little respite yesterday,
      Dining with one who well knew how to dine us,
    But when I slept, the charm soon fled away,
      I dreamed I was a _prætor peregrinus_.

    Dismasted in the deep of law I lie,
      A poor reward it is to stand confessed as
    The Virgil of the interdict _de vi_,
      The Petrarch of the _patria potestas_.




Bologna


    I go from colonnade to colonnade
      In streets that Dante trod, and past the towers
      Aslant toward heaven, and listen to the hours
    Chimed by the bells of choirs where Dante prayed.
    They cease; then lo! the foot of time seems stayed
      Five hundred years and more, I find me bowers
      Where sweet and noble ladies weave them flowers
    For one who reads Boccaccio in the shade.
    The cowlèd students halt by two and threes
      To hear the voice come thrilling through the trees,
      Then tear themselves away to themes more trite.
    Anon I mark the diligent hands that turn
      Unlovely parchment scrolls whereby to learn
      The beauty of inexorable right.




A Garden Party in the Temple


    On hospitable thoughts intent
    To me the Inner Temple sent
          An invitation,
    A garden party 'twas to be,
    And I accepted readily
          And with elation;
    Good reason too, but oft the seeds
    Of reason flower in senseless deeds.

    I stood as savage as a bear,
    For not a human being there
          Knew I from Adam
    I heard around in various tones,
    "_So_ glad to see you, Mr. Jones;"
          "Good morning, Madam."
    It seemed so painfully absurd
    To stand and never speak a word.

    I brought my doom upon myself,
    And there I was upon the shelf
          In melancholy.
    Why, say you, did I go at all?
    I once met Chloris at a ball,
          And in my folly
    I went and suffered all this pain
    In hopes to see her once again.

    Of strawberries a pound at least
    I ate, and made myself a beast
          With tea and sherry;
    And raspberries I ate and trembled,
    Until I felt that I resembled
          Myself a berry,
    But 'twas the berry that at school
    We used to call a gooseberry fool.

    The I. C. R. V.[F] band droned on,
    While guests had come and guests had gone
          Since my arrival;
    My brow grew gloomier with despair,
    And on it sat the guilty air
          Of a survival
    Of some remorse for ancient crimes
    Wrought in the pre-historic times.

    My seventh cup of tea was done,
    My seventh glass of wine begun,
          Then of her coming
    I was aware, nor shall forget
    How she and that brown sherry set
          My brains a-humming;
    Well should I be rewarded soon
    For all the weary afternoon.

    Her eyes looked vaguely into mine
    Without as much as half a sign
          Of recognition.
    My heart, my heart! the blow was sore,
    But you have often been before
          In this condition;
    As said the bard of old, those eyes
    Are not my only Paradise.[G]

[F] Inns of Court Rifle Volunteers.

[G] Dante, Par. xviii. 21.




The Spinning-House of the Future

    "Cada puta hile."--_Don Quixote_, i. 46.


    Without my dinner here I lie,
          And all because that proctor
    With her stout bull-dogs passed, and I
                      Mocked her.

    For Clara is at Girton too,
          That dragon is her tutor,
    I threatened once what I would do,
                      Shoot her.

    Her life by Clara's tears was saved,
          Wherefore she doth detest me,
    And hither hungry and unshaved
                      Pressed me.

    I would that I could have commenced
          An action 'gainst that devil,
    Like that once brought by Kemp against
                      Neville.[H]

    To her I owe the statute framed
          That one against it sinning
    Should dwell within the house that's named
                      Spinning.

    Ah me! it runs in sections three:
          Who speaks to Girton student
    Is fined to teach him how to be
                      Prudent.

    Who loves a Girton girl must do
          Twelve months on bread and water,
    From a digestive point of view
                      Slaughter.

    Who kisses her commits a crime
          By hanging expiated,
    And she in tears must spend her time
                      Gated.

    Would that at Oxford I had been,
          At Balliol or at Merton,
    And then I never should have seen
                      Girton.

    Go down I must, no more shall I
          And Clara cross the same bridge;
    Still, Granta, art thou her and my
                      Cambridge.

    Some day on this her eyes may light,
          This doggerel stiff and jointless,
    And she may own it is not quite
                      Pointless.

[H] An action brought in 1861 by a dressmaker at Cambridge against the
Vice-Chancellor for false imprisonment in the Spinning-House (the
University prison). The Court of Common Pleas held _inter alia_ that no
action lies against a judge for a judicial decision on a matter within
his jurisdiction (10 Common Bench Reports, New Series, 523).




How we found our Verdict


    We sat in the jury-box, twelve were we all,
    And the clock was just pointing to ten in the hall,
    His Lordship he bowed to the jury, and we
    Bowed back to his Lordship as gravely as he.

    The case of _De Weller_ v. _Jones_ was the first,
    And we all settled down and prepared for the worst
    When old Smithers, Q.C., began slowly to preach
    Of a promise of marriage and action for breach.

    A barmaid the plaintiff was, wondrous the skill
    Wherewith she was wont her tall tankards to fill,
    The defendant, a publican, sought for his bride
    Such a paragon, urged by professional pride.

    But the course of true love ran no smoother for her
    Than the Pas de Calais or the bark of a fir,
    The defendant discovered a widow with gold
    In the bank and the plaintiff was left in the cold.

    An hour Smithers spoke, and he said that the heart
    Of the plaintiff at Jones's fell touch flew apart,
    But a cheque for a thousand might help to repair
    The destruction effected by love and despair.

    Miss de Weller was called, and in ladylike tones
    She described all the injury suffered from Jones,
    How he called her at first "Angelina," and this
    Soon cooled to "Miss Weller," and lastly to "Miss."

    But the jury were shaken a little when Gore
    Cross-examined about her engagements before,
    For Jones was the sixth of the strings to her bow
    And with five other verdicts she solaced her woe.

    Re-examined by Smithers, she won us again,
    For the tears of a maid are a terror to men,
    Then his Lordship awoke from his nap and explained
    How love that is frequent is love that is feigned.

    Miss de Weller looked daggers, and under the paint
    Of her cheeks she grew pale and fell down in a faint,
    She played her trump-card in the late afternoon,
    For damages satisfy girls who can swoon.

    Till she fainted most thought that a farthing would do,
    Though I was in favour of pounds--one or two;
    But after the faint--and she _was_ so well dressed--
    At a hundred the void in her heart was assessed.




A Greek Libel


    ARCHILOCHUS.

    Neobule, yesternight
    Saw I thee in beauty dight,
    On thy head a myrtle spray
    Cast its shadow as the day
    By the stars was put to flight.
    Twining on thy temples white
    Roses gave the myrtle light,
    Sign thou wilt not say me nay,
                  Neobule.
    Loosened from its coilèd height
    Streamed thy hair in thy despite
    On thy shoulders soft to stray
    And to bid the bard essay
    Never but of thee to write,
                  Neobule.


    NEOBULE.

    Sorry poet, who dost dare
    Cast bold glances on my hair,
    Let thy most presumptuous eyes
    Seek another enterprise,
    Ceasing now to linger there.
    Hearken, I can tell thee where
    Grow the bushes that will spare
    Rods to teach thee humbler guise,
                  Sorry poet.
    Know I not that I am fair?
    Need thy halting verse declare
    What my mirror daily cries?
    Rid me of thy silly sighs,
    Rid me of thy hateful stare,
                  Sorry poet.


    ARCHILOCHUS.

    Neobule, poets see
    Dreams of things that are to be.
    Vengeance is the poet's trade,
    Come, iambus, to my aid
    'Gainst the fools who scoff at me.
    All the world will laugh with glee
    When they mark my verses free
    Grasp thee like a pillory,
    And thy scorn with scorn repaid,
                  Neobule.
    E'en in death thou canst not flee
    From the doom the Fates decree.
    When my satire's keenest blade
    Cuts thee to the heart, fond maid,
    I shall laugh, but what of thee,
                  Neobule?




Le Temps Passé


    Those brave old days when King Abuse did reign
    We sigh for, but we shall not see again.
    Then Eldon sowed the seed of equity
    That grew to bounteous harvest, and with glee
    A Bar of modest numbers shared the grain.
    Then lived the pleaders who could issues feign,
    Who blushed not to aver that France or Spain
    Was in the Ward of Chepe;[I] no more can be
                          Those brave old days.

    O'er pauper settlements men fought amain,
    And golden guineas followed in their train,
    John Doe then flourished like a lusty tree,
    And Richard Roe brought many a noble fee,
    We mourn in unremunerated pain
                          Those brave old days.

[I] See, for instance, the well-known case of _Mostyn_ v. _Fabrigas_, in
which the plaintiff declared that the defendant on the 1st of September,
in the year 1771, made an assault upon the said plaintiff at Minorca, to
wit, at London, in the parish of St. Mary-le-bow, in the Ward of Cheap.




Lawn Tennis in the Temple Gardens


    Not in contempt but to our sport inclined
    Smile on us, shades of Judges short and tall
    Portrayed on windows of the Temple Hall;
    There was a time that ye grave thoughts resigned,
    Then, warm with sack, the Serjeants' hearts waxed kind,
    In mirth Lords Keepers danced the galliard all,
                          Not in contempt.

    Of pleasures past the shadows here we find,
    Gay strife on brighter swards we thus recall,
    Where maiden laughter winged the flying ball;
    Declare us, fair ones, with a merry mind
                          Not in contempt.




A Ballade of Lost Law


    (_Spirit of Lord Eldon speaks_)

    This England is gone staring mad,
    She hath abolished Chancery,[J]
    See the long lines of suitors, sad
    To find themselves unwontedly
    After one day of trial free.
    Pleading and seals have gone their way.
    "I know," said I, "that after me
    Too quickly comes the evil day."


    (_Spirit of Lord Lyndhurst speaks_)

    I was Chief Baron, and I had
    A Court of Law and Equity,[K]
    The Courts at Westminster were clad
    With ancient glory fair to see.
    Now County Courts have come to be
    Exalted high on our decay,
    And every whit as good as we;
    Too quickly comes the evil day.


    (_Shade of Butler speaks_)

    In days of yore we used to pad
    Our deeds with words of certainty;
    Alas! that now the office lad
    Is qualified to grant in fee!
    Lost is our old supremacy,
    Lost is the delicate display
    Of learning on _pur autre vie_;
    Too quickly comes the evil day.


    L'ENVOI

    (_The Three in Chorus_)

    Thurlow, to thee we bend the knee,
    When law was law, then men were gay,
    'Tis down with port and up with tea,
    Too quickly comes the evil day.

[J] The Court of Chancery was merged in the High Court of Justice in
1875.

[K] In the days of Lord Lyndhurst the old Court of Exchequer had
equitable as well as common law jurisdiction.




Com[oe]dia Juris


    Est omne jus forense quasi com[oe]dia;
    Hic advocatus maximas partes agit
    Laudatus undique a procuratoribus,
    Labore vocis redditus ditissimus;
    Cui brevia nil forensis et quaestus valent
    Silenter ille spectat, at pro præmio
    Fruitur quietus optime com[oe]dia.




Cases




Cases


MYLWARD _v._ WELDON

    [The plaintiff was committed to the Fleet Prison on Feb. 8, 1596, by
    order of the Lord Keeper, for drawing a replication of sixscore
    sheets containing much impertinent matter which might well have been
    contained in sixteen. On Feb. 10 the Lord Keeper ordered that on the
    following Saturday the Warden of the Fleet should cut a hole through
    the replication, and put the plaintiff's head through the hole and
    let it hang about his shoulders with the written side outwards, and
    lead the plaintiff bareheaded and barefaced round about Westminster
    Hall, and show him at the bar of all the courts, and so back to the
    Fleet.--Abridged from Spence's _Equitable Jurisdiction_, vol. i. p.
    376.]

    'Gainst Weldon Mylward files a bill,
    But doth his replication fill
    With scandalous and idle matter,
    That would disgrace the maddest hatter.
                        Woe is me for Mylward!

    'Twas sixscore sheets, it might have been
    Contained, and amply, in sixteen;
    So after that the court hath risen
    Must Mylward Fleetward go to prison.
                        Woe is me for Mylward!

    And two days afterwards 'tis meet
    That by the Warden of the Fleet
    He be led on in slow progression
    Through every court that sits in session.
                        Woe is me for Mylward!

    The pleading writ with words so fair
    Must Mylward like a tabard wear,
    A hole therein, the Warden cuts it,
    A head put through it, Mylward puts it.
                        Woe is me for Mylward!

    The bar makes merry at his shame;
    What careth he? He winneth fame,
    Three hundred years his reputation
    Hath rested on that replication.
                        Woe is me for Mylward!


HAMPDEN _v._ WALSH

(1 Queen's Bench Division, 189)

    "Five hundred pounds as stake I'll lay,"
    Says Hampden, "that by such a day
    No man of science proves to me
    That earth not flat but round must be;
    The earth is flat, and flats are they."
    The sum Walsh holds right willingly;
    But Wallace by philosophy
    Proves roundness, and would take away
            Five hundred pounds.

    "Proof me no proofs," quoth Hampden, "Nay,
    Let Wallace get it if he may,
    I'll sue Walsh for it." So sues he.
    "Let Wallace," hold the judges three,
    "Take nought, let Walsh to Hampden pay
            Five hundred pounds."


WILLIS _v._ THE BISHOP OF OXFORD

(2 Probate Division, 192)

    Aid me, Muses! my endeavour is to sing a woful song,
    How a very learned bishop in the Arches Court went wrong.
    Aid me, for _duplex querela_ is an uninviting theme,
    And the practice of the Arches raises no poetic dream.
    'Tis the Reverend Child Willis, child in name but not in age,
    Comes he to the Court of Arches burning with a noble rage,
    Filing his _duplex querela_, claiming for himself thereby
    Vicarage of Drayton Parslow, or to know the reason why.
    "Reason why?" the bishop answers; "that is not so far to seek.
    Little Latin have you, Willis, innocent are you of Greek.
    You were specially examined by my good Archdeacon Pott;
    He reported to me promptly, 'Greek and Latin all forgot,
    _Non idoneus_ is Willis, _minus et sufficiens_,
    He may have a _sanum corpus_, but he lacks a _sana mens_.'"
    "Nay," says Willis, "such an answer is but trifling with the court,
    I have preached a Latin sermon, and the classics are my forte,
    You must name the books I failed in, you must give me every chance
    Of a fresh examination at the hands of Lord Penzance."
    Lord Penzance supported Willis: "Bishop, you must file," said he,
    "Some more tangible objection, some less vague and general plea.
    As it stands I cannot gather what it is you ploughed him in,
    Whether Hellenistic aorists or the Latin word for sin."
    But alas! the world has never known as yet what Willis did,
    In the breast of the Archdeacon still it lies a secret hid.
    Was his Latin prose defective? Did his style of writing show
    More resemblance to Tertullian than to Tullius Cicero?
    Were his dates a little shaky? Could it, could it be that he
    Confidently made Augustine flourish at a date B.C.?
    None will know save Pott, Archdeacon, for alas! the patroness
    Showed no mercy to Child Willis in the day of his distress.
    She revoked the presentation, leaving Willis in the lurch,
    One of undisputed learning preached in Drayton Parslow church.
    Doubly barren was his triumph, it was not a twelve-month ere
    Death set up _his_ Court of Arches, Willis did not triumph there.


DASHWOOD _v._ JERMYN

(12 Chancery Division, 776)

    Captain Dashwood, who had been
    In the service of the Queen,
    Sick of "Eyes front" and "Attention,"
    Came to London on his pension.
    At the "Portland" as he stayed,
    Firm the friendship that he made
    With one William Richards, who
    Put up at the "Portland" too.
    Passed six years, then he was wrapped in
    Love's embraces, vanquished captain!
    "Yes," he cried, "I will; no bar shall
    Stop my wedding Edith Marshall."
    But there was a bar, 'twas that
    He was poorer than a rat;
    Indian pensions do not run
    More than just enough for one.
    Edith, too, had not a cent,
    Who would pay the rates and rent?
    Two more years, and Richards moved
    (He perchance had sometime loved),
    Promised them an income clear,
    'Twas five hundred pounds a year
    For his life; when he was dead,
    Then ten thousand pounds instead.
    This to Dashwood in a letter
    Wrote he, deeming it was better
    They should marry soon while he
    Lived their happiness to see.
    'Twas a modest sum, but marriage
    May be blest without a carriage,
    Forty pounds a month and more
    Keep the wolf from near the door.
    So they wed for worse or better,
    On the faith of Richards' letter.
    Scarcely was a quarter's payment
    Due when mourning was their raiment.
    Richards died. Alas! no cash would
    Find its way to Captain Dashwood.
    Dashwood's head began to swim--
    Not a shilling left to him!
    "Ha, I'll have it still," cried he;
    "Justice dwells in Chancery."
    So the case was straightway taken
    To the court of V.-C. Bacon.
    Vainly Dashwood cash expended
    The executors defended,
    Claiming that what Richards wrote
    Was not worth a five-pound note;
    First because the dead testator
    Well, not wisely, loved the "cratur,"
    More than that, had often been
    In delirium tremens seen;
    Secondly, because he signed
    When he did not know his mind;
    Third, because pollicitation
    Is not good consideration.
    Law, of justice independent,
    Gave its judgment for defendant.
    Poorer than he was at first,
    That unhappy plaintiff cursed,
    With a special satisfaction
    Cursed the day he brought his action.
    Would that he'd in India tarried!
    Would that he had never married!
    He, alas, is tied for life
    Pauper to a pauper wife,
    Scarce consoled that on his name
    Equity reports shower fame,
    Bearing down to endless ages
    Dashwood's story on their pages.


_EX PARTE_ JONES

(18 Chancery Division, 109)

    Oh for the wily infant who married the widow and made
    Profit of coke and of breeze, and never a penny he paid!
    Oh for the Corporation of Birmingham cheated and snared,
    Taking orders for coke that the widow and infant prepared!
    Oh for the Court of Appeal, and oh for Lords Justices three!
    Oh for the Act that infants from contracts may shake themselves free!
    Oh for the common law with its store of things old and new!
    Birmingham coke is good and good Coke upon Littleton too.


FINLAY _v._ CHIRNEY

(20 Queen's Bench Division, 494)

    When love-sick man descends to folly
      And gets engaged, he must not stray,
    The jury takes the part of Polly,
      And if he jilts her, he must pay.

    The only way his fault to cover,
      From damages and costs to fly,
    To leave his jilted lady-lover
      Without an action is--to die![L]

[L] The decision was to the effect that in most cases an action for
breach of promise of marriage does not survive against the
representatives of the promiser.


POLLARD _v._ PHOTOGRAPHIC COMPANY

(40 Chancery Division, 345)

    "Shall I take your photograph, my pretty maid?"
    "You may if you like, kind sir," she said.

    "Do you like your photograph, my pretty maid?"
    "It is more than flattering, sir," she said.

    "I'll publish your photograph, my pretty maid."
    "Indeed but you won't, kind sir," she said.

    "As a Christmas card, my pretty maid."
    "The very idea, kind sir!" she said.

    "But what if I've done it, my pretty maid?"
    "I'll get an injunction, sir," she said.

    "The law is with you, my pretty maid,"
    The learned judge of the Chancery said.

    "You have proved the negative, my pretty maid,
    A difficult thing in law," he said.


THE MINNEAPOLIS CASE

(_Tried in Minnesota in 1892_)

    Kind reader, tarry here, nor miss
    The law of Minneapolis.
    There was a carpenter called Brown,
    A citizen of that great town,
    Who stood his "inexpressive she"
    A dollar's worth of comedy.
    Was it a Gaiety burlesque,
    Or labour of Norwegian desk?
    Or did they spout in stagey tones
    Morality by H. A. Jones?
    Or tear romance to rags and set it
    In heavy platitudes by Pettit?
    I know not, and it matters not,
    The subject I have clean forgot.
    Sufficient that the pair did sit
    In expectation in the pit,
    An expectation not fulfilled,
    'Twas otherwise by fortune willed.
    Before this loving couple sat
    In solitary state a hat--
    A hat, I say, for in their wonder
    They never noticed what was under,
    The wearer must have been a "human,"
    But might have been a man or woman.
    'Twas like a mountain crowned with trees
    Amid the pathless Pyrenees,
    Or like a garden planned by Paxton,
    Or colophon designed by Caxton,
    So intricate the work; and flowers
    Were trained to climb its soaring towers,
    Convolvulus and candytuft,
    And 'mid them water-wagtails stuffed.
    Such splendour never yet, I wis,
    Had shone in Minneapolis.
    But Brown was in a sore dilemma,
    A dollar he had paid for Emma
    To see a play, and not a hat;
    A dollar, it was dear at that.
    And Emma--disappointment racked her,
    She never saw a single actor.
    So Brown, with visage thunder-black,
    Demanded both his dollars back.
    The man who took the cash said, "Sonny,
    Our rule is not to give back money.
    But if you'll come another night,
    Maybe you'll get a better sight."
    So Brown went home and nursed his sorrow,
    His writ he issued on the morrow.
    A hundred dollars was his claim,
    And the young lady claimed the same.
    The case was argued, on revision
    Of pleadings, this was the decision:
    "The theatre's defence is bad,
    Brown paid for what he never had,
    He paid when in the pit he sat
    To see a play and not a hat.
    To bring defendants to their senses,
    I find for plaintiffs with expenses."
    _Justitiæ columna sis_,
    Wise judge of Minneapolis!


COMMONWEALTH _v._ MARZYNSKI

(21 New England Reports, 228 [Massachusetts, 1893])

    [On a complaint for keeping open a tobacconist's shop on Sunday,
    contrary to the law of Massachusetts, it was held that the court
    will take judicial notice that tobacco and cigars are not drugs and
    medicines, and will exclude the testimony of a witness who offers
    evidence that they are.]

    Against the statutes of the Old Bay State
      Marzynski on a Sunday stood behind
      His counter, well content his gain to find
      In pipes not pills, cigars not carbonate.
    From breakfast till 'twas dusk at half-past eight
      Tobacco cheered this hardened sinner's mind,
      The price of it his pockets, disinclined
      To add their dime to the collection plate.
    The State Attorney claimed the penalty;
      "Cigars are no cigars," said the defence,
      "But drugs, and we have witnesses to prove it."
    "Cigars to be cigars judicially
      We notice, and reject the evidence."
      So said the Court, and spat, and nought could move it.




Translations




Translations


GREEK ANTHOLOGY


X. 48

    Woe to the house whose mistress was a slave!
    So say old saws, my own in aid I crave;
    Woe to the court whose judge once spake for fees,
    Though he were readier than Isocrates!
    An advocate that pleaded once for pelf
    Scarce on the bench forgets his former self.

                                  _Palladas._


XI. 75

    This Olympicus of old
    Had, Sebastus, I am told
    Quite his share of upper gear,
    Nose and chin and eye and ear.
    All he lost, and by his fist--
    He became a pugilist.
    Loss of members with it drew
    Loss of patrimony too.
    When his birthright he would claim,
    Into court his brother came
    With a portrait, saying, "Thus
    Looked the old Olympicus."
    None could any likeness see,
    Disinherited was he.

                                  _Lucillus._


XI. 141

    A pig, a goat, an ox I lost:
    I want them back at any cost,
    And so retained, O woful fate!
    Menecles for my advocate.
    But tell me, will you, what have these
    In common with Othryades?
    The heroes of Thermopylæ
    Have nought to do with theft from me.
    Against Eutychides I bring
    My action for a trivial thing.
    Let Xerxes rest a little space,
    And leave the Spartans in their place.
    For if you don't put all this by
    I'll go into the streets and cry,
    "The voice of Menecles is big,
    But what about my stolen pig?"

                                  _Lucillus._

    [This Epigram is probably an imitation of that of Martial, on p.
    90.]


XI. 143

    Pluto rejected at his gate
    The soul of Mark the advocate;
    "No, Cerberus my dog," quoth he,
    "Will make you pleasant company;
    But if within you needs must go,
    Practise on poet Melito,
    And you shall have, if he won't do,
    Tityus and Ixion too.
    You'll be to hell the sorest ill
    Of all that hell contains, until
    There come to us worse barbarisms
    When Rufus speaks his solecisms."

                                  _Lucillus._


XI. 147

    So soon hath Asiaticus
      The gift of eloquence achieved?
    It was in Thebes it happened thus,
      The story well may be believed.

                                  _Ammianus._


XI. 151

    The statue of an advocate, as like as like can be.
    And why? The statue cannot speak a word, no more could he.

                                  _Anon._


XI. 152

    Paul, dost thou wish to make thy boy
      An advocate like these his betters?
    Then let him not his time employ
      To useless ends in learning letters.

                                  _Ammianus._


XI. 251

    The parties were as deaf as deaf could be,
    The judge was far the deafest of the three.
    Said plaintiff, "Sir, I ask for five months' rent."
    Defendant, "Grinding corn all night I spent."
    "Why," quoth the judge, "dispute? Your mother's claim
    Is good, and you must both support the dame."

                                  _Nicarchus._


XI. 350

    Remember justice and her yoke, and know
    That 'gainst the wicked votes of "Guilty" go.
    Thou trustest in thy cunning speech, thy power
    Of speaking words that vary with the hour.
    Hope what thou wilt, thy trifling tricks are vain,
    Thou canst not make the path of law less plain.

                                  _Agathias._


XI. 376

    Once to Diodorus came a client in a state of doubt,
    And to that most learned counsel thus he set the matter out:
    "Alpha Beta found a slave-girl who had run away from me:
    To a slave of his he wed her, though she was my property,
    Well he knew she was my chattel; she has had a child or two;
    Now I cannot tell for certain whose the children are, can you?"
    Diodorus thought, consulted all authorities on "Slave,"
    To his client turned his furrowed brows and slowly answer gave:
    "'Tis to you or to the other who, you say, has done you wrong,
    That the children of the handmaid rightfully of course belong,
    Your best plan will be the matter in the proper court to place,
    So you'll get a good opinion whether you have any case."

                                  _Agathias._


PLAN, 193

    "Good Hermes, only just one cabbage plant."
    "Stop, stop, my thieving traveller, you can't."
    "What, grudge me one poor cabbage! is it so?"
    "Nay, I don't grudge it, but the law says no.
    The law says, Keep your itching palms, d'ye see,
    From meddling with another's property."
    "Well, this beats anything I ever saw!
    Hermes against a thief invokes the law."

                                  _Philippus._


APPENDIX, 385

    Pupils seven of Aristides,
          Tell me, how are ye?
    Four of you are walls, beside is
          Nought but benches three.

    _Another Version_

    Seven pupils of the rhetor
          Aristides, how are ye?
    Seven! _Hoc et nihil præter_,
          Four are walls and benches three.

                                  _Anon._


MARTIAL


_In Caium_

    "Lend me sestertia, Caius, only twenty,
    'Tis no great thing for you who roll in plenty."
    He was an old companion, and his coffers
    Were full enough to stand such friendly offers.
    "Go, plead in court," said he; "'tis pleadings pay us."
    "I want your money, not your counsel, Caius."

                                  _Martial_, ii. 30.


_In Causidicum_

    'Tis said that some bold advocate
      Has dared to criticise my poem,
    His name I have not learned, his fate
      Will be a warning when I know him.

                                  _Martial_, v. 33.


_In Postumum Causidicum_

    No claim for trespass do I bring,
    Or homicide, or poisoning.
    I claim that by my neighbour's theft
    Of she-goats three I was bereft.
    The judge of course wants evidence,
    But you go wandering far from thence,
    And with a mighty voice declaim
    Of Mithridates and the shame
    Of Cannæ, and the lies of old
    That Punic politicians told.
    And why should you pass Sylla by,
    The Marii and Mucii?
    When, Postumus, d'ye hope to reach
    My stolen she-goats in your speech?

                                  _Martial_, vi. 19.


_In Cinnam_

    Is this advocacy, Cinna, this a type of lawyers' powers,
    This immense oration, Cinna, some nine words in some ten hours?
    Waterclocks I grant you asked for, Cinna, yes, you called for four;
    There you stopped, such wealth of silence, Cinna, ne'er was seen
              before.

                                  _Martial_, viii. 7.


THE COURT OF REASON

    A thousand doubts and pleadings in a day
      Are filed in Empress Reason's court supreme
      By angry Love--his eyes with anger gleam.
      "Which of us twain hath been more faithful, say.
    'Tis all through me that Cino can display
      The sail of fame on life's unhappy stream."
      "Thee," quoth I, "root of all my woe I deem,
      I found what gall beneath thy sweetness lay."
    Then he: "Ah, traitorous and truant slave!
      Are these the thanks thou renderest, ingrate,
      For giving thee a maid without a peer?"
    "Thy left," cried I, "slew what thy right hand gave."
      "Not so," said he. The judge, "Your wrath abate.
      I must have time to give true judgment here."

                                  _Cino da Pistoia._

    [Imitated by Petrarch in the conclusion of the Canzone, _Quell'
    antico mio dolce empio signore_.]


TO ROME

    Tell me, proud Rome, why dost these edicts read,
      These many laws by prince or people made,
      Or answers by the prudent duly weighed,
      When now thou canst the world no longer lead?
    Thou readest, sad one, of each ancient deed
      Where thy unconquered sons their might displayed,
      Afric and Egypt at thy feet were laid,
      But slavery, not rule, is now thy meed.
    What boots it that thou wast of old a queen,
      And over foreign nations heldest rein,
      If thou and all thy fame no more exist?
    Forgive me, God, if all my days have been
      Devoted to man's laws, unjust and vain
      Unless Thy law within the heart be fixed.

                                  _Cino da Pistoia._


JUSTICE

    Ah! justice is a virtue bepraised and full of worth,
    It castigates the sinner, and peoples all the earth,
    And kings with care should guard it--instead they now forget
    The gem that is most precious in all the coronet.
    Some think they may do justice by cruelty, I wist;
    But 'tis an evil counsel, for justice must consist
    In showing deeds of mercy, in knowledge of the truth,
    And executing judgment it executes with ruth.

                                  _Pedro Lopez de Ayala._


THE POET AND THE ADVOCATE


    Glory and gain thus mixed distract the thought,
    We owe to honour all, to fortune nought;
    The poet, like the soldier, scorns for pay
    Peruvian gold, but seeks the wreath of bay.
    How is the advocate the poet's peer?
    The poet's glory is complete and clear;
    He far outlives the advocate's renown,
    Patru is e'en by Scarron's name weighed down.
    The bar of Greece and Rome you point me out,
    A bar that trained great men, I do not doubt,
    For then chicane with language void of sense
    Had not deformed the law and eloquence.
    Purge the tribune of all this monstrous growth,
    I mount it, and my soul will sink, though loth,
    Will yield to fortune and will speak in prose.
    But since reform in this so slowly grows,
    Leave me my tastes, for I aspire to be
    By verse ennobled to posterity,
    To hold first place in arts above the law,
    More grave and noble than it ever saw.
    Fraud in this age of ours unpunished can
    Tread down the equity so dear to man.
    Can you for spirits just and generous find
    A fairer cause to plead before mankind?
    Mother or stepmother let Fortune be,
    The theatre and not the bar for me;
    For client virtue, truth for counsel's wage;
    For judge the present and the coming age.

                                  _Piron_, _La Métromanie_, Act iii. Sc. 7.


MORRISON AND GIBB, PRINTERS, EDINBURGH.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Briefless Ballads and Legal Lyrics, by 
James Williams

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BRIEFLESS BALLADS AND LEGAL LYRICS ***

***** This file should be named 25281-8.txt or 25281-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/5/2/8/25281/

Produced by Bryan Ness, Stephen Blundell and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive/American Libraries.)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
