The Project Gutenberg EBook of The 1999 CIA Factbook, by 
United States.  Central Intelligence Agency.

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The 1999 CIA Factbook

Author: United States.  Central Intelligence Agency.

Release Date: December 31, 2008 [EBook #27676]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 1999 CIA FACTBOOK ***




Produced by Al Haines




The World Factbook 1999


In general, information available as of 1 January 1999 was used in the
preparation of this edition.

The World Factbook is prepared by the Central Intelligence Agency for
the use of US Government officials, and the style, format, coverage,
and content are designed to meet their specific requirements.
Information is provided by the Bureau of the Census (Department of
Commerce), Bureau of Labor Statistics (Department of Labor), Central
Intelligence Agency, Council of Managers of National Antarctic
Programs, Defense Intelligence Agency (Department of Defense), Defense
Threat Reduction Agency (Department of Defense), Department of State,
Fish and Wildlife Service (Department of the Interior), Maritime
Administration (Department of Transportation), National Imagery and
Mapping Agency (Department of Defense), Antarctic Information Program
(National Science Foundation), Naval Facilities Engineering Command
(Department of Defense), Office of Insular Affairs (Department of the
Interior), Office of Naval Intelligence (Department of Defense), US
Board on Geographic Names (Department of the Interior), and other
public and private sources.

The Factbook is in the public domain. Accordingly, it may be copied
freely without permission of the Central Intelligence Agency (CIA). The
official seal of the CIA, however, may NOT be copied without permission
as required by the CIA Act of 1949 (50 U.S.C. section 403m). Misuse of
the official seal of the CIA could result in civil and criminal
penalties.

Comments and queries are welcome and may be addressed to:

Central Intelligence Agency
Attn.: Office of Public Affairs
Washington, DC 20505
Telephone: [1] (703) 482-0623
FAX: [1] (703) 482-1739



=====================================================================



Country Listings


A

Afghanistan
Albania
Algeria
American Samoa
Andorra
Angola
Anguilla
Antarctica
Antigua and Barbuda
Arctic Ocean
Argentina
Armenia
Aruba
Ashmore and Cartier Islands
Atlantic Ocean
Australia
Austria
Azerbaijan


B

Bahamas, The
Bahrain
Baker Island
Bangladesh
Barbados
Bassas da India
Belarus
Belgium
Belize
Benin
Bermuda
Bhutan
Bolivia
Bosnia and Herzegovina
Botswana
Bouvet Island
Brazil
British Indian Ocean Territory
British Virgin Islands
Brunei
Bulgaria
Burkina Faso
Burma
Burundi


C

Cambodia
Cameroon
Canada
Cape Verde
Cayman Islands
Central African Republic
Chad
Chile
China
Christmas Island
Clipperton Island
Cocos (Keeling) Islands
Colombia
Comoros
Congo, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Republic of the
Cook Islands
Coral Sea Islands
Costa Rica
Cote d'Ivoire
Croatia
Cuba
Cyprus
Czech Republic


D

Denmark
Djibouti
Dominica
Dominican Republic


E

Ecuador
Egypt
El Salvador
Equatorial Guinea
Eritrea
Estonia
Ethiopia
Europa Island


F

Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
Faroe Islands
Fiji
Finland
France
French Guiana
French Polynesia
French Southern and Antarctic Lands


G

Gabon
Gambia, The
Gaza Strip
Georgia
Germany
Ghana
Gibraltar
Glorioso Islands
Greece
Greenland
Grenada
Guadeloupe
Guam
Guatemala
Guernsey
Guinea
Guinea-Bissau
Guyana


H

Haiti
Heard Island and McDonald Islands
Holy See (Vatican City)
Honduras
Hong Kong
Howland Island
Hungary


I

Iceland
India
Indian Ocean
Indonesia
Iran
Iraq
Ireland
Israel
Italy


J

Jamaica
Jan Mayen
Japan
Jarvis Island
Jersey
Johnston Atoll
Jordan
Juan de Nova Island


K

Kazakhstan
Kenya
Kingman Reef
Kiribati
Korea, North
Korea, South
Kuwait
Kyrgyzstan


L

Laos
Latvia
Lebanon
Lesotho
Liberia
Libya
Liechtenstein
Lithuania
Luxembourg


M

Macau
Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Madagascar
Malawi
Malaysia
Maldives
Mali
Malta
Man, Isle of
Marshall Islands
Martinique
Mauritania
Mauritius
Mayotte
Mexico
Micronesia, Federated States of
Midway Islands
Moldova
Monaco
Mongolia
Montserrat
Morocco
Mozambique


N

Namibia
Nauru
Navassa Island
Nepal
Netherlands
Netherlands Antilles
New Caledonia
New Zealand
Nicaragua
Niger
Nigeria
Niue
Norfolk Island
Northern Mariana Islands
Norway



O

Oman



P

Pacific Ocean
Pakistan
Palau
Palmyra Atoll
Panama
Papua New Guinea
Paracel Islands
Paraguay
Peru
Philippines
Pitcairn Islands
Poland
Portugal
Puerto Rico


Q

Qatar


R

Reunion
Romania
Russia
Rwanda


S

Saint Helena
Saint Kitts and Nevis
Saint Lucia
Saint Pierre and Miquelon
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
Samoa
San Marino
Sao Tome and Principe
Saudi Arabia
Senegal
Serbia and Montenegro
Seychelles
Sierra Leone
Singapore
Slovakia
Slovenia
Solomon Islands
Somalia
South Africa
South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
Spain
Spratly Islands
Sri Lanka
Sudan
Suriname
Svalbard
Swaziland
Sweden
Switzerland
Syria


T

Taiwan entry follows Zimbabwe
Tajikistan
Tanzania
Thailand
Togo
Tokelau
Tonga
Trinidad and Tobago
Tromelin Island
Tunisia
Turkey
Turkmenistan
Turks and Caicos Islands
Tuvalu


U

Uganda
Ukraine
United Arab Emirates
United Kingdom
United States
Uruguay
Uzbekistan


V

Vanuatu
Venezuela
Vietnam
Virgin Islands


W

Wake Atoll
Wallis and Futuna
West Bank
Western Sahara
World


Y

Yemen


Z

Zaire (see Democratic Republic of the Congo)
Zambia
Zimbabwe



Taiwan



=====================================================================



Appendixes


A. Abbreviations

B. United Nations System

C. International Organizations and Groups

D. Selected International Environmental Agreements

E. Weights and Measures

F. Cross-Reference List of Country Data Codes

G. Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic Data Codes

H. Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names



=====================================================================



Notes and Definitions


In addition to the updating of information, the following
changes have been made in this edition of The World
Factbook. The name Wake Island has been officially changed
to Wake Atoll. The Historical perspective and Current issues
entries in the Introduction category have been combined into
a new Background entry. It appears in only a few country
profiles at this time. There are new entries on Population
below poverty line, Household income or consumption by
percentage share, Electricity--production by source (fossil
fuel, hydro, nuclear, other), Electricity--exports, and
Electricity--imports. A new reference map of Kosovo has been
included and terrain has been added to most of the reference
maps.

Abbreviations: This information is included in Appendix A:
Abbreviations, which includes all abbreviations and acronyms
used in the Factbook, with their expansions.

Administrative divisions: This entry generally gives the
numbers, designatory terms, and first-order administrative
divisions as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names
(BGN). Changes that have been reported but not yet acted on
by BGN are noted.

Age structure: This entry provides the distribution of the
population according to age. Information is included by sex
and age group (0-14 years, 15-64 years, 65 years and over).
The age structure of a population affects a nation's key
socioeconomic issues. Countries with young populations (high
percentage under age 15) need to invest more in schools,
while countries with older populations (high percentage ages
65 and over) need to invest more in the health sector. The
age structure can also be used to help predict potential
political issues. For example, the rapid growth of a young
adult population unable to find employment can lead to
unrest.

Agriculture--products: This entry is a rank ordering of major
crops and products starting with the most important.

Airports: This entry gives the total number of airports. The
runway(s) may be paved (concrete or asphalt surfaces) or
unpaved (grass, dirt, sand, or gravel surfaces), but must be
usable. Not all airports have facilities for refueling,
maintenance, or air traffic control.

Airports--with paved runways: This entry gives the total
number of airports with paved runways (concrete or asphalt
surfaces). For airports with more than one runway, only the
longest runway is included according to the following five
groups --(1) over 3,047 m, (2) 2,438 to 3,047 m, (3) 1,524 to
2,437 m, (4) 914 to 1,523 m, and (5) under 914 m. Only
airports with usable runways are included in this listing.
Not all airports have facilities for refueling, maintenance,
or air traffic control.

Airports--with unpaved runways: This entry gives the total
number of airports with unpaved runways (grass, dirt, sand,
or gravel surfaces). For airports with more than one runway,
only the longest runway is included according to the
following five groups--(1) over 3,047 m, (2) 2,438 to 3,047
m, (3) 1,524 to 2,437 m, (4) 914 to 1,523 m, and (5) under
914 m. Only airports with usable runways are included in
this listing. Not all airports have facilities for
refueling, maintenance, or air traffic control.

Appendixes: This section includes Factbook-related material
by topic.

Area: This entry includes three subfields. Total area is the
sum of all land and water areas delimited by international
boundaries and/or coastlines. Land area is the aggregate of
all surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or
coastlines, excluding inland water bodies (lakes,
reservoirs, rivers). Water area is the sum of all water
surfaces delimited by international boundaries and/or
coastlines, including inland water bodies (lakes,
reservoirs, rivers).

Area--comparative: This entry provides an area comparison
based on total area equivalents. Most entities are compared
with the entire US or one of the 50 states based on area
measurements (1990 revised) provided by the US Bureau of the
Census. The smaller entities are compared with Washington,
DC (178 sq km, 69 sq mi) or The Mall in Washington, DC (0.59
sq km, 0.23 sq mi, 146 acres).

Background: This entry usually highlights major historic
events, current issues, and may include a statement about
one or two key future trends. This entry appears for only a
few countries at the present time, but will be added to all
countries in the future.

Birth rate: This entry gives the average annual number of
births during a year per 1,000 persons in the population at
midyear; also known as crude birth rate. The birth rate is
usually the dominant factor in determining the rate of
population growth. It depends on both the level of fertility
and the age structure of the population.

Budget: This entry includes revenues, total expenditures,
and capital expenditures. These figures are calculated on an
exchange rate basis, i.e., not in purchasing power parity
(PPP) terms.

Capital: This entry gives the location of the seat of
government.

Climate: This entry includes a brief description of typical
weather regimes throughout the year.

Coastline: This entry gives the total length of the boundary
between the land area (including islands) and the sea.

Communications: This category deals with the means of
exchanging information and includes the telephone, radio,
and television entries.

Communications--note: This entry includes miscellaneous
communications information of significance not included
elsewhere.

Constitution: This entry includes the dates of adoption,
revisions, and major amendments.

Country map: Most versions of the Factbook provide a country
map in color. The maps were produced from the best
information available at the time of preparation. Names
and/or boundaries may have changed subsequently.

Country name: This entry includes all forms of the country's
name approved by the US Board on Geographic Names (Italy is
used as an example): conventional long form (Italian
Republic), conventional short form (Italy), local long form
(Repubblica Italiana), local short form (Italia), former
(Kingdom of Italy), as well as the abbreviation. Also see
the Terminology note.

Currency: This entry identifies the national medium of
exchange and its basic subunit.

Data code: This entry gives the official US Government
digraph that precisely identifies every land entity without
overlap, duplication, or omission. AF, for example, is the
data code for Afghanistan. This two-letter country code is a
standardized geopolitical data element promulgated in the
Federal Information Processing Standards Publication (FIPS)
10-4 by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
at the US Department of Commerce and maintained by the
Office of the Geographer and Global Issues at the US
Department of State. The data code is used to eliminate
confusion and incompatibility in the collection, processing,
and dissemination of area-specific data and is particularly
useful for interchanging data between databases. Appendix F
cross-references various country data codes and Appendix G
does the same thing for hydrographic data codes.

Data codes--country: This information is presented in
Appendix F: Cross-Reference List of Country Data Codes which
includes the US Government approved Federal Information
Processing Standards (FIPS) codes, the International
Organization for Standardization (ISO) codes, and Internet
codes for land entities.

Data codes--hydrographic: This information is presented in
Appendix G: Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic Data Codes
which includes the International Hydrographic Organization
(IHO) codes, Aeronautical Chart and Information Center
(ACIC; now National Imagery and Mapping Agency or NIMA)
codes, and Defense Intelligence Agency (DIA) codes for
hydrographic entities. The US Government has not yet
approved a standard for hydrographic data codes similar to
the FIPS 10-4 standard for country data codes.

Date of information: In general, information available as of
1 January 1999, was used in the preparation of this edition.

Death rate: This entry gives the average annual number of
deaths during a year per 1,000 population at midyear; also
known as crude death rate. The death rate, while only a
rough indicator of the mortality situation in a country,
accurately indicates the current mortality impact on
population growth. This indicator is significantly affected
by age distribution, and most countries will eventually show
a rise in the overall death rate, in spite of continued
decline in mortality at all ages, as declining fertility
results in an aging population.

Debt--external: This entry gives the total amount of public
foreign financial obligations.

Dependency status: This entry describes the formal
relationship between a particular nonindependent entity and
an independent state.

Dependent areas: This entry contains an alphabetical listing
of all nonindependent entities associated in some way with a
particular independent state.

Diplomatic representation: The US Government has diplomatic
relations with 184 independent states, including 178 of the
185 UN members (excluded UN members are Bhutan, Cuba, Iran,
Iraq, North Korea, former Yugoslavia, and the US itself). In
addition, the US has diplomatic relations with 6 independent
states that are not in the UN--Holy See, Kiribati, Nauru,
Switzerland, Tonga, and Tuvalu.

Diplomatic representation from the US: This entry includes
the chief of mission, embassy address, mailing address,
telephone number, FAX number, branch office locations,
consulate general locations, and consulate locations.

Diplomatic representation in the US: This entry includes the
chief of the foreign mission, chancery address, telephone
number, FAX number, consulate general locations, consulate
locations, honorary consulate general locations, and
honorary consulate locations.

Disputes--international: This entry includes a wide variety
of situations that range from traditional bilateral boundary
disputes to unilateral claims of one sort or another.
Information regarding disputes over international
terrestrial and maritime boundaries has been reviewed by the
US Department of State. References to other situations
involving borders or frontiers may also be included, such as
resource disputes, geopolitical questions, or irredentist
issues; however, inclusion does not necessarily constitute
official acceptance or recognition by the US Government.

Economic aid--donor: This entry refers to net official
development assistance (ODA) from OECD nations to developing
countries and multilateral organizations. ODA is defined as
financial assistance that is concessional in character, has
the main objective to promote economic development and
welfare of LDCs, and contains a grant element of at least
25%. The entry does not cover other official flows (OOF) or
private flows.

Economic aid--recipient: This entry, which is subject to
major problems of definition and statistical coverage,
refers to the net inflow of Official Development Finance
(ODF) to recipient countries. The figure includes assistance
from the World Bank, the IMF, and other international
organizations and from individual nation donors. Formal
commitments of aid are included in the data. Omitted from
the data are grants by private organizations. Aid comes in
various forms including outright grants and loans. The entry
thus is the difference between new inflows and repayments.

Economy: This category includes the entries dealing with the
size, development, and management of productive resources,
i.e., land, labor, and capital.

Economy--overview: This entry briefly describes the type of
economy, including the degree of market orientation, the
level of economic development, the most important natural
resources, and the unique areas of specialization. It also
characterizes major economic events and policy changes in
the most recent 12 months and may include a statement about
one or two key future macroeconomic trends.

Electricity--consumption: This entry consists of total
electricity generated annually plus imports and minus
exports, expressed in kilowatt hours.

Electricity--exports: This entry is the total exported
electricity in kilowatt hours.

Electricity--imports: This entry is the total imported
electricity in kilowatt hours.

Electricity--production: This entry is the annual electricity
generated expressed in kilowatt hours.

Electricity--production by source: This entry indicates the
percentage share of annual electricity production of each
energy source. These are fossil fuel, hydro, nuclear, and
other (solar, geothermal, and wind).

Elevation extremes: This entry includes both the highest
point and the lowest point.

Entities: Some of the independent states, dependencies,
areas of special sovereignty, and governments included in
this publication are not independent, and others are not
officially recognized by the US Government. "Independent
state" refers to a people politically organized into a
sovereign state with a definite territory. "Dependencies"
and "areas of special sovereignty" refer to a broad category
of political entities that are associated in some way with
an independent state. "Country" names used in the table of
contents or for page headings are usually the short-form
names as approved by the US Board on Geographic Names and
may include independent states, dependencies, and areas of
special sovereignty, or other geographic entities. There are
a total of 266 separate geographic entities in The World
Factbook that may be categorized as follows:


INDEPENDENT STATES

191   Afghanistan, Albania, Algeria, Andorra, Angola, Antigua
     and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
     Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
     Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia
     and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria,
     Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada,
     Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
     Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
     Republic of the Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire,
     Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
     Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
     Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia,
     Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia,
     Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
     Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Holy See, Honduras,
     Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Iraq, Ireland,
     Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
     Kiribati, North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan,
     Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
     Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, The Former Yugoslav
     Republic of Macedonia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
     Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania,
     Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia,
     Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
     Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria,
     Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea,
     Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar,
     Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
     Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
     Marino, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
     Serbia and Montenegro, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
     Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Somalia,
     South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
     Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan,
     Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
     Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine,
     UAE, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela,
     Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe

OTHER

1     Taiwa
     n

DEPENDENCIES AND AREAS OF SPECIAL SOVEREIGNTY

6     Australia--Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island,
     Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island
     and McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island
1     China--Hong Kong
2     Denmark--Faroe Islands, Greenland
16    France--Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa Island,
     French Guiana, French Polynesia, French Southern and
     Antarctic Lands, Glorioso Islands, Guadeloupe, Juan de
     Nova Island, Martinique, Mayotte, New Caledonia, Reunion,
     Saint Pierre and Miquelon, Tromelin Island, Wallis and
     Futuna
2     Netherlands--Aruba, Netherlands Antilles
3     New Zealand--Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau
3     Norway--Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard
1     Portugal--Macau
15    UK--Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean Territory,
     British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands,
     Gibraltar, Guernsey, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat,
     Pitcairn Islands, Saint Helena, South Georgia and the
     South Sandwich Islands, Turks and Caicos Islands
14    US--American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland Island,
     Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway
     Islands, Navassa Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra
     Atoll, Puerto Rico, Virgin Islands, Wake Atoll

MISCELLANEOUS

  6   Antarctica, Gaza Strip, Paracel Islands, Spratly Islands,
     West Bank, Western Sahara

OTHER ENTITIES

  4   oceans--Arctic Ocean, Atlantic Ocean, Indian Ocean,
     Pacific Ocean
  1   World


266   Tota
     l
Environment--current issues: This entry lists the most
pressing and important environmental problems.

Environment--international agreements: This entry separates
country participation in international environmental
agreements into two levels--party to and signed but not
ratified. Agreements are listed in alphabetical order by the
abbreviated form of the full name.

Environmental agreements: This information is presented in
Appendix D: Selected International Environmental Agreements,
which includes the name, abbreviation, date opened for
signature, date entered into force, objective, and parties
by category.

Ethnic groups: This entry provides a rank ordering of ethnic
groups starting with the largest and normally includes the
percent of total population.

Exchange rates: This entry provides the official value of a
country's monetary unit at a given date or over a given
period of time, as expressed in units of local currency per
US dollar and as determined by international market forces
or official fiat.

Executive branch: This entry includes several subfields.
Chief of state includes the name and title of the titular
leader of the country who represents the state at official
and ceremonial functions but may not be involved with the
day-to-day activities of the government. Head of government
includes the name and title of the top administrative leader
who is designated to manage the day-to-day activities of the
government. Cabinet includes the official name for this body
of high-ranking advisers and the method for selection of
members. Elections includes the nature of election process
or accession to power, date of the last election, and date
of the next election. Election results includes the percent
of vote for each candidate in the last election. In the UK,
the monarch is the chief of state, and the prime minister is
the head of government. In the US, the president is both the
chief of state and the head of government.

Exports: This entry provides the total US dollar amount of
exports on an f.o.b. (free on board) basis.

Exports--commodities: This entry provides a rank ordering of
exported products starting with the most important; it
sometimes includes the percent of total dollar value.

Exports--partners: This entry provides a rank ordering of
trading partners starting with the most important; it
sometimes includes the percent of total dollar value.

Fiscal year: This entry identifies the beginning and ending
months for a country's accounting period of 12 months, which
often is the calendar year but which may begin in any month.
FY93/94 refers to the fiscal year that began in calendar
year 1993 and ended in calendar year 1994. All yearly
references are for the calendar year (CY) unless indicated
as a noncalendar fiscal year (FY).

Flag description: This entry provides a written flag
description produced from actual flags or the best
information available at the time the entry was written. The
flags of independent states are used by their dependencies
unless there is an officially recognized local flag. Some
disputed and other areas do not have flags.

Flag graphic: Most versions of the Factbook include a color
flag at the beginning of the country profile. The flag
graphics were produced from actual flags or the best
information available at the time of preparation. The flags
of independent states are used by their dependencies unless
there is an officially recognized local flag. Some disputed
and other areas do not have flags.

GDP: This entry gives the gross domestic product (GDP) or
value of all final goods and services produced within a
nation in a given year. GDP dollar estimates in the Factbook
are derived from purchasing power parity (PPP) calculations.
See the note on GDP methodology for more information.

GDP methodology: In the Economy section, GDP dollar
estimates for all countries are derived from purchasing
power parity (PPP) calculations rather than from conversions
at official currency exchange rates. The PPP method involves
the use of standardized international dollar price weights,
which are applied to the quantities of final goods and
services produced in a given economy. The data derived from
the PPP method provide the best available starting point for
comparisons of economic strength and well-being between
countries. The division of a GDP estimate in domestic
currency by the corresponding PPP estimate in dollars gives
the PPP conversion rate. Whereas PPP estimates for OECD
countries are quite reliable, PPP estimates for developing
countries are often rough approximations. Most of the GDP
estimates are based on extrapolation of PPP numbers
published by the UN International Comparison Program (UNICP)
and by Professors Robert Summers and Alan Heston of the
University of Pennsylvania and their colleagues. In
contrast, currency exchange rates depend on a variety of
international and domestic financial forces that often have
little relation to domestic output. In developing countries
with weak currencies the exchange rate estimate of GDP in
dollars is typically one-fourth to one-half the PPP
estimate. Furthermore, exchange rates may suddenly go up or
down by 10% or more because of market forces or official
fiat whereas real output has remained unchanged. On 12
January 1994, for example, the 14 countries of the African
Financial Community (whose currencies are tied to the French
franc) devalued their currencies by 50%. This move, of
course, did not cut the real output of these countries by
half. One important caution: the proportion of, say, defense
expenditures as a percentage of GDP in local currency
accounts may differ substantially from the proportion when
GDP accounts are expressed in PPP terms, as, for example,
when an observer tries to estimate the dollar level of
Russian or Japanese military expenditures. Note: the numbers
for GDP and other economic data can not be chained together
from successive volumes of the Factbook because of changes
in the US dollar measuring rod, revisions of data by
statistical agencies, use of new or different sources of
information, and changes in national statistical methods and
practices. For statistical series on GDP and other economic
variables, see the Handbook of International Economic
Statistics available from the same sources as The World
Factbook.

GDP--composition by sector: This entry gives the percentage
contribution of agriculture, industry, and services to total
GDP.

GDP--per capita: This entry shows GDP on a purchasing power
parity basis divided by population as of 1 July for the same
year.

GDP--real growth rate: This entry gives GDP growth on an
annual basis adjusted for inflation and expressed as a
percent.

Geographic coordinates: This entry includes rounded latitude
and longitude figures for the purpose of finding the
approximate geographic center of an entity and is based on
the Gazetteer of Conventional Names, Third Edition, August
1988, US Board on Geographic Names and on other sources.

Geographic names: This information is presented in Appendix
H: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names which indicates
where various geographic names--including alternate names,
former names, political or geographical portions of larger
entities, and the location of all US Foreign Service
posts--can be found in The World Factbook. Spellings are
normally, but not always, those approved by the US Board on
Geographic Names (BGN). Alternate names are included in
parentheses, while additional information is included in
brackets.

Geography: This category includes the entries dealing with
the natural environment and the effects of human activity.

Geography--note: This entry includes miscellaneous geographic
information of significance not included elsewhere.

GNP: Gross national product (GNP) is the value of all final
goods and services produced within a nation in a given year,
plus income earned by its citizens abroad, minus income
earned by foreigners from domestic production. The Factbook,
following current practice, uses GDP rather than GNP to
measure national production. However, the user must realize
that in certain countries net remittances from citizens
working abroad may be important to national well-being.

Government: This category includes the entries dealing with
the system for the adoption and administration of public
policy.

Government type: This entry gives the basic form of
government (e.g., republic, constitutional monarchy, federal
republic, parliamentary democracy, military dictatorship).

Government--note: This entry includes miscellaneous
government information of significance not included
elsewhere.

Gross domestic product: see GDP

Gross national product: see GNP

Gross world product: see GWP

GWP: This entry gives the gross world product (GWP) or
aggregate value of all final goods and services produced
worldwide in a given year.

Heliports: This entry gives the total number of established
helicopter takeoff and landing sites (which may or may not
have fuel or other services).

Highways: This entry includes the total length of the
highway system as well as the length of the paved and
unpaved components.

Household income or consumption by percentage share: Data on
household income or consumption come from household surveys,
the results adjusted for household size. Nations use
different standards and procedures in collecting and
adjusting the data. Surveys based on income will normally
show a more unequal distribution than surveys based on
consumption. The quality of surveys is improving with time,
yet caution is still necessary in making inter-country
comparisons.

Illicit drugs: This entry gives information on the five
categories of illicit drugs--narcotics, stimulants,
depressants (sedatives), hallucinogens, and cannabis. These
categories include many drugs legally produced and
prescribed by doctors as well as those illegally produced
and sold outside of medical channels.

Cannabis (Cannabis sativa) is the common hemp plant, which
provides hallucinogens with some sedative properties, and
includes marijuana (pot, Acapulco gold, grass, reefer),
tetrahydrocannabinol (THC, Marinol), hashish (hash), and
hashish oil (hash oil).

Coca (mostly Erythroxylum coca) is a bush with leaves that
contain the stimulant used to make cocaine. Coca is not to
be confused with cocoa, which comes from cacao seeds and is
used in making chocolate, cocoa, and cocoa butter.

Cocaine is a stimulant derived from the leaves of the coca
bush.

Depressants (sedatives) are drugs that reduce tension and
anxiety and include chloral hydrate, barbiturates (Amytal,
Nembutal, Seconal, phenobarbital), benzodiazepines (Librium,
Valium), methaqualone (Quaalude), glutethimide (Doriden),
and others (Equanil, Placidyl, Valmid).

Drugs are any chemical substances that effect a physical,
mental, emotional, or behavioral change in an individual.

Drug abuse is the use of any licit or illicit chemical
substance that results in physical, mental, emotional, or
behavioral impairment in an individual.

Hallucinogens are drugs that affect sensation, thinking,
self-awareness, and emotion. Hallucinogens include LSD
(acid, microdot), mescaline and peyote (mexc, buttons,
cactus), amphetamine variants (PMA, STP, DOB), phencyclidine
(PCP, angel dust, hog), phencyclidine analogues (PCE, PCPy,
TCP), and others (psilocybin, psilocyn).

Hashish is the resinous exudate of the cannabis or hemp
plant (Cannabis sativa).

Heroin is a semisynthetic derivative of morphine.

Mandrax is a trade name for methaqualone, a pharmaceutical
depressant.

Marijuana is the dried leaves of the cannabis or hemp plant
(Cannabis sativa).

Methaqualone is a pharmaceutical depressant, referred to as
mandrax in Southwest Asia.

Narcotics are drugs that relieve pain, often induce sleep,
and refer to opium, opium derivatives, and synthetic
substitutes. Natural narcotics include opium (paregoric,
parepectolin), morphine (MS-Contin, Roxanol), codeine
(Tylenol with codeine, Empirin with codeine, Robitussan AC),
and thebaine. Semisynthetic narcotics include heroin (horse,
smack), and hydromorphone (Dilaudid). Synthetic narcotics
include meperidine or Pethidine (Demerol, Mepergan),
methadone (Dolophine, Methadose), and others (Darvon,
Lomotil).

Opium is the brown, gummy exudate of the incised, unripe
seedpod of the opium poppy.

Opium poppy (Papaver somniferum) is the source for the
natural and semisynthetic narcotics.

Poppy straw concentrate is the alkaloid derived from the
mature, dried opium poppy.

Qat (kat, khat) is a stimulant from the buds or leaves of
Catha edulis that is chewed or drunk as tea.

Quaaludes is the North American slang term for methaqualone,
a pharmaceutical depressant.

Stimulants are drugs that relieve mild depression, increase
energy and activity, and include cocaine (coke, snow,
crack), amphetamines (Desoxyn, Dexedrine), phenmetrazine
(Preludin), methylphenidate (Ritalin), and others (Cylert,
Sanorex, Tenuate).

Imports: This entry provides the total US dollar amount of
imports on a c.i.f. (cost, insurance, and freight)or f.o.b.
(free on board) basis.

Imports--commodities: This entry provides a rank ordering of
imported products starting with the most important; it
sometimes includes the percent of total dollar value.

Imports--partners: This entry provides a rank ordering of
trading partners starting with the most important; it
sometimes includes the percent of total dollar value.

Independence: For most countries, this entry gives the date
that sovereignty was achieved, and from which nation,
empire, or trusteeship. For the other countries, the date
given may not represent "independence" in the strict sense,
but rather some significant nationhood event such as
traditional founding date, date of unification, federation,
confederation, establishment, fundamental change in the form
of government, or state succession. Dependent areas include
the notation "none" followed by the nature of their
dependency status. Also see the Terminology note.

Industrial production growth rate: This entry gives the
annual percentage increase in industrial production
(includes manufacturing, mining, and construction).

Industries: This entry provides a rank ordering of
industries starting with the largest by value of annual
output.

Infant mortality rate: This entry gives the number of deaths
of infants under one year old in a given year per 1,000 live
births in the same year. This rate is often used an
indicator of the level of health in a country.

Inflation rate (consumer prices): This entry furnishes the
annual percent change in consumer prices compared with the
previous year's consumer prices.

International disputes: see Disputes--international

International organization participation: This entry lists
in alphabetical order by abbreviation those international
organizations in which the subject country is a member or
participates in some other way.

International organizations: This information is presented
in Appendix C: International Organizations and Groups which
includes the name, abbreviation, address, telephone, FAX,
date established, aim, and members by category.

Introduction: This category includes one entry, Background.
At present it appears in only a few country profiles, but
will be added to others in the future.

Irrigated land: This entry gives the number of square
kilometers of land area that is artificially supplied with
water.

Judicial branch: This entry contains the name(s) of the
highest court(s) and a brief description of the selection
process for members.

Labor force: This entry contains the total labor force
figure.

Labor force--by occupation: This entry contains a rank
ordering of component parts of the labor force by
occupation.

Land boundaries: This entry contains the total length of all
land boundaries and the individual lengths for each of the
contiguous border countries.

Land use: This entry contains the percentage shares of total
land area for five different types of land use. Arable
land--land cultivated for crops that are replanted after each
harvest like wheat, maize, and rice. Permanent crops--land
cultivated for crops that are not replanted after each
harvest like citrus, coffee, and rubber. Permanent
pastures--land permanently used for herbaceous forage crops.
Forests and woodland--land under dense or open stands of
trees. Other--any land type not specifically mentioned above,
such as urban areas, roads, desert, etc.

Languages: This entry provides a rank ordering of languages
starting with the largest and sometimes includes the percent
of total population speaking that language.

Legal system: This entry contains a brief description of the
legal system's historical roots, role in government, and
acceptance of International Court of Justice (ICJ)
jurisdiction.

Legislative branch: This entry contains information on the
structure (unicameral, bicameral, tricameral), formal name,
number of seats, and term of office. Elections includes the
nature of election process or accession to power, date of
the last election, and date of the next election. Election
results includes the percent of vote and/or number of seats
held by each party in the last election.

Life expectancy at birth: This entry contains the average
number of years to be lived by a group of people born in the
same year, if mortality at each age remains constant in the
future. The entry includes total population as well as the
male and female components. Life expectancy at birth is also
a measure of overall quality of life in a country and
summarizes the mortality at all ages. It can also be thought
of as indicating the potential return on investment in human
capital and is necessary for the calculation of various
actuarial measures.

Literacy: This entry includes a definition of literacy and
Census Bureau percentages for the total population, males,
and females. There are no universal definitions and
standards of literacy. Unless otherwise specified, all rates
are based on the most common definition--the ability to read
and write at a specified age. Detailing the standards that
individual countries use to assess the ability to read and
write is beyond the scope of the Factbook. Information on
literacy, while not a perfect measure of educational
results, is probably the most easily available and valid for
international comparisons. Low levels of literacy, and
education in general, can impede the economic development of
a country in the current rapidly changing, technology-driven
world.

Location: This entry identifies the country's regional
location, neighboring countries, and adjacent bodies of
water.

Map references: This entry includes the name of the Factbook
reference map on which a country may be found. The entry on
Geographic coordinates may be helpful in finding some
smaller countries.

Maritime claims: This entry includes the following claims:
contiguous zone, continental shelf, exclusive economic zone,
exclusive fishing zone, extended fishing zone, none (usually
for a landlocked country), other (unique maritime claims
like Libya's Gulf of Sidra Closing Line or North Korea's
Military Boundary Line), and territorial sea. The proximity
of neighboring states may prevent some national claims from
being extended the full distance.

Merchant marine: Merchant marine may be defined as all ships
engaged in the carriage of goods; all commercial vessels (as
opposed to all nonmilitary ships), which excludes tugs,
fishing vessels, offshore oil rigs, etc.; or a grouping of
merchant ships by nationality or register. This entry
contains information in two subfields--total and ships by
type. Total includes the total number of ships (1,000 GRT or
over), total DWT for those ships, and total GRT for those
ships. Ships by type includes a listing of barge carriers,
bulk cargo ships, cargo ships, combination bulk carriers,
combination ore/oil carriers, container ships, intermodal
ships, liquefied gas tankers, livestock carriers,
multifunction large--load carriers, oil tankers, passenger
ships, passenger-cargo ships, railcar carriers, refrigerated
cargo ships, roll-on/roll-off cargo ships, short-sea
passenger ships, specialized tankers, tanker tug-barges, and
vehicle carriers.

A captive register is a register of ships maintained by a
territory, possession, or colony primarily or exclusively
for the use of ships owned in the parent country; it is also
referred to as an offshore register, the offshore equivalent
of an internal register. Ships on a captive register will
fly the same flag as the parent country, or a local variant
of it, but will be subject to the maritime laws and taxation
rules of the offshore territory. Although the nature of a
captive register makes it especially desirable for ships
owned in the parent country, just as in the internal
register, the ships may also be owned abroad. The captive
register then acts as a flag of convenience register, except
that it is not the register of an independent state.

A flag of convenience register is a national register
offering registration to a merchant ship not owned in the
flag state. The major flags of convenience (FOC) attract
ships to their registers by virtue of low fees, low or
nonexistent taxation of profits, and liberal manning
requirements. True FOC registers are characterized by having
relatively few of the registered ships actually owned in the
flag state. Thus, while virtually any flag can be used for
ships under a given set of circumstances, an FOC register is
one where the majority of the merchant fleet is owned
abroad. It is also referred to as an open register.

A flag state is the nation in which a ship is registered and
which holds legal jurisdiction over operation of the ship,
whether at home or abroad. Maritime legislation of the flag
state determines how a ship is crewed and taxed and whether
a foreign-owned ship may be placed on the register. An
internal register is a register of ships maintained as a
subset of a national register. Ships on the internal
register fly the national flag and have that nationality but
are subject to a separate set of maritime rules from those
on the main national register. These differences usually
include lower taxation of profits, use of foreign nationals
as crew members, and, usually, ownership outside the flag
state (when it functions as an FOC register). The Norwegian
International Ship Register and Danish International Ship
Register are the most notable examples of an internal
register. Both have been instrumental in stemming flight
from the national flag to flags of convenience and in
attracting foreign-owned ships to the Norwegian and Danish
flags.

A merchant ship is a vessel that carries goods against
payment of freight; it is commonly used to denote any
nonmilitary ship but accurately restricted to commercial
vessels only.

A register is the record of a ship's ownership and
nationality as listed with the maritime authorities of a
country; also, it is the compendium of such individual
ships' registrations. Registration of a ship provides it
with a nationality and makes it subject to the laws of the
country in which registered (the flag state) regardless of
the nationality of the ship's ultimate owner.

Military: This category includes the entries dealing with a
country's military structure, manpower, and expenditures.

Military branches: This entry lists the names of the ground,
naval, air, marine, and other defense or security forces.

Military expenditures--dollar figure: This entry gives
current military expenditures in US dollars; the figure is
calculated by multiplying the estimated defense spending in
percentage terms by the gross domestic product (GDP)
calculated on an exchange rate basis not purchasing power
parity (PPP) terms. The figure should be treated with
caution because of different price patterns and accounting
methods among nations, as well as wide variations in the
strength of their currencies.

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: This entry gives
current military expenditures as an estimated percent of
gross domestic product (GDP).

Military manpower--availability: This entry gives the total
numbers of males and females age 15-49 and assumes that
every individual is fit to serve.

Military manpower--fit for military service: This entry gives
the number of males and females age 15-49 fit for military
service. This is a more refined measure of potential
military manpower availability which tries to correct for
the health situation in the country and reduces the maximum
potential number to a more realistic estimate of the actual
number fit to serve.

Military manpower--military age: This entry gives the minimum
age at which an individual may volunteer for military
service or be subject to conscription.

Military manpower--reaching military age annually: This entry
gives the number of draft-age males and females entering the
military manpower pool in any given year and is a measure of
the availability of draft-age young adults.

Military--note: This entry includes miscellaneous military
information of significance not included elsewhere.

Money figures: All money figures are expressed in
contemporaneous US dollars unless otherwise indicated.

National holiday: This entry gives the primary national day
of celebration--usually independence day.

Nationality: This entry provides the identifying terms for
citizens--noun and adjective.

Natural hazards: This entry lists potential natural
disasters.

Natural resources: This entry lists a country's mineral,
petroleum, hydropower, and other resources of commercial
importance.

Net migration rate: This entry includes the figure for the
difference between the number of persons entering and
leaving a country during the year per 1,000 persons (based
on midyear population). An excess of persons entering the
country is referred to as net immigration (e.g., 3.56
migrants/1,000 population); an excess of persons leaving the
country as net emigration (e.g., -9.26 migrants/1,000
population). The net migration rate indicates the
contribution of migration to the overall level of population
change. High levels of migration can cause problems such as
increasing unemployment and potential ethnic strife (if
people are coming in) or a reduction in the labor force,
perhaps in certain key sectors (if people are leaving).

People: This category includes the entries dealing with the
characteristics of the people and their society.

People--note: This entry includes miscellaneous demographic
information of significance not included elsewhere.

Personal Names--Capitalization: The Factbook capitalizes the
surname or family name of individuals for the convenience of
our users who are faced with a world of different cultures
and naming conventions. An example would be President SADDAM
Husayn of Iraq. Saddam is his name and Husayn is his
father's name. He may be referred to as President SADDAM
Husayn or President SADDAM, but not President Husayn. The
need for capitalization, bold type, underlining, italics, or
some other indicator of the individual's surname is apparent
in the following examples: MAO Zedong, Fidel CASTRO Ruz,
William Jefferson CLINTON, and TUNKU SALAHUDDIN Abdul Aziz
Shah ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin Alam Shah. By knowing
the surname, a short form without all capital letters can be
used with confidence as in President Saddam, President
Castro, Chairman Mao, President Clinton, or Sultan Tunku
Salahuddin. The same system of capitalization is extended to
the names of leaders with surnames that are not commonly
used such as Queen ELIZABETH II.

Personal Names--Spelling: The romanization of personal names
in the Factbook normally follows the same transliteration
system used by the US Board on Geographic Names for spelling
place names. At times, however, a foreign leader expressly
indicates a preference for, or the media or official
documents regularly use, a romanized spelling that differs
from the transliteration derived from the US Government
standard. In such cases, the Factbook uses the alternative
spelling.

Personal Names--Titles: The Factbook capitalizes any valid
title (or short form of it) immediately preceding a person's
name. A title standing alone is lowercased. Examples:
President YEL'TSIN and President CLINTON are chiefs of
state. In Russia, the president is chief of state and the
premier is the head of the government, while in the US, the
president is both chief of state and head of government.

Pipelines: This entry gives the lengths and types of
pipelines for transporting products like natural gas, crude
oil, or petroleum products.

Political parties and leaders: This entry includes a listing
of significant political organizations and their leaders.

Political pressure groups and leaders: This entry includes a
listing of organizations with leaders involved in politics,
but not standing for legislative election.

Population: This entry gives an estimate from the US Bureau
of the Census based on statistics from population censuses,
vital statistics registration systems, or sample surveys
pertaining to the recent past and on assumptions about
future trends. The total population presents one overall
measure of the potential impact of the country on the world
and within its region. Note: starting with the 1993
Factbook, demographic estimates for some countries (mostly
African) have taken into account the effects of the growing
incidence of AIDS infections. These countries are Botswana,
Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Central African Republic, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Ethiopia, Guyana,
Haiti, Honduras, Kenya, Lesotho, Malawi, Namibia, Nigeria,
Rwanda, South Africa, Swaziland, Tanzania, Thailand, Uganda,
Zambia, and Zimbabwe.

Population below poverty line: National estimates of the
percentage of the population lying below the poverty line
are based on surveys of sub-groups, with the results
weighted by the number of people in each group. Definitions
of poverty vary considerably among nations. For example,
rich nations generally employ more generous standards of
poverty than poor nations.

Population growth rate: The average annual percent change in
the population, resulting from a surplus (or deficit) of
births over deaths and the balance of migrants entering and
leaving a country. The rate may be positive or negative. The
growth rate is a factor in determining how great a burden
would be imposed on a country by the changing needs of its
people for infrastructure (e.g., schools, hospitals,
housing, roads), resources (e.g., food, water, electricity),
and jobs. Rapid population growth can be seen as threatening
by neighboring countries.

Ports and harbors: This entry lists the major ports and
harbors selected on the basis of overall importance to each
country. This is determined by evaluating a number of
factors (e.g., dollar value of goods handled, gross tonnage,
facilities, military significance).

Radio broadcast stations: This entry includes the total
number of AM, FM, and shortwave broadcast stations.

Radios: This entry gives the total number of radio
receivers.

Railways: This entry includes the total length of the
railway network and component parts by gauge: broad, dual,
narrow, standard, and other.

Reference maps: This section includes world, regional, and
special or current interest maps.

Religions: This entry includes a rank ordering of religions
starting with the largest and sometimes includes the percent
of total population.

Sex ratio: This entry includes the number of males for each
female in five age groups--at birth, under 15 years, 15-64
years, 65 years and over, and for the total population. Sex
ratio at birth has recently emerged as an indicator of
certain kinds of sex discrimination in some countries. For
instance, high sex ratios at birth in some Asian countries
are now attributed to sex-selective abortion and infanticide
due to a strong preference for sons. This will affect future
marriage patterns and fertility patterns. Eventually it
could cause unrest among young adult males who are unable to
find partners. The sex ratio at birth for the World is 1.06
(1999 est.).

Suffrage: This entry gives the age at enfranchisement and
whether the right to vote is universal or restricted.

Telephone numbers: All telephone numbers in the Factbook
consist of the country code in brackets, the city or area
code (where required) in parentheses, and the local number.
The one component that is not presented is the international
access code, which varies from country to country. For
example, an international direct dial telephone call placed
from the US to Madrid, Spain, would be as follows:

011 [34] (1) 577-xxxx where

011 is the international access code for station-to-station
calls

(01 is for calls other than station-to-station calls),

[34] is the country code for Spain,

(1) is the city code for Madrid,

577 is the local exchange, and

xxxx is the local telephone number.

An international direct dial telephone call placed from
another country to the US would be as follows:

international access code + [1] (202) 939-xxxx, where

[1] is the country code for the US,

(202) is the area code for Washington, DC,

939 is the local exchange, and

xxxx is the local telephone number.

Telephone system: This entry includes a brief
characterization of the system with details on the domestic
and international components. The following terms and
abbreviations are used throughout the entry:

Arabsat--Arab Satellite Communications Organization (Riyadh,
Saudi Arabia).

Autodin--Automatic Digital Network (US Department of
Defense).

CB--citizen's band mobile radio communications.

cellular telephone system--the telephones in this system are
radio

transceivers, with each instrument having its own private
radio frequency and sufficient radiated power to reach the
booster station in its area (cell), from which the telephone
signal is fed to a regular telephone exchange.

Central American Microwave System--a trunk microwave radio
relay system that links the countries of Central America and
Mexico with each other.

coaxial cable--a multichannel communication cable consisting
of a central conducting wire, surrounded by and insulated
from a cylindrical conducting shell; a large number of
telephone channels can be made available within the
insulated space by the use of a large number of carrier
frequencies.

Comsat--Communications Satellite Corporation (US).

DSN--Defense Switched Network (formerly Automatic Voice
Network or Autovon); basic general-purpose, switched voice
network of the Defense Communications System (US Department
of Defense).

Eutelsat--European Telecommunications Satellite Organization
(Paris).

fiber-optic cable--a multichannel communications cable using
a thread of optical glass fibers as a transmission medium in
which the signal (voice, video, etc.) is in the form of a
coded pulse of light.

HF-- high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 3,000- to
30,000-kHz range.

Inmarsat--International Mobile Satellite Organization
(London); provider of global mobile satellite communications
for commercial, distress, and safety applications at sea, in
the air, and on land.

Intelsat--International Telecommunications Satellite
Organization (Washington, DC).

Intersputnik--International Organization of Space
Communications (Moscow); first established in the former
Soviet Union and the East European countries, it is now
marketing its services worldwide with earth stations in
North America, Africa, and East Asia.

landline--communication wire or cable of any sort that is
installed on poles or buried in the ground.

Marecs--Maritime European Communications Satellite used in
the Inmarsat system on lease from the European Space Agency.

Marisat--satellites of the Comsat Corporation that
participate in the Inmarsat system.

Medarabtel--the Middle East Telecommunications Project of the
International Telecommunications Union (ITU) providing a
modern telecommunications network, primarily by microwave
radio relay, linking Algeria, Djibouti, Egypt, Jordan,
Libya, Morocco, Saudi Arabia, Somalia, Sudan, Syria,
Tunisia, and Yemen; it was initially started in Morocco in
1970 by the Arab Telecommunications Union (ATU) and was
known at that time as the Middle East Mediterranean
Telecommunications Network.

microwave radio relay--transmission of long distance
telephone calls and television programs by highly
directional radio microwaves that are received and sent on
from one booster station to another on an optical path.

NMT--Nordic Mobile Telephone; an analog cellular telephone
system that was developed jointly by the national
telecommunications authorities of the Nordic countries
(Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden).

Orbita--a Russian television service; also the trade name of
a packet--switched digital telephone network.

radiotelephone communications--the two-way transmission and
reception of sounds by broadcast radio on authorized
frequencies using telephone handsets.

satellite communication system--a communication system
consisting of two or more earth stations and at least one
satellite that provides long distance transmission of voice,
data, and television; the system usually serves as a trunk
connection between telephone exchanges; if the earth
stations are in the same country, it is a domestic system.

satellite earth station--a communications facility with a
microwave radio transmitting and receiving antenna and
required receiving and transmitting equipment for
communicating with satellites.

satellite link--a radio connection between a satellite and an
earth station permitting communication between them, either
one-way (down link from satellite to earth
station--television receive-only transmission) or two-way
(telephone channels).

SHF--super-high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 3,000-
to 30,000-MHz range.

shortwave--radio frequencies (from 1.605 to 30 MHz) that fall
above the commercial broadcast band and are used for
communication over long distances.

Solidaridad--geosynchronous satellites in Mexico's system of
international telecommunications in the Western Hemisphere.

Statsionar--Russia's geostationary system for satellite
telecommunications.

submarine cable--a cable designed for service under water.

TAT--Trans-Atlantic Telephone; any of a number of high-
capacity submarine coaxial telephone cables linking Europe
with North America.

telefax--facsimile service between subscriber stations via
the public switched telephone network or the international
Datel network.

telegraph--a telecommunications system designed for
unmodulated electric impulse transmission.

telex--a communication service involving teletypewriters
connected by wire through automatic exchanges.

tropospheric scatter--a form of microwave radio transmission
in which the troposphere is used to scatter and reflect a
fraction of the incident radio waves back to earth;
powerful, highly directional antennas are used to transmit
and receive the microwave signals; reliable over-the-horizon
communications are realized for distances up to 600 miles in
a single hop; additional hops can extend the range of this
system for very long distances.

trunk network--a network of switching centers, connected by
multichannel trunk lines.

UHF-- ultra-high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 300-
to 3,000-MHz range.

VHF--very-high-frequency; any radio frequency in the 30- to
300-MHz range.

Telephones: This entry gives the total number of
subscribers.

Television--broadcast stations: This entry gives the total
number of separate broadcast stations plus any repeater
stations.

Televisions: This entry gives the total number of television
sets.

Terminology: Due to the highly structured nature of the
Factbook database, some collective generic terms have to be
used. For example, the word Country in the Country name
entry refers to a wide variety of dependencies, areas of
special sovereignty, uninhabited islands, and other entities
in addition to the traditional countries or independent
states. Military is also used as an umbrella term for
various civil defense, security, and defense activities in
many entries. The Independence entry includes the usual
colonial independence dates and former ruling states as well
as other significant nationhood dates such as the
traditional founding date or the date of unification,
federation, confederation, establishment, or state
succession that are not strictly independence dates.
Dependent areas have the nature of their dependency status
noted in this same entry.

Terrain: This entry contains a brief description of the
topography.

Total fertility rate: This entry gives a figure for the
average number of children that would be born per woman if
all women lived to the end of their childbearing years and
bore children according to a given fertility rate at each
age. The total fertility rate is a more direct measure of
the level of fertility than the crude birth rate, since it
refers to births per woman. This indicator shows the
potential for population growth in the country. High rates
will also place some limits on the labor force participation
rates for women. Large numbers of children born to women
indicate large family sizes that might limit the ability of
the families to feed and educate their children.

Transnational Issues: This category includes only two
entries at the present time --Disputes--international and
Illicit drugs--that deal with current issues going beyond
national boundaries.

Transportation: This category includes the entries dealing
with the means for movement of people and goods.

Transportation--note: This entry includes miscellaneous
transportation information of significance not included
elsewhere.

Unemployment rate: This entry contains the percent of the
labor force that is without jobs. Substantial
underemployment might be noted.

United Nations System: This information is presented in
Appendix B: United Nations System as a chart, table, or text
(depending on the version of the Factbook) that shows the
organization of the UN in detail.

Waterways: This entry gives the total length and individual
names of navigable rivers, canals, and other inland bodies
of water.

Weights and measures: This information is presented in
Appendix E: Weights and Measures and includes mathematical
notations (mathematical powers and names), metric
interrelationships (prefix; symbol; length, weight, or
capacity; area; volume), and standard conversion factors.

Years: All year references are for the calendar year (CY)
unless indicated as fiscal year (FY). The calendar year is
an accounting period of 12 months from 1 January to 31
December. The fiscal year is an accounting period of 12
months other than 1 January to 31 December. FY93/94 refers
to the fiscal year that began in calendar year 1993 and
ended in calendar year 1994.

Note: Information for the US and US dependencies was
compiled from material in the public domain and does not
represent Intelligence Community estimates. The Handbook of
International Economic Statistics, published annually in
September by the Central Intelligence Agency, contains
detailed economic information for the Organization for
Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) countries, the
successor nations to the Soviet Union, and selected other
countries. The Handbook can be obtained wherever the
Factbook is available.



=====================================================================



A Brief History of Basic Intelligence and The World Factbook


The Intelligence Cycle is the process by which information is acquired,
converted into intelligence, and made available to policymakers.
Information is raw data from any source, data that may be fragmentary,
contradictory, unreliable, ambiguous, deceptive, or wrong. Intelligence
is information that has been collected, integrated, evaluated,
analyzed, and interpreted. Finished intelligence is the final product
of the Intelligence Cycle ready to be delivered to the policymaker.

The three types of finished intelligence are: basic, current, and
estimative. Basic intelligence provides the fundamental and factual
reference material on a country or issue. Current intelligence reports
on new developments. Estimative intelligence judges probable outcomes.
The three are mutually supportive: basic intelligence is the foundation
on which the other two are constructed; current intelligence
continually updates the inventory of knowledge; and estimative
intelligence revises overall interpretations of country and issue
prospects for guidance of basic and current intelligence. The World
Factbook, The President's Daily Brief, and the National Intelligence
Estimates are examples of the three types of finished intelligence.

The United States has carried on foreign intelligence activities since
the days of George Washington, but only since World War II have they
been coordinated on a governmentwide basis. Three programs have
highlighted the development of coordinated basic intelligence since
that time: (1) the Joint Army Navy Intelligence Studies (JANIS), (2)
the National Intelligence Survey (NIS), and (3) The World Factbook.

During World War II, intelligence consumers realized that the
production of basic intelligence by different components of the US
Government resulted in a great duplication of effort and conflicting
information. The Japanese attack on Pearl Harbor in 1941 brought home
to leaders in Congress and the executive branch the need for
integrating departmental reports to national policymakers. Detailed
coordinated information was needed not only on such major powers as
Germany and Japan, but also on places of little previous interest. In
the Pacific Theater, for example, the Navy and Marines had to launch
amphibious operations against many islands about which information was
unconfirmed or nonexistent. Intelligence authorities resolved that the
United States should never again be caught unprepared.

In 1943, Gen. George B. Strong (G-2), Adm. H. C. Train (Office of Naval
Intelligence--ONI), and Gen. William J. Donovan (Director of the Office
of Strategic Services--OSS) decided that a joint effort should be
initiated. A steering committee was appointed on 27 April 1943 that
recommended the formation of a Joint Intelligence Study Publishing
Board to assemble, edit, coordinate, and publish the Joint Army Navy
Intelligence Studies (JANIS). JANIS was the first interdepartmental
basic intelligence program to fulfill the needs of the US Government
for an authoritative and coordinated appraisal of strategic basic
intelligence. Between April 1943 and July 1947, the board published 34
JANIS studies. JANIS performed well in the war effort, and numerous
letters of commendation were received, including a statement from Adm.
Forrest Sherman, Chief of Staff, Pacific Ocean Areas, which said,
"JANIS has become the indispensable reference work for the shore-based
planners."

The need for more comprehensive basic intelligence in the postwar world
was well expressed in 1946 by George S. Pettee, a noted author on
national security. He wrote in The Future of American Secret
Intelligence (Infantry Journal Press, 1946, page 46) that world
leadership in peace requires even more elaborate intelligence than war.
"The conduct of peace involves all countries, all human activities--not
just the enemy and his war production."

The Central Intelligence Agency was established on 26 July 1947 and
officially began operating on 18 September 1947. Effective 1 October
1947, the Director of Central Intelligence assumed operational
responsibility for JANIS. On 13 January 1948, the National Security
Council issued Intelligence Directive (NSCID) No. 3, which authorized
the National Intelligence Survey (NIS) program as a peacetime
replacement for the wartime JANIS program. Before adequate NIS country
sections could be produced, government agencies had to develop more
comprehensive gazetteers and better maps. The US Board on Geographic
Names (BGN) compiled the names; the Department of the Interior produced
the gazetteers; and CIA produced the maps.

The Hoover Commission's Clark Committee, set up in 1954 to study the
structure and administration of the CIA, reported to Congress in 1955
that: "The National Intelligence Survey is an invaluable publication
which provides the essential elements of basic intelligence on all
areas of the world. . . . There will always be a continuing requirement
for keeping the Survey up-to-date." The Factbook was created as an
annual summary and update to the encyclopedic NIS studies. The first
classified Factbook was published in August 1962, and the first
unclassified version was published in June 1971. The NIS program was
terminated in 1973 except for the Factbook, map, and gazetteer
components. The 1975 Factbook was the first to be made available to the
public with sales through the US Government Printing Office (GPO). The
1996 edition was printed by GPO and the 1997 edition was reprinted by
GPO. The year 1999 marks the 52nd anniversary of the establishment of
the Central Intelligence Agency and the 56th year of continuous basic
intelligence support to the US Government by The World Factbook and its
two predecessor programs



=====================================================================



Purchasing Information


The Central Intelligence Agency (CIA) prepares The World Factbook in
printed, CD-ROM, and Internet versions. US Government officials may
obtain information about availability of the Factbook directly from
their own organizations or through liaison channels to the CIA. Other
users may obtain sales information about printed copies and CD-ROMs
from the following:

Superintendent of Documents
P.O. Box 371954
Pittsburgh, PA 15250-7954
Telephone: [1] (202) 512-1800
FAX: [1] (202) 512-2250
http://www.access.gpo.gov/su_docs/


National Technical Information Service
5285 Port Royal Road
Springfield, VA 22161
Telephone: [1] (800) 553-6847 (only in the US);
[1] (703) 605-6000 (for outside US)
FAX: [1] (703) 605-6900
http://www.ntis.gov/

The Internet version may be accessed through the following World-Wide
Web uniform resource locator (URL): http://www.cia.gov

Electronic file preparation by Printing and Photography Group, Central
Intelligence Agency.



=====================================================================



@Afghanistan
-----------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, north and west of Pakistan, east of Iran

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 N, 65 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 647,500 sq km
  land: 647,500 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,529 km
  border countries: China 76 km, Iran 936 km, Pakistan 2,430 km,
  Tajikistan 1,206 km, Turkmenistan 744 km, Uzbekistan 137 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: arid to semiarid; cold winters and hot summers

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains; plains in north and southwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Amu Darya 258 m
  highest point: Nowshak 7,485 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, coal, copper, talc,
  barites, sulfur, lead, zinc, iron ore, salt, precious and
  semiprecious stones

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 3%
  other: 39% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: damaging earthquakes occur in Hindu Kush
  mountains; flooding

Environment--current issues: soil degradation; overgrazing;
  deforestation (much of the remaining forests are being cut down for
  fuel and building materials); desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 25,824,882 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 5,640,841; female 5,422,460)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 7,273,681; female 6,776,750)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 374,666; female 336,484) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.95% (1999 est.)
  note: this rate reflects the continued return of refugees

Birth rate: 41.93 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 17.02 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 14.62 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.11 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 140.55 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 47.33 years
  male: 47.82 years
  female: 46.82 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.94 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Afghan(s)
  adjective: Afghan

Ethnic groups: Pashtun 38%, Tajik 25%, Uzbek 6%, Hazara 19%,
  minor ethnic groups (Aimaks, Turkmen, Baloch, and others)

Religions: Sunni Muslim 84%, Shi'a Muslim 15%, other 1%

Languages: Pashtu 35%, Afghan Persian (Dari) 50%, Turkic
  languages (primarily Uzbek and Turkmen) 11%, 30 minor languages
  (primarily Balochi and Pashai) 4%, much bilingualism

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 31.5%
  male: 47.2%
  female: 15% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Islamic State of Afghanistan; note--the
  self-proclaimed Taliban government refers to the country as Islamic
  Emirate of Afghanistan
  conventional short form: Afghanistan
  local long form: Dowlat-e Eslami-ye Afghanestan
  local short form: Afghanestan
  former: Republic of Afghanistan

Data code: AF

Government type: transitional government

Capital: Kabul

Administrative divisions: 30 provinces (velayat,
  singular--velayat); Badakhshan, Badghis, Baghlan, Balkh, Bamian,
  Farah, Faryab, Ghazni, Ghowr, Helmand, Herat, Jowzjan, Kabol,
  Kandahar, Kapisa, Konar, Kondoz, Laghman, Lowgar, Nangarhar, Nimruz,
  Oruzgan, Paktia, Paktika, Parvan, Samangan, Sar-e Pol, Takhar,
  Vardak, Zabol
  note: there may be two new provinces of Nurestan (Nuristan) and
  Khowst

Independence: 19 August 1919 (from UK control over Afghan foreign
  affairs)

National holiday: Victory of the Muslim Nation, 28 April;
  Remembrance Day for Martyrs and Disabled, 4 May; Independence Day,
  19 August

Constitution: none

Legal system: a new legal system has not been adopted but all
  factions tacitly agree they will follow Shari'a (Islamic law)

Suffrage: undetermined; previously males 15-50 years of age

Executive branch: on 27 September 1996, the ruling members of the
  Afghan Government were displaced by members of the Islamic Taliban
  movement; the Islamic State of Afghanistan has no functioning
  government at this time, and the country remains divided among
  fighting factions
  note: the Taliban have declared themselves the legitimate government
  of Afghanistan; the UN has deferred a decision on credentials and
  the Organization of the Islamic Conference has left the Afghan seat
  vacant until the question of legitimacy can be resolved through
  negotiations among the warring factions; the country is essentially
  divided along ethnic lines; the Taliban controls the capital of
  Kabul and approximately two-thirds of the country including the
  predominately ethnic Pashtun areas in southern Afghanistan; opposing
  factions have their stronghold in the ethnically diverse north

Legislative branch: non-functioning as of June 1993

Judicial branch: non-functioning as of March 1995, although there
  are local Shari'a (Islamic law) courts throughout the country

Political parties and leaders: Taliban (Religious Students
  Afghanistan comprised of Jumbesh-i-Melli Islami (National Islamic
  other smaller parties are Hizbi Islami-Gulbuddin (Islamic Party)
  SAYYAF]; Harakat-Inqilab-i-Islami (Islamic Revolutionary Movement)
  GAILANI]; Hizbi Wahdat-Akbari faction (Islamic Unity Party)

Political pressure groups and leaders: tribal elders represent
  traditional Pashtun leadership; Afghan refugees in Pakistan,
  Australia, US, and elsewhere have organized politically; Peshawar,
  Pakistan-based groups such as the Coordination Council for National

International organization participation: AsDB, CP, ECO, ESCAP,
  FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, Intelsat, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  note: embassy operations suspended 21 August 1997
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  chancery: 2341 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US embassy in Kabul
  has been closed since January 1989 due to security concerns

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and black with a gold emblem centered on the three bands; the
  emblem features a temple-like structure with Islamic inscriptions
  above and below, encircled by a wreath on the left and right and by
  a bolder Islamic inscription above, all of which are encircled by
  two crossed scimitars
  note: the Taliban uses a plain white flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Afghanistan is an extremely poor, landlocked
  country, highly dependent on farming and livestock raising (sheep
  and goats). Economic considerations have played second fiddle to
  political and military upheavals during two decades of war,
  including the nearly 10-year Soviet military occupation (which ended
  15 February 1989). During that conflict one-third of the population
  fled the country, with Pakistan and Iran sheltering a combined peak
  of more than 6 million refugees. Now, only 750,000 registered Afghan
  refugees remain in Pakistan and about 1.2 million in Iran. Another 1
  million have probably moved into and around urban areas within
  Afghanistan. Gross domestic product has fallen substantially over
  the past 20 years because of the loss of labor and capital and the
  disruption of trade and transport. Much of the population continues
  to suffer from insufficient food, clothing, housing, and medical
  care. Inflation remains a serious problem throughout the country,
  with one estimate putting the rate at 240% in Kabul in 1996.
  International aid can deal with only a fraction of the humanitarian
  problem, let alone promote economic development. Government efforts
  to encourage foreign investment have not worked. The economic
  situation did not improve in 1998. Numerical data are likely to be
  either unavailable or unreliable.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$20 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 53%
  industry: 28.5%
  services: 18.5% (1990)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 240% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 7.1 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and animal husbandry
  67.8%, industry 10.2%, construction 6.3%, commerce 5%, services and
  other 10.7% (1980 est.)

Unemployment rate: 8% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: small-scale production of textiles, soap, furniture,
  shoes, fertilizer, and cement; handwoven carpets; natural gas, oil,
  coal, copper

Electricity--production: 540 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 35.19%
  hydro: 64.81%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 660 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996) (1996)

Electricity--imports: 120 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, fruits, nuts, karakul pelts; wool,
  mutton

Exports: $80 million (1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: fruits and nuts, handwoven carpets, wool,
  cotton, hides and pelts, precious and semi-precious gems

Exports--partners: FSU, Pakistan, Iran, Germany, India, UK,
  Belgium, Luxembourg, Czech Republic

Imports: $150 million (1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: food and petroleum products; most consumer
  goods

Imports--partners: FSU, Pakistan, Iran, Japan, Singapore, India,
  South Korea, Germany

Debt--external: $2.3 billion (March 1991 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $214.6 million (1995); note?US provided
  $450 million in bilateral assistance (1985-93); US continues to
  contribute to multilateral assistance through the UN programs of
  food aid, immunization, land mine removal, and a wide range of aid
  to refugees and displaced persons

Currency: 1 afghani (AF) = 100 puls

Exchange rates: afghanis (Af) per US$1--4,750 (February 1999),
  17,000 (December 1996), 7,000 (January 1995), 1,900 (January 1994),
  1,019 (March 1993), 850 (1991); note--these rates reflect the free
  market exchange rates rather than the official exchange rate, which
  was fixed at 50.600 afghanis to the dollar until 1996, when it rose
  to 2,262.65 per dollar, and finally became fixed again at 3,000.00
  per dollar on April 1996

Fiscal year: 21 March--20 March



Communications



Telephones: 31,200 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: very limited telephone and telegraph service; in 1997,
  telecommunications links were established between Mazar-e Sharif,
  Herat, Kandahar, Jalalabad, and Kabul through satellite and
  microwave systems
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
  linked only to Iran and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region);
  commercial satellite telephone center in Ghazni

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6 (5 are inactive), FM 1, shortwave
  3 (1998)

Radios: 1.67 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA
  note: in 1997, there was a station in Mazar-e Sharif reaching four
  northern Afghanistan provinces; also, the government ran a central
  television station in Kabul and regional stations in nine of the 30
  provinces; it is unknown if any of these stations currently operate

Televisions: 100,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 24.6 km
  broad gauge: 9.6 km 1.524-m gauge from Gushgy (Turkmenistan) to
  Towraghondi; 15 km 1.524-m gauge from Termiz (Uzbekistan) to
  Kheyrabad transshipment point on south bank of Amu Darya

Highways:
  total: 21,000 km
  paved: 2,793 km
  unpaved: 18,207 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,200 km; chiefly Amu Darya, which handles vessels up
  to about 500 DWT

Pipelines: petroleum products--Uzbekistan to Bagram and
  Turkmenistan to Shindand; natural gas 180 km

Ports and harbors: Kheyrabad, Shir Khan

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 container ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,982
  GRT/14,101 DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 44 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 11
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 33
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA; note--the military does not exist on a
  national basis; some elements of the former Army, Air and Air
  Defense Forces, National Guard, Border Guard Forces, National Police
  Force (Sarandoi), and tribal militias still exist but are
  factionalized among the various groups

Military manpower--military age: 22 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 6,326,135 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,392,336 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 248,320 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: support to Islamic militants worldwide by
  some factions; question over which group should hold Afghanistan's
  seat at the UN

Illicit drugs: world's second-largest illicit opium producer
  after Burma (cultivation in 1998--41,720 hectares, a 7% increase over
  1997; potential production in 1998--1,350 metric tons) and a major
  source of hashish; increasing number of heroin-processing
  laboratories being set up in the country; major political factions
  in the country profit from drug trade



======================================================================




@Albania
-------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea and
  Ionian Sea, between Greece and Serbia and Montenegro

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 28,750 sq km
  land: 27,400 sq km
  water: 1,350 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 720 km
  border countries: Greece 282 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia 151 km, Serbia and Montenegro 287 km (114 km with Serbia,
  173 km with Montenegro)

Coastline: 362 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mild temperate; cool, cloudy, wet winters; hot, clear,
  dry summers; interior is cooler and wetter

Terrain: mostly mountains and hills; small plains along coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Maja e Korabit (Golem Korab) 2,753 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium,
  copper, timber, nickel

Land use:
  arable land: 21%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 15%
  forests and woodland: 38%
  other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,410 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes; tsunamis occur along
  southwestern coast

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
  pollution from industrial and domestic effluents

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location along Strait of Otranto (links
  Adriatic Sea to Ionian Sea and Mediterranean Sea)



People



Population: 3,364,571 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 568,642; female 530,088)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 957,561; female 1,105,870)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 84,280; female 118,130) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.05% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.74 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.35 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.93 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.87 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 42.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69 years
  male: 65.92 years
  female: 72.33 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.5 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Albanian(s)
  adjective: Albanian

Ethnic groups: Albanian 95%, Greeks 3%, other 2% (Vlachs,
  Gypsies, Serbs, and Bulgarians) (1989 est.)
  note: in 1989, other estimates of the Greek population ranged from
  1% (official Albanian statistics) to 12% (from a Greek organization)

Religions: Muslim 70%, Albanian Orthodox 20%, Roman Catholic 10%
  note: all mosques and churches were closed in 1967 and religious
  observances prohibited; in November 1990, Albania began allowing
  private religious practice

Languages: Albanian (Tosk is the official dialect), Greek

Literacy:
  definition: age 9 and over can read and write
  total population: 93%
  male: NA%
  female: NA% (1997 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Albania
  conventional short form: Albania
  local long form: Republika e Shqiperise
  local short form: Shqiperia
  former: People's Socialist Republic of Albania

Data code: AL

Government type: emerging democracy

Capital: Tirana

Administrative divisions: 36 districts (rrethe, singular--rreth)
  and 1 municipality* (bashki); Berat, Bulqize, Delvine, Devoll
  (Bilisht), Diber (Peshkopi), Durres, Elbasan, Fier, Gjirokaster,
  Gramsh, Has (Krume), Kavaje, Kolonje (Erseke), Korce, Kruje, Kucove,
  Kukes, Lac, Lezhe, Librazhd, Lushnje, Malesi e Madhe (Koplik),
  Mallakaster (Ballsh), Mat (Burrel), Mirdite (Rreshen), Peqin,
  Permet, Pogradec, Puke, Sarande, Shkoder, Skrapar (Corovode),
  Tepelene, Tirane (Tirana), Tirane* (Tirana), Tropoje (Bajram Curri),
  Vlore
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 28 November 1912 (from Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 November (1912)

Constitution: a new constitution was adopted by popular
  referendum on 28 November 1998; note--the opposition Democratic Party
  boycotted the vote

Legal system: has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President of the Republic Rexhep MEIDANI (since 24
  July 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Pandeli MAJKO (since 2 October
  1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  approved by the president
  elections: president elected by the People's Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 24 July 1997 (next to be held NA
  2002); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Rexhep MEIDANI elected president; People's
  Assembly vote by number--total votes 122, for 110, against 3,
  abstained 2, invalid 7

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Kuvendi
  Popullor (155 seats; most members are elected by direct popular vote
  and some by proportional vote for four-year terms)
  elections: last held 29 June 1997 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PS 53.36%, PD 25.33%, PSD
  2.5%, PBDNJ 2.78%, PBK 2.36%, PAD 2.85%, PR 2.25%, PLL 3.09%, PDK
  1.00%, PBSD 0.84%; seats by party--PS 101, PD 27, PSD 8, PBDNJ 4, PBK
  3, PAD 2, PR 2, PLL 2, PDK 1, PBSD 1, PUK 1, independents 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chairman of the Supreme Court is
  elected by the People's Assembly for a four-year term

Political parties and leaders: Albanian Socialist Party or PS

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMIG, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Petrit BUSHATI
  chancery: 2100 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Marisa R. LINO
  embassy: Rruga Elbasanit 103, Tirana
  mailing address: American Embassy, Tirana, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-9510

Flag description: red with a black two-headed eagle in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: An extremely poor country by European
  standards, Albania is making the difficult transition to a more
  open-market economy. The economy rebounded in 1993-95 after a severe
  depression accompanying the collapse of the previous centrally
  planned system in 1990 and 1991. However, a weakening of government
  resolve to maintain stabilization policies in the election year of
  1996 contributed to renewal of inflationary pressures, spurred by
  the budget deficit which exceeded 12%. The collapse of financial
  pyramid schemes in early 1997--which had attracted deposits from a
  substantial portion of Albania's population--triggered severe social
  unrest which led to more than 1,500 deaths, widespread destruction
  of property, and an 8% drop in GDP. The new government installed in
  July 1997 has taken strong measures to restore public order and to
  revive economic activity and trade. The economy continues to be
  bolstered by remittances of some 20% of the labor force which works
  abroad, mostly in Greece and Italy. These remittances supplement GDP
  and help offset the large foreign trade deficit. Most agricultural
  land was privatized in 1992, substantially improving peasant
  incomes. In 1998, Albania probably recovered most if not all of the
  7% drop in GDP of 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,490 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 56%
  industry: 21%
  services: 23% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 19.6% (1996 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 40% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 1.692 million (1994 est.) (including 352,000
  emigrant workers and 261,000 domestically unemployed)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture (nearly all private; but
  some state employed) 49.5%, private business sector 22.2%, state
  business sector 28.3% (including state-owned industry 7.8%);
  note--includes only those domestically employed

Unemployment rate: 14% (October 1997) officially, but likely to
  be as high as 28%

Budget:
  revenues: $624 million
  expenditures: $996 million, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: food processing, textiles and clothing; lumber, oil,
  cement, chemicals, mining, basic metals, hydropower

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 5.12 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 4.3%
  hydro: 95.7%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.27 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996) (1996)

Electricity--imports: 150 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wide range of temperate-zone crops and
  livestock

Exports: $212 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: asphalt, metals and metallic ores,
  electricity, crude oil, vegetables, fruits, tobacco

Exports--partners: Italy, Greece, Germany, Belgium, US

Imports: $791 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery, consumer goods, grains

Imports--partners: Italy, Greece, Bulgaria, Turkey, The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Debt--external: $645 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $630 million (1997 pledged)

Currency: 1 lek (L) = 100 qintars

Exchange rates: leke (L) per US$1--139.93 (January 1999), 150.63
  (1998), 148.93 (1997), 104.50 (1996), 92.70 (1995), 94.62 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 55,000

Telephone system:
  domestic: obsolete wire system; no longer provides a telephone for
  every village; in 1992, following the fall of the communist
  government, peasants cut the wire to about 1,000 villages and used
  it to build fences
  international: inadequate; international traffic carried by
  microwave radio relay from the Tirana exchange to Italy and Greece

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 3, shortwave 4 (1998)

Radios: 577,000 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13 (1997)

Televisions: 300,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 447 km (none electrified)
  standard gauge: 447 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 18,000 km
  paved: 5,400 km
  unpaved: 12,600 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 43 km plus Albanian sections of Lake Scutari, Lake
  Ohrid, and Lake Prespa (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 145 km; petroleum products 55 km; natural
  gas 64 km (1991)

Ports and harbors: Durres, Sarande, Shengjin, Vlore

Merchant marine:
  total: 8 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 28,394 GRT/41,429
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 6
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces,
  Interior Ministry Troops, Border Guards

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 763,949 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 622,013 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 32,954 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $60 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: the Albanian Government supports
  protection of the rights of ethnic Albanians outside of its borders
  but has downplayed them to further its primary foreign policy goal
  of regional cooperation; Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks
  independence from Serbian Republic; Albanians in The Former Yugoslav
  Republic of Macedonia claim discrimination in education, access to
  public-sector jobs, and representation in government

Illicit drugs: increasingly active transshipment point for
  Southwest Asian opiates, hashish, and cannabis transiting the Balkan
  route and--to a far lesser extent--cocaine from South America destined
  for Western Europe; limited opium and cannabis production; ethnic
  Albanian narcotrafficking organizations active and rapidly expanding
  in Europe



======================================================================




@Algeria
-------





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea,
  between Morocco and Tunisia

Geographic coordinates: 28 00 N, 3 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 2,381,740 sq km
  land: 2,381,740 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than 3.5 times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 6,343 km
  border countries: Libya 982 km, Mali 1,376 km, Mauritania 463 km,
  Morocco 1,559 km, Niger 956 km, Tunisia 965 km, Western Sahara 42 km

Coastline: 998 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 32-52 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: arid to semiarid; mild, wet winters with hot, dry
  summers along coast; drier with cold winters and hot summers on high
  plateau; sirocco is a hot, dust/sand-laden wind especially common in
  summer

Terrain: mostly high plateau and desert; some mountains; narrow,
  discontinuous coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Chott Melrhir -40 m
  highest point: Tahat 3,003 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates,
  uranium, lead, zinc

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 2%
  other: 82% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,550 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: mountainous areas subject to severe earthquakes;
  mud slides

Environment--current issues: soil erosion from overgrazing and
  other poor farming practices; desertification; dumping of raw
  sewage, petroleum refining wastes, and other industrial effluents is
  leading to the pollution of rivers and coastal waters; Mediterranean
  Sea, in particular, becoming polluted from oil wastes, soil erosion,
  and fertilizer runoff; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: second-largest country in Africa (after Sudan)



People



Population: 31,133,486 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 37% (male 5,911,910; female 5,696,538)
  15-64 years: 59% (male 9,255,702; female 9,063,954)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 559,570; female 645,812) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.1% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.52 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 43.82 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.24 years
  male: 68.07 years
  female: 70.46 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.27 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Algerian(s)
  adjective: Algerian

Ethnic groups: Arab-Berber 99%, European less than 1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim (state religion) 99%, Christian and
  Jewish 1%

Languages: Arabic (official), French, Berber dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 61.6%
  male: 73.9%
  female: 49% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Democratic and Popular Republic of Algeria
  conventional short form: Algeria
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Jaza'iriyah ad Dimuqratiyah ash
  Shabiyah
  local short form: Al Jaza'ir

Data code: AG

Government type: republic

Capital: Algiers

Administrative divisions: 48 provinces (wilayas,
  singular--wilaya); Adrar, Ain Defla, Ain Temouchent, Alger, Annaba,
  Batna, Bechar, Bejaia, Biskra, Blida, Bordj Bou Arreridj, Bouira,
  Boumerdes, Chlef, Constantine, Djelfa, El Bayadh, El Oued, El Tarf,
  Ghardaia, Guelma, Illizi, Jijel, Khenchela, Laghouat, Mascara,
  Medea, Mila, Mostaganem, M'Sila, Naama, Oran, Ouargla, Oum el
  Bouaghi, Relizane, Saida, Setif, Sidi Bel Abbes, Skikda, Souk Ahras,
  Tamanghasset, Tebessa, Tiaret, Tindouf, Tipaza, Tissemsilt, Tizi
  Ouzou, Tlemcen

Independence: 5 July 1962 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 1 November (1954)

Constitution: 19 November 1976, effective 22 November 1976;
  revised 3 November 1988, 23 February 1989, and 28 November 1996;
  note--referendum approving the revisions of 28 November 1996 was
  signed into law 7 December 1996

Legal system: socialist, based on French and Islamic law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in ad hoc Constitutional Council
  composed of various public officials, including several Supreme
  Court justices; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Liamine ZEROUAL (appointed president 31
  January 1994, elected president 16 November 1995)
  head of government: Interim Prime Minister Smail HAMDANI (since 15
  December 1998); note--appointed as interim prime minister until April
  1999 presidential elections
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 16 November 1995 (next to be held NA April 1999;
  note--ZEROUAL announced in September 1998 his intention to step down
  after early presidential elections); prime minister appointed by the
  president
  election results: Liamine ZEROUAL elected president; percent of
  vote--Liamine ZEROUAL 61.3%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the National
  People's Assembly or Al-Majlis Ech-Chaabi Al-Watani (380 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms) and the
  Council of Nations (144 seats; one-third of the members appointed by
  the president, two-thirds elected by indirect vote; members serve
  six-year terms; created as a result of the constitutional revision
  of November 1996)
  elections: National People's Assembly--last held 5 June 1997 (next to
  be held NA 2001); elections for two-thirds of the Council of
  Nations--last held 25 December 1997 (next to be held NA 2003)
  election results: National People's Assembly--percent of vote by
  party--NA%; seats by party--RND 156, MSP 69, FLN 62, Nahda Movement
  34, FFS 20, RCD 19, PT 4, Republican Progressive Party 3, Union for
  Democracy and Freedoms 1, Liberal Social Party 1, independents 11;
  Council of Nations--percent of vote by party--NA%; seats by party--RND
  80, FLN 10, FFS 4, MSP 2 (remaining 48 seats appointed by the
  president, party breakdown NA)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: Islamic Salvation Front or FIS
  BENHAMOUDA, secretary general]; Socialist Forces Front or FFS
  note: the government established a multiparty system in September
  1989 and, as of 31 December 1990, over 50 legal parties existed; a
  new party law was enacted in March 1997

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, AMU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OAS
  (observer), OAU, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ramtane LAMAMRA
  chancery: 2118 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Cameron R. HUME
  embassy: 4 Chemin Cheikh Bachir El-Ibrahimi, Algiers
  mailing address: B. P. Box 549, Alger-Gare, 16000 Algiers

Flag description: two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side)
  and white with a red, five-pointed star within a red crescent; the
  crescent, star, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam
  (the state religion)



Economy



Economy--overview: The hydrocarbons sector is the backbone of the
  economy, accounting for roughly 52% of budget revenues, 25% of GDP,
  and over 95% of export earnings. Algeria has the fifth-largest
  reserves of natural gas in the world and is the second largest gas
  exporter; it ranks fourteenth for oil reserves. Algiers' efforts to
  reform one of the most centrally planned economies in the Arab world
  began after the 1986 collapse of world oil prices plunged the
  country into a severe recession. In 1989, the government launched a
  comprehensive, IMF-supported program to achieve economic
  stabilization and to introduce market mechanisms into the economy.
  Despite substantial progress toward economic adjustment, in 1992 the
  reform drive stalled as Algiers became embroiled in political
  turmoil. In September 1993, a new government was formed, and one
  priority was the resumption and acceleration of the structural
  adjustment process. Burdened with a heavy foreign debt, Algiers
  concluded a one-year standby arrangement with the IMF in April 1994
  and the following year signed onto a three-year extended fund
  facility which ended 30 April 1998. Progress on economic reform, a
  Paris Club debt rescheduling in 1995, and oil and gas sector
  expansion have contributed to a recovery since 1995. Investments in
  developing hydrocarbon resources have spurred growth, but the
  economy remains heavily dependent on volatile oil and gas revenues.
  The government has continued efforts to diversify the economy by
  attracting foreign and domestic investment outside the energy sector
  in order to reduce high unemployment and improve living standards.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$140.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 12%
  industry: 51%
  services: 37% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 22.6% (1995 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.8%
  highest 10%: 26.8% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 7.8 million (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: government 29.5%, agriculture 22%,
  construction and public works 16.2%, industry 13.6%, commerce and
  services 13.5%, transportation and communication 5.2% (1989)

Unemployment rate: 30% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $14.4 billion
  expenditures: $15.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $4.4
  million (1998 est.)

Industries: petroleum, natural gas, light industries, mining,
  electrical, petrochemical, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: -4% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 18.4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 98.91%
  hydro: 1.09%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 18.13 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 490 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 220 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, oats, grapes, olives,
  citrus, fruits; sheep, cattle

Exports: $14 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and natural gas 97%

Exports--partners: Italy 18.8%, US 14.8%, France 11.8%, Spain 8%,
  Germany 7.9% (1995 est.)

Imports: $8.5 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: capital goods, food and beverages, consumer
  goods

Imports--partners: France 29%, Spain 10.5%, Italy 8.2%, US 8%,
  Germany 5.6% (1995 est.)

Debt--external: $31.4 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $897.5 million (1994)

Currency: 1 Algerian dinar (DA) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Algerian dinars (DA) per US$1--61.264 (January
  1999), 58.739 (1998), 57.707 (1997), 54.749 (1996), 47.663 (1995),
  35.059 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1,381,342 (5,200 cellular telephone subscribers)
  (1997)

Telephone system:
  domestic: good service in north but sparse in south; domestic
  satellite system with 12 earth stations (20 additional domestic
  earth stations are planned)
  international: 5 submarine cables; microwave radio relay to Italy,
  France, Spain, Morocco, and Tunisia; coaxial cable to Morocco and
  Tunisia; participant in Medarabtel; satellite earth stations--2
  Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik, and
  1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 23, FM 1, shortwave 8 (1998 est.)

Radios: 3.5 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18 (not including low-power
  stations) (1997)

Televisions: 2 million (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,772 km
  standard gauge: 3,616 km 1.435-m gauge (301 km electrified; 215 km
  double track)
  narrow gauge: 1,156 km 1.055-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 102,424 km
  paved: 70,570 km (including 608 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 31,854 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 6,612 km; petroleum products 298 km; natural
  gas 2,948 km

Ports and harbors: Algiers, Annaba, Arzew, Bejaia, Beni Saf,
  Dellys, Djendjene, Ghazaouet, Jijel, Mostaganem, Oran, Skikda, Tenes

Merchant marine:
  total: 78 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 933,672 GRT/1,094,104
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 27, chemical tanker 7, liquefied gas
  tanker 11, oil tanker 5, roll-on/roll-off cargo 13, short-sea
  passenger 5, specialized tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 137 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 51
  over 3,047 m: 8
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 24
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 86
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 24
  914 to 1,523 m: 40
  under 914 m: 19 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Popular Army, Navy, Air Force,
  Territorial Air Defense, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 8,237,682 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 5,046,931 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 359,592 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.3 billion (1994)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.7% (1994)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: part of southeastern region claimed by
  Libya



======================================================================




@American Samoa
--------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean,
  about one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 14 20 S, 170 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 199 sq km
  land: 199 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Rose Island and Swains Island

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 116 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine, moderated by southeast trade winds;
  annual rainfall averages 124 inches; rainy season from November to
  April, dry season from May to October; little seasonal temperature
  variation

Terrain: five volcanic islands with rugged peaks and limited
  coastal plains, two coral atolls (Rose Island, Swains Island)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Lata 966 m

Natural resources: pumice, pumicite

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 10%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 70%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons common from December to March

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water
  resources; the water division of the government has spent
  substantial funds in the past few years to improve water catchments
  and pipelines

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: Pago Pago has one of the best natural deepwater
  harbors in the South Pacific Ocean, sheltered by shape from rough
  seas and protected by peripheral mountains from high winds;
  strategic location in the South Pacific Ocean



People



Population: 63,786 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 39% (male 12,840; female 12,074)
  15-64 years: 56% (male 17,933; female 18,035)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 1,494; female 1,410) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.64% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.53 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.04 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.06 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.19 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.46 years
  male: 71.23 years
  female: 79.95 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.66 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: American Samoan(s)
  adjective: American Samoan

Ethnic groups: Samoan (Polynesian) 89%, Caucasian 2%, Tongan 4%,
  other 5%

Religions: Christian Congregationalist 50%, Roman Catholic 20%,
  Protestant denominations and other 30%

Languages: Samoan (closely related to Hawaiian and other
  Polynesian languages), English
  note: most people are bilingual

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 98%
  female: 97% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of American Samoa
  conventional short form: American Samoa
  abbreviation: AS

Data code: AQ

Dependency status: unincorporated and unorganized territory of
  the US; administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department
  of the Interior

Government type: NA

Capital: Pago Pago

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US); there are
  no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are three districts and two islands* at the
  second order; Eastern, Manu'a, Rose Island*, Swains Island*, Western

Independence: none (territory of the US)

National holiday: Territorial Flag Day, 17 April (1900)

Constitution: ratified 1966, in effect 1967

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON of the US (since
  20 January 1993) and Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20
  January 1993)
  head of government: Governor Tauese P. SUNIA (since 3 January 1997)
  and Lieutenant Governor Togiola TULAFONO (since 3 January 1997)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
  on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election
  last held 3 November 1996 (next to be held 7 November 2000)
  election results: Tauese P. SUNIA elected governor; percent of
  vote--Tauese P. SUNIA (Democrat) 51%, Peter REID (independent) 49%

Legislative branch: bicameral Fono or Legislative Assembly
  consists of the House of Representatives (21 seats--20 of which are
  elected by popular vote and 1 is an appointed, nonvoting delegate
  from Swains Island; members serve two-year terms) and the Senate (18
  seats; members are elected from local chiefs and serve four-year
  terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held NA November 1998 (next
  to be held NA November 2000); Senate--last held 3 November 1996 (next
  to be held 7 November 2000)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--NA; Senate--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--NA
  note: American Samoa elects one delegate to the US House of
  Representatives; election last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held
  7 November 2000); results--Eni R. F. H. FALEOMAVAEGA (Democrat)
  reelected as delegate for a sixth term

Judicial branch: High Court (chief justice and associate justices
  are appointed by the US Secretary of the Interior)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party [leader NA];

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate),
  Interpol (subbureau), IOC, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: blue, with a white triangle edged in red that
  is based on the outer side and extends to the hoist side; a brown
  and white American bald eagle flying toward the hoist side is
  carrying two traditional Samoan symbols of authority, a staff and a
  war club



Economy



Economy--overview: This is a traditional Polynesian economy in
  which more than 90% of the land is communally owned. Economic
  activity is strongly linked to the US, with which American Samoa
  conducts the great bulk of its foreign trade. Tuna fishing and tuna
  processing plants are the backbone of the private sector, with
  canned tuna the primary export. Transfers from the US Government add
  substantially to American Samoa's economic well-being. According to
  one observer, attempts by the government to develop a larger and
  broader economy are restrained by Samoa's remote location, its
  limited transportation, and its devastating hurricanes. Tourism, a
  developing sector, may be held back by the current financial
  difficulties in East Asia.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$150 million (1995 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,600 (1995 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 13,949 (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: government 33%, tuna canneries 34%,
  other 33% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1991)

Budget:
  revenues: $121 million (37% in local revenue and 63% in US grants )
  expenditures: $127 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97)

Industries: tuna canneries (largely dependent on foreign fishing
  vessels), handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 105 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 105 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, coconuts, vegetables, taro,
  breadfruit, yams, copra, pineapples, papayas; dairy products,
  livestock

Exports: $313 million (1996)

Exports--commodities: canned tuna 93%

Exports--partners: US 99.6%

Imports: $471 million (1996)

Imports--commodities: materials for canneries 56%, food 8%,
  petroleum products 7%, machinery and parts 6%

Imports--partners: US 62%, Japan 9%, NZ 7%, Australia 11%, Fiji
  4%, other 7%

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?important financial support
  from the US

Currency: 1 US dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 9,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: good telex, telegraph, facsimile and cellular phone
  services; domestic satellite system with 1 Comsat earth station
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 12,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 350 km
  paved: 150 km
  unpaved: 200 km

Ports and harbors: Aunu'u (new construction), Auasi, Faleosao,
  Ofu, Pago Pago, Ta'u

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Andorra
-------





Geography



Location: Southwestern Europe, between France and Spain

Geographic coordinates: 42 30 N, 1 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 450 sq km
  land: 450 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 125 km
  border countries: France 60 km, Spain 65 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; snowy, cold winters and warm, dry summers

Terrain: rugged mountains dissected by narrow valleys

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Riu Valira 840 m
  highest point: Coma Pedrosa 2,946 m

Natural resources: hydropower, mineral water, timber, iron ore,
  lead

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 56%
  forests and woodland: 22%
  other: 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: snowslides, avalanches

Environment--current issues: deforestation; overgrazing of
  mountain meadows contributes to soil erosion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 65,939 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 14% (male 4,880; female 4,527)
  15-64 years: 73% (male 25,811; female 22,444)
  65 years and over: 13% (male 4,196; female 4,081) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.24% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.27 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.46 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 17.61 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.15 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.03 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.12 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.08 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 83.46 years
  male: 80.55 years
  female: 86.55 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.25 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Andorran(s)
  adjective: Andorran

Ethnic groups: Spanish 61%, Andorran 30%, French 6%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic (predominant)

Languages: Catalan (official), French, Castilian

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Principality of Andorra
  conventional short form: Andorra
  local long form: Principat d'Andorra
  local short form: Andorra

Data code: AN

Government type: parliamentary democracy (since March 1993) that
  retains as its heads of state a coprincipality; the two princes are
  the president of France and bishop of Seo de Urgel, Spain, who are
  represented locally by officials called veguers

Capital: Andorra la Vella

Administrative divisions: 7 parishes (parroquies,
  singular--parroquia); Andorra, Canillo, Encamp, La Massana, Les
  Escaldes, Ordino, Sant Julia de Loria

Independence: 1278

National holiday: Mare de Deu de Meritxell, 8 September

Constitution: Andorra's first written constitution was drafted in
  1991; adopted 14 March 1993

Legal system: based on French and Spanish civil codes; no
  judicial review of legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: French Coprince Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May 1995)
  represented by Veguer Jean-Pierre COURTOIS (since NA); and Spanish
  Coprince Episcopal Monseigneur Joan MARTI Alanis (since 31 January
  1971) represented by Veguer Francesc BADIA Battalla (since NA)
  head of government: Executive Council President Marc FORNE Molne
  (since 21 December 1994)
  cabinet: Executive Council designated by the Executive Council
  president
  elections: Executive Council president elected by the General
  Council and formally appointed by the coprinces; election last held
  16 February 1997 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: Marc FORNE Molne elected executive council
  president; percent of General Council vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council of the Valleys or
  Consell General de las Valls (28 seats; members are elected by
  direct popular vote, 14 from a single national constituency and 14
  to represent each of the 7 parishes; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 16 February 1997 (next to be held NA February
  2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--UL 57%, AND 21%, IDN 7%,
  ND 7%, other 8%; seats by party--UL 16, AND 6, ND 2, IDN 2, UPO 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Andorra at Perpignan, France,
  (two civil judges appointed by the veguers, one appeals judge
  appointed by the coprinces alternately); Ecclesiastical Court of the
  Bishop of Seo de Urgel (Spain); Tribunal of the Courts or Tribunal
  des Cortes, (presided over by the two civil judges, one appeals
  judge, the veguers, and two members of the General Council)

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Group or AND
  note: there are two other small parties

International organization participation: CE, ECE, ICRM, IFRCS,
  Interpol, IOC, ITU, OSCE, UN, UNESCO, WHO, WIPO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Juli MINOVES-TRIQUELL (also Permanent
  Representative to the UN)
  chancery: 2 United Nations Plaza, 25th Floor, New York, NY 10017

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Andorra; the US Ambassador to Spain is accredited to
  Andorra; US interests in Andorra are represented by the Consulate
  General's office in Barcelona (Spain); mailing address: Paseo Reina
  Elisenda, 23, 08034 Barcelona, Spain; telephone: (3493) 280-2227;
  FAX: (3493) 205-7705; note--Consul General Douglas R. SMITH makes
  periodic visits to Andorra

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist
  side), yellow, and red with the national coat of arms centered in
  the yellow band; the coat of arms features a quartered shield;
  similar to the flags of Chad and Romania that do not have a national
  coat of arms in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism, the mainstay of Andorra's tiny,
  well-to-do economy, accounts for roughly 80% of GDP. An estimated 10
  million tourists visit annually, attracted by Andorra's duty-free
  status and by its summer and winter resorts. Andorra's comparative
  advantage has recently eroded as the economies of neighboring France
  and Spain have been opened up, providing broader availability of
  goods and lower tariffs. The banking sector, with its "tax haven"
  status, also contributes substantially to the economy. Agricultural
  production is limited by a scarcity of arable land, and most food
  has to be imported. The principal livestock activity is sheep
  raising. Manufacturing consists mainly of cigarettes, cigars, and
  furniture. Andorra is a member of the EU Customs Union and is
  treated as an EU member for trade in manufactured goods (no tariffs)
  and as a non-EU member for agricultural products.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.2 billion (1995 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$18,000 (1995 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 0%

Budget:
  revenues: $138 million
  expenditures: $177 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1993)

Industries: tourism (particularly skiing), sheep, timber,
  tobacco, banking

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 140 million kWh (1992)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: tobacco, rye, wheat, barley, oats,
  vegetables; sheep

Exports: $47 million (f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: electricity, tobacco products, furniture

Exports--partners: France 49%, Spain 47%

Imports: $1 billion (1995)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, food

Imports--partners: France, Spain, US 4.2%

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: none

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes; 1 peseta (Pta) = 100
  centimos; the French and Spanish currencies are used

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994); Spanish pesetas (Ptas) per US$1--143.39 (January 1999),
  149.40 (1998), 146.41 (1997), 126.66 (1996), 124.69 (1995), 133.96
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 21,258 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: modern system with microwave radio relay connections
  between exchanges
  international: landline circuits to France and Spain

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 15, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 10,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: 7,000 (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 269 km
  paved: 198 km
  unpaved: 71 km (1991 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France and Spain



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Angola
------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean,
  between Namibia and Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 12 30 S, 18 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,246,700 sq km
  land: 1,246,700 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,198 km
  border countries: Democratic Republic of the Congo 2,511 km of which
  220 km is the boundary of discontiguous Cabinda Province, Republic
  of the Congo 201 km, Namibia 1,376 km, Zambia 1,110 km

Coastline: 1,600 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: semiarid in south and along coast to Luanda; north has
  cool, dry season (May to October) and hot, rainy season (November to
  April)

Terrain: narrow coastal plain rises abruptly to vast interior
  plateau

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Morro de Moco 2,620 m

Natural resources: petroleum, diamonds, iron ore, phosphates,
  copper, feldspar, gold, bauxite, uranium

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 23%
  forests and woodland: 43%
  other: 32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: locally heavy rainfall causes periodic flooding
  on the plateau

Environment--current issues: the overuse of pastures and
  subsequent soil erosion attributable to population pressures;
  desertification; deforestation of tropical rain forest, in response
  to both international demand for tropical timber and to domestic use
  as fuel, resulting in loss of biodiversity; soil erosion
  contributing to water pollution and siltation of rivers and dams;
  inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Desertification, Law of the Sea
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change

Geography--note: Cabinda is separated from rest of country by the
  Democratic Republic of the Congo



People



Population: 11,177,537 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 2,545,006; female 2,473,732)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 2,938,178; female 2,909,844)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 143,074; female 167,703) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.84% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 43.11 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.35 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 129.19 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 48.39 years
  male: 46.08 years
  female: 50.82 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.12 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Angolan(s)
  adjective: Angolan

Ethnic groups: Ovimbundu 37%, Kimbundu 25%, Bakongo 13%, mestico
  (mixed European and Native African) 2%, European 1%, other 22%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 47%, Roman Catholic 38%, Protestant
  15% (1998 est.)

Languages: Portuguese (official), Bantu and other African
  languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 42%
  male: 56%
  female: 28% (1998 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Angola
  conventional short form: Angola
  local long form: Republica de Angola
  local short form: Angola
  former: People's Republic of Angola

Data code: AO

Government type: transitional government, nominally a multiparty
  democracy with a strong presidential system

Capital: Luanda

Administrative divisions: 18 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia); Bengo, Benguela, Bie, Cabinda, Cuando Cubango,
  Cuanza Norte, Cuanza Sul, Cunene, Huambo, Huila, Luanda, Lunda
  Norte, Lunda Sul, Malanje, Moxico, Namibe, Uige, Zaire

Independence: 11 November 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 11 November (1975)

Constitution: 11 November 1975; revised 7 January 1978, 11 August
  1980, 6 March 1991, and 26 August 1992

Legal system: based on Portuguese civil law system and customary
  law; recently modified to accommodate political pluralism and
  increased use of free markets

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS (since 21
  September 1979); note--the president is both chief of state and head
  of government
  head of government: President Jose Eduardo DOS SANTOS (since January
  1999); note--the president is both chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: President DOS SANTOS originally elected without
  opposition under a one-party system and stood for reelection in
  Angola's first multiparty elections in 28-29 September 1992, the
  last elections to be held (next to be held NA)
  election results: DOS SANTOS received 49.6% of the total vote,
  making a run-off election necessary between him and second-place
  finisher Jonas SAVIMBI; the run-off was not held and SAVIMBI's
  National Union for the Total Independence of Angola (UNITA)
  repudiated the results of the first election; the civil war resumed

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assembleia
  Nacional (220 seats; members elected by proportional vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 29-30 September 1992 (next to be held NA)
  election results: percent of vote by party--MPLA 54%, UNITA 34%,
  others 12%; seats by party--MPLA 129, UNITA 70, PRS 6, FNLA 5, PLD 3,
  others 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal da Relacao, judges of
  the Supreme Court are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Popular Movement for the
  in power since 1975; National Union for the Total Independence of
  years of armed resistance before joining the current unity
  note: about a dozen minor parties participated in the 1992 elections
  but won few seats and have little influence in the National Assembly

Political pressure groups and leaders: Front for the Liberation
  of the Enclave of Cabinda or FLEC
  note: FLEC is waging a small-scale, highly factionalized, armed
  struggle for the independence of Cabinda Province

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, CEEAC,
  ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OAU,
  SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Antonio dos Santos FRANCA "N'dalu"
  chancery: 1615 M Street, NW, Suite 900, Washington, DC 20036

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Joseph G. SULLIVAN
  embassy: number 32 Rua Houari Boumedienne, Miramar, Luanda
  mailing address: international mail: Caixa Postal 6484, Luanda;
  pouch: American Embassy Luanda, Department of State, Washington, DC
  20521-2550

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  black with a centered yellow emblem consisting of a five-pointed
  star within half a cogwheel crossed by a machete (in the style of a
  hammer and sickle)



Economy



Economy--overview: Angola is an economy in disarray because of
  more than 20 years of nearly continuous warfare. Despite its
  abundant natural resources, output per capita is among the world's
  lowest. Subsistence agriculture provides the main livelihood for 85%
  of the population. Oil production and the supporting activities are
  vital to the economy, contributing about 45% to GDP. Notwithstanding
  the signing of a peace accord in November 1994, sporadic violence
  continues, millions of land mines remain, and many farmers are
  reluctant to return to their fields. As a result, much of the
  country's food must still be imported. To take advantage of its rich
  resources--gold, diamonds, extensive forests, Atlantic fisheries,
  arable land, and large oil deposits--Angola will need to implement
  the peace agreement and reform government policies. The increase in
  the pace of civil warfare in late 1998 dims economic prospects for
  1999 especially if the oil sector were to be damaged.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$11 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 13%
  industry: 53%
  services: 34% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 90% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 5 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 85%, industry and services
  15% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: extensive unemployment and underemployment
  affecting more than half the population (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $928 million
  expenditures: $2.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $963
  million (1992 est.)

Industries: petroleum; diamonds, iron ore, phosphates, feldspar,
  bauxite, uranium, and gold; cement; basic metal products; fish
  processing; food processing; brewing; tobacco products; sugar;
  textiles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.86 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 24.73%
  hydro: 75.27%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.86 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, sugarcane, coffee, sisal, corn,
  cotton, manioc (tapioca), tobacco, vegetables, plantains; livestock;
  forest products; fish

Exports: $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil 90%, diamonds, refined petroleum
  products, gas, coffee, sisal, fish and fish products, timber, cotton
  (1998)

Exports--partners: US 65%, EU, China (1997)

Imports: $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and electrical equipment, vehicles
  and spare parts; medicines, food, textiles and clothing; substantial
  military goods

Imports--partners: Portugal 21%, US 15%, France 14%, South Africa
  (1997)

Debt--external: $13 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $493.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 kwanza (NKz) = 100 lwei

Exchange rates: kwanza (NKz) per US$1--350,000 (February 1999),
  392,824 (1998), 229,040 (1997), 128,029 (1996), 2,750 (1995), 59,515
  (1994); note--readjusted Kwanzas per US$1,000 through 1994, per US$1
  thereafter

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 78,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: telephone service limited mostly to government
  and business use; HF radiotelephone used extensively for military
  links
  domestic: limited system of wire, microwave radio relay, and
  tropospheric scatter
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 8, shortwave 8 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 7 (1997)

Televisions: 50,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,952 km (limited trackage in use because of land mines still
  in place from the civil war) (1997 est.)
  narrow gauge: 2,798 km 1.067-m gauge; 154 km 0.600-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 76,626 km
  paved: 19,156 km
  unpaved: 57,470 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 1,295 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 179 km

Ports and harbors: Ambriz, Cabinda, Lobito, Luanda, Malongo,
  Namibe, Porto Amboim, Soyo

Merchant marine:
  total: 10 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 48,384 GRT/78,357 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 9, oil tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 252 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 32
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 220
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 32
  914 to 1,523 m: 100
  under 914 m: 82 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces,
  National Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,544,203 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,280,377 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 111,168 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 25% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: increasingly used as a transshipment point for
  cocaine and heroin destined for Western Europe and other African
  states



======================================================================




@Anguilla
--------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, east of Puerto
  Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 N, 63 10 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 91 sq km
  land: 91 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about half the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 61 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds

Terrain: flat and low-lying island of coral and limestone

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Crocus Hill 65 m

Natural resources: salt, fish, lobster

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (mostly rock with sparse scrub oak, few trees, some
  commercial salt ponds)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent hurricanes and other tropical storms
  (July to October)

Environment--current issues: supplies of potable water sometimes
  cannot meet increasing demand largely because of poor distribution
  system

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 11,510 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 1,581; female 1,529)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 3,874; female 3,695)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 366; female 465) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.16% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.68 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.3 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 20.24 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.72 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.71 years
  male: 74.72 years
  female: 80.78 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.95 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Anguillan(s)
  adjective: Anguillan

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Anglican 40%, Methodist 33%, Seventh-Day Adventist 7%,
  Baptist 5%, Roman Catholic 3%, other 12%

Languages: English (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 12 and over can read and write
  total population: 95%
  male: 95%
  female: 95% (1984 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Anguilla

Data code: AV

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: The Valley

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Anguilla Day, 30 May

Constitution: Anguilla Constitutional Order 1 April 1982; amended
  1990

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952);
  represented by Governor Alan HOOLE (since 1 November 1995)
  head of government: Chief Minister Hubert HUGHES (since 16 March
  1994)
  cabinet: Executive Council appointed by the governor from among the
  elected members of the House of Assembly
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor from among the
  members of the House of Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (11 seats total,
  7 elected by direct popular vote; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 4 March 1999 (next to be held March 2004)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--ANA 2,
  AUP 2, ADP 2, independent 1

Judicial branch: High Court (judge provided by Eastern Caribbean
  Supreme Court)

Political parties and leaders: Anguilla National Alliance or ANA

International organization participation: Caricom (observer),
  CDB, Interpol (subbureau), OECS (associate), ECLAC (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Anguillan coat of arms centered in the
  outer half of the flag; the coat of arms depicts three orange
  dolphins in an interlocking circular design on a white background
  with blue wavy water below



Economy



Economy--overview: Anguilla has few natural resources, and the
  economy depends heavily on luxury tourism, offshore banking, lobster
  fishing, and remittances from emigrants. The economy, and especially
  the tourism sector, suffered a setback in late 1995 due to the
  effects of Hurricane Luis in September but recovered in 1996.
  Increased activity in the tourism industry, which has spurred the
  growth of the construction sector, contributed to economic growth in
  1997-98. Anguillan officials have put substantial effort into
  developing the offshore financing sector. A comprehensive package of
  financial services legislation was enacted in late 1994. In the
  medium term, prospects for the economy will depend on the tourism
  sector and, therefore, on continuing income growth in the
  industrialized nations.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$81 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6.5% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,300 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 16%
  services: 80% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.6% (1997)

Labor force: 4,400 (1992)

Labor force--by occupation: commerce 36%, services 29%,
  construction 18%, transportation and utilities 10%, manufacturing
  3%, agriculture/fishing/forestry/mining 4%

Unemployment rate: 7% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $20.4 million
  expenditures: $23.3 million, including capital expenditures of $3.8
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: tourism, boat building, offshore financial services

Industrial production growth rate: 3.1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: pigeon peas, corn, sweet potatoes; sheep,
  goats, pigs, cattle, poultry; fish, lobsters

Exports: $1.6 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: lobster, fish, livestock, salt

Exports--partners: NA

Imports: $54.2 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: NA

Imports--partners: NA

Debt--external: $8.5 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $3.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 890

Telephone system:
  domestic: modern internal telephone system
  international: microwave radio relay to island of Saint Martin
  (Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 6, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 2,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 105 km
  paved: 65 km
  unpaved: 40 km (1992 est.)

Ports and harbors: Blowing Point, Road Bay

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Antarctica
----------





Geography



Location: continent mostly south of the Antarctic Circle

Geographic coordinates: 90 00 S, 0 00 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
  total: 14 million sq km
  land: 14 million sq km (280,000 sq km ice-free, 13.72 million sq km
  ice-covered) (est.)
  note: second-smallest continent (after Australia)

Area--comparative: slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the US

Land boundaries: 0 km
  note: see entry on International disputes

Coastline: 17,968 km

Maritime claims: none, but see entry on International disputes

Climate: severe low temperatures vary with latitude, elevation,
  and distance from the ocean; East Antarctica is colder than West
  Antarctica because of its higher elevation; Antarctic Peninsula has
  the most moderate climate; higher temperatures occur in January
  along the coast and average slightly below freezing

Terrain: about 98% thick continental ice sheet and 2% barren
  rock, with average elevations between 2,000 and 4,000 meters;
  mountain ranges up to about 5,000 meters; ice-free coastal areas
  include parts of southern Victoria Land, Wilkes Land, the Antarctic
  Peninsula area, and parts of Ross Island on McMurdo Sound; glaciers
  form ice shelves along about half of the coastline, and floating ice
  shelves constitute 11% of the area of the continent

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Vinson Massif 5,140 m

Natural resources: none presently exploited; iron ore, chromium,
  copper, gold, nickel, platinum and other minerals, and coal and
  hydrocarbons have been found in small, uncommercial quantities

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (ice 98%, barren rock 2%)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: katabatic (gravity-driven) winds blow coastward
  from the high interior; frequent blizzards form near the foot of the
  plateau; cyclonic storms form over the ocean and move clockwise
  along the coast; volcanism on Deception Island and isolated areas of
  West Antarctica; other seismic activity rare and weak

Environment--current issues: in 1998, NASA satellite data showed
  that the antarctic ozone hole was the largest on record, covering 27
  million square kilometers; researchers in 1997 found that increased
  ultraviolet light coming through the hole damages the DNA of
  icefish, an antarctic fish lacking hemoglobin; ozone depletion
  earlier was shown to harm one-celled antarctic marine plants

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: the coldest, windiest, highest, and driest
  continent; during summer, more solar radiation reaches the surface
  at the South Pole than is received at the Equator in an equivalent
  period; mostly uninhabitable



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants, but there are seasonally
  staffed research stations
  note: approximately 29 nations, all signatory to the Antarctic
  Treaty, send personnel to perform seasonal (summer) and year-round
  research on the continent and in its surrounding oceans; the
  population of persons doing and supporting science on the continent
  and its nearby islands south of 60 degrees south latitude (the
  region covered by the Antarctic Treaty) varies from approximately
  4,000 in summer to 1,000 in winter; in addition, approximately 1,000
  personnel including ship's crew and scientists doing onboard
  research are present in the waters of the treaty region; Summer
  (January) population--3,687 total; Argentina 302, Australia 201,
  Belgium 13, Brazil 80, Bulgaria 16, Chile 352, China 70, Finland 11,
  France 100, Germany 51, India 60, Italy 106, Japan 136, South Korea
  14, Netherlands 10, NZ 60, Norway 40, Peru 28, Poland 70, Russia
  254, South Africa 80, Spain 43, Sweden 20, UK 192, US 1,378
  (1998-99); Winter (July) population--964 total; Argentina 165,
  Australia 75, Brazil 12, Chile 129, China 33, France 33, Germany 9,
  India 25, Japan 40, South Korea 14, NZ 10, Poland 20, Russia 102,
  South Africa 10, UK 39, US 248 (1998-99); year-round stations--42
  total; Argentina 6, Australia 4, Brazil 1, Chile 4, China 2, Finland
  1, France 1, Germany 1, India 1, Italy 1, Japan 1, South Korea 1, NZ
  1, Norway 1, Poland 1, Russia 6, South Africa 1, Spain 1, Ukraine 1,
  UK 2, US 3, Uruguay 1 (1998-99); Summer-only stations--32 total;
  Argentina 3, Australia 4, Bulgaria 1, Chile 7, Germany 1, India 1,
  Japan 3, NZ 1, Peru 1, Russia 3, Sweden 2, UK 5 (1998-99) in
  addition, during the austral summer some nations have numerous
  occupied locations such as tent camps, summer-long temporary
  facilities, and mobile traverses in support of research



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Antarctica

Data code: AY

Government type: Antarctic Treaty Summary--the Antarctic Treaty,
  signed on 1 December 1959 and entered into force on 23 June 1961,
  establishes the legal framework for the management of Antarctica.
  Administration is carried out through consultative member
  meetings--the 22nd Antarctic Treaty Consultative Meeting was in
  Norway in May 1998. At the end of 1998, there were 43 treaty member
  nations: 27 consultative and 16 acceding. Consultative (voting)
  members include the seven nations that claim portions of Antarctica
  as national territory (some claims overlap) and 20 nonclaimant
  nations. The US and some other nations that have made no claims have
  reserved the right to do so. The US does not recognize the claims of
  others. The year in parentheses indicates when an acceding nation
  was voted to full consultative (voting) status, while no date
  indicates the country was an original 1959 treaty signatory.
  Claimant nations are--Argentina, Australia, Chile, France, New
  Zealand, Norway, and the UK. Nonclaimant consultative nations
  are--Belgium, Brazil (1983), Bulgaria (1978) China (1985), Ecuador
  (1990), Finland (1989), Germany (1981), India (1983), Italy (1987),
  Japan, South Korea (1989), Netherlands (1990), Peru (1989), Poland
  (1977), Russia, South Africa, Spain (1988), Sweden (1988), Uruguay
  (1985), and the US. Acceding (nonvoting) members, with year of
  accession in parentheses, are--Austria (1987), Canada (1988),
  Colombia (1988), Cuba (1984), Czech Republic (1993), Denmark (1965),
  Greece (1987), Guatemala (1991), Hungary (1984), North Korea (1987),
  Papua New Guinea (1981), Romania (1971), Slovakia (1993),
  Switzerland (1990), Turkey (1995), and Ukraine (1992). Article
  1--area to be used for peaceful purposes only; military activity,
  such as weapons testing, is prohibited, but military personnel and
  equipment may be used for scientific research or any other peaceful
  purpose; Article 2--freedom of scientific investigation and
  cooperation shall continue; Article 3--free exchange of information
  and personnel in cooperation with the UN and other international
  agencies; Article 4--does not recognize, dispute, or establish
  territorial claims and no new claims shall be asserted while the
  treaty is in force; Article 5 --prohibits nuclear explosions or
  disposal of radioactive wastes; Article 6--includes under the treaty
  all land and ice shelves south of 60 degrees 00 minutes south;
  Article 7--treaty-state observers have free access, including aerial
  observation, to any area and may inspect all stations,
  installations, and equipment; advance notice of all activities and
  of the introduction of military personnel must be given; Article
  8--allows for jurisdiction over observers and scientists by their own
  states; Article 9--frequent consultative meetings take place among
  member nations; Article 10--treaty states will discourage activities
  by any country in Antarctica that are contrary to the treaty;
  Article 11--disputes to be settled peacefully by the parties
  concerned or, ultimately, by the ICJ; Articles 12, 13, 14--deal with
  upholding, interpreting, and amending the treaty among involved
  nations. Other agreements--some 200 recommendations adopted at treaty
  consultative meetings and ratified by governments include --Agreed
  Measures for the Conservation of Antarctic Fauna and Flora (1964);
  Convention for the Conservation of Antarctic Seals (1972);
  Convention on the Conservation of Antarctic Marine Living Resources
  (1980); a mineral resources agreement was signed in 1988 but was
  subsequently rejected; the Protocol on Environmental Protection to
  the Antarctic Treaty was signed 4 October 1991 and entered into
  force 14 January 1998; this agreement provides for the protection of
  the Antarctic environment through five specific annexes on marine
  pollution, fauna, and flora, environmental impact assessments, waste
  management, and protected areas; it prohibits all activities
  relating to mineral resources except scientific research.

Legal system: US law, including certain criminal offenses by or
  against US nationals, such as murder, may apply to areas not under
  jurisdiction of other countries. Some US laws directly apply to
  Antarctica. For example, the Antarctic Conservation Act, 16 U.S.C.
  section 2401 et seq., provides civil and criminal penalties for the
  following activities, unless authorized by regulation of statute:
  the taking of native mammals or birds; the introduction of
  nonindigenous plants and animals; entry into specially protected or
  scientific areas; the discharge or disposal of pollutants; and the
  importation into the US of certain items from Antarctica. Violation
  of the Antarctic Conservation Act carries penalties of up to $10,000
  in fines and one year in prison. The Departments of Treasury,
  Commerce, Transportation, and Interior share enforcement
  responsibilities. Public Law 95-541, the US Antarctic Conservation
  Act of 1978, requires expeditions from the US to Antarctica to
  notify, in advance, the Office of Oceans and Polar Affairs, Room
  5801, Department of State, Washington, DC 20520, which reports such
  plans to other nations as required by the Antarctic Treaty. For more
  information, contact Permit Office, Office of Polar Programs,
  National Science Foundation, Arlington, Virginia 22230 (703)
  306-1031, or see their website at www.nsf.gov.



Economy



Economy--overview: No economic activity is conducted at present,
  except for fishing off the coast and small-scale tourism, both based
  abroad. Antarctic fisheries in 1997-98 reported landing 92,456
  metric tons. Unregulated fishing landed five to six times more than
  the regulated fishery, and allegedly illegal fishing in antarctic
  waters in 1998 resulted in the seizure (by France and Australia) of
  at least eight fishing ships. A total of 9,604 tourists visited in
  the 1997-98 summer, up from the 7,413 who visited the previous year.
  Nearly all of them were passengers on 13 commercial
  (nongovernmental) ships that made 92 trips during the summer. Around
  200 tourists were on yachts or commercial aircraft. Most tourist
  trips lasted approximately two weeks.



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM 2 (American Forces Antarctic
  Network), shortwave 1 (Argentina Antarctic Base de Egercito
  Esperanza) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (American Forces Antarctic
  Network-McMurdo) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage

Airports: 17; 27 stations, operated by 16 national governments
  party to the Antarctic Treaty, have landing facilities for either
  helicopters and/or fixed-wing aircraft; commercial enterprises
  operate two additional air facilities; helicopter pads are available
  at 27 stations; runways at 15 locations are gravel, sea-ice,
  blue-ice, or compacted snow suitable for landing wheeled, fixed-wing
  aircraft; of these, 1 is greater than 3 km in length, 6 are between
  2 km and 3 km in length, 3 are between 1 km and 2 km in length, 3
  are less than 1 km in length, and 2 are of unknown length; snow
  surface skiways, limited to use by ski-equipped, fixed-wing
  aircraft, are available at another 15 locations; of these, 4 are
  greater than 3 km in length, 3 are between 2 km and 3 km in length,
  2 are between 1 km and 2 km in length, 2 are less than 1 km in
  length, and 4 are of unknown length; airports generally subject to
  severe restrictions and limitations resulting from extreme seasonal
  and geographic conditions; airports do not meet ICAO standards;
  advance approval from the respective governmental or nongovernmental
  operating organization required for landing (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 17
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: the Antarctic Treaty prohibits any measures of a
  military nature, such as the establishment of military bases and
  fortifications, the carrying out of military maneuvers, or the
  testing of any type of weapon; it permits the use of military
  personnel or equipment for scientific research or for any other
  peaceful purposes



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Antarctic Treaty defers claims (see
  Antarctic Treaty Summary above); sections (some overlapping) claimed
  by Argentina, Australia, Chile, France (Adelie Land), New Zealand
  (Ross Dependency), Norway (Queen Maud Land), and UK; the US and most
  other nations do not recognize the territorial claims of other
  nations and have made no claims themselves (the US reserves the
  right to do so); no formal claims have been made in the sector
  between 90 degrees west and 150 degrees west



======================================================================




@Antigua and Barbuda
-------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, east-southeast of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 17 03 N, 61 48 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 440 sq km
  land: 440 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Redonda

Area--comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 153 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly low-lying limestone and coral islands, with some
  higher volcanic areas

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Boggy Peak 402 m

Natural resources: NEGL; pleasant climate fosters tourism

Land use:
  arable land: 18%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 11%
  other: 62% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes and tropical storms (July to
  October); periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: water management?a major concern
  because of limited natural fresh water resources--is further hampered
  by the clearing of trees to increase crop production, causing
  rainfall to run off quickly

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 64,246 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 26% (male 8,414; female 8,137)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 21,936; female 22,227)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 1,504; female 2,028) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.36% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.22 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.76 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 20.69 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.46 years
  male: 69.06 years
  female: 73.98 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.72 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Antiguan(s), Barbudan(s)
  adjective: Antiguan, Barbudan

Ethnic groups: black, British, Portuguese, Lebanese, Syrian

Religions: Anglican (predominant), other Protestant sects, some
  Roman Catholic

Languages: English (official), local dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has completed five or more years of
  schooling
  total population: 89%
  male: 90%
  female: 88% (1960 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Antigua and Barbuda

Data code: AC

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Saint John's

Administrative divisions: 6 parishes and 2 dependencies*;
  Barbuda*, Redonda*, Saint George, Saint John, Saint Mary, Saint
  Paul, Saint Peter, Saint Philip

Independence: 1 November 1981 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 November (1981)

Constitution: 1 November 1981

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General James B. CARLISLE (since NA 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Lester Bryant BIRD (since 8 March
  1994)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the governor general on
  the advice of the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general chosen
  by the monarch on the advice of the prime minister; prime minister
  appointed by the governor general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (17-member body appointed by the governor general) and the House of
  Representatives (17 seats; members are elected by proportional
  representation to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 9 March 1999 (next to
  be held NA March 2004)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--ALP
  12, UPP 4, independent 1

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint
  Lucia) (one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands
  and presides over the Court of Summary Jurisdiction)

Political parties and leaders: Antigua Labor Party or ALP [Lester
  coalition of three opposition political parties--United National
  Democratic Party or UNDP, Antigua Caribbean Liberation Movement or
  ACLM, and the Progressive Labor Movement or PLM

Political pressure groups and leaders: Antigua Trades and Labor

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO
  (subscriber), ITU, NAM (observer), OAS, OECS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Lionel Alexander HURST
  chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
  consulate(s) general: Miami

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Antigua and Barbuda (embassy closed 30 June 1994); the US
  Ambassador to Barbados is accredited to Antigua and Barbuda

Flag description: red, with an inverted isosceles triangle based
  on the top edge of the flag; the triangle contains three horizontal
  bands of black (top), light blue, and white, with a yellow rising
  sun in the black band



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism continues to be by far the dominant
  activity in the economy accounting directly or indirectly for more
  than half of GDP. Increased tourist arrivals have helped spur growth
  in the construction and transport sectors. The dual island nation's
  agricultural production is mainly directed to the domestic market;
  the sector is constrained by the limited water supply and labor
  shortages that reflect the pull of higher wages in tourism and
  construction. Manufacturing comprises enclave-type assembly for
  export with major products being bedding, handicrafts, and
  electronic components. Prospects for economic growth in the medium
  term will continue to depend on income growth in the industrialized
  world, especially in the US, which accounts for about half of all
  tourist arrivals.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$503 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,900 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 12.5%
  services: 83.5% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -1.1% (1997)

Labor force: 30,000

Labor force--by occupation: commerce and services 82%, agriculture
  11%, industry 7% (1983)

Unemployment rate: 9% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $122.6 million
  expenditures: $141.2 million, including capital expenditures of
  $17.3 million (1997 est.)

Industries: tourism, construction, light manufacturing (clothing,
  alcohol, household appliances)

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 95 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 95 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, fruits, vegetables, bananas,
  coconuts, cucumbers, mangoes, sugarcane; livestock

Exports: $37.8 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum products 48%, manufactures 23%,
  food and live animals 4%, machinery and transport equipment 17%

Exports--partners: OECS 26%, Barbados 15%, Guyana 4%, Trinidad and
  Tobago 2%, US 0.3%

Imports: $325.5 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: food and live animals, machinery and
  transport equipment, manufactures, chemicals, oil

Imports--partners: US 27%, UK 16%, Canada 4%, OECS 3%, other 50%

Debt--external: $240 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $2.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 6,700

Telephone system:
  domestic: good automatic telephone system
  international: 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean); tropospheric scatter to Saba (Netherlands
  Antilles) and Guadeloupe

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 2, shortwave 0 (repeater
  transmitters for Deutsche Welle and BBC world broadcasts) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 28,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 77 km
  narrow gauge: 64 km 0.760-m gauge; 13 km 0.610-m gauge (used almost
  exclusively for handling sugarcane)

Highways:
  total: 250 km (1996 est.)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Saint John's

Merchant marine:
  total: 517 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,706,126
  GRT/3,542,664 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 21, cargo 338, chemical tanker 7, combination
  bulk 2, container 111, liquefied gas tanker 2, multifunctional
  large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 4, refrigerated cargo 9,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 21, vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry: Germany owns 10 ships,
  Slovenia 2, and Cyprus 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Antigua and Barbuda Defense Force, Royal
  Antigua and Barbuda Police Force (includes Coast Guard)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: over the long-term, considered a relatively minor
  transshipment point for narcotics bound for the US and Europe and
  recently, a transshipment point for heroin from Europe to the US;
  potentially more significant as a drug-money-laundering center



======================================================================




@Arctic Ocean
------------





Geography



Location: body of water mostly north of the Arctic Circle

Geographic coordinates: 90 00 N, 0 00 E

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
  total: 14.056 million sq km
  note: includes Baffin Bay, Barents Sea, Beaufort Sea, Chukchi Sea,
  East Siberian Sea, Greenland Sea, Hudson Bay, Hudson Strait, Kara
  Sea, Laptev Sea, Northwest Passage, and other tributary water bodies

Area--comparative: slightly less than 1.5 times the size of the
  US; smallest of the world's four oceans (after Pacific Ocean,
  Atlantic Ocean, and Indian Ocean)

Coastline: 45,389 km

Climate: polar climate characterized by persistent cold and
  relatively narrow annual temperature ranges; winters characterized
  by continuous darkness, cold and stable weather conditions, and
  clear skies; summers characterized by continuous daylight, damp and
  foggy weather, and weak cyclones with rain or snow

Terrain: central surface covered by a perennial drifting polar
  icepack that averages about 3 meters in thickness, although pressure
  ridges may be three times that size; clockwise drift pattern in the
  Beaufort Gyral Stream, but nearly straight-line movement from the
  New Siberian Islands (Russia) to Denmark Strait (between Greenland
  and Iceland); the icepack is surrounded by open seas during the
  summer, but more than doubles in size during the winter and extends
  to the encircling landmasses; the ocean floor is about 50%
  continental shelf (highest percentage of any ocean) with the
  remainder a central basin interrupted by three submarine ridges
  (Alpha Cordillera, Nansen Cordillera, and Lomonsov Ridge)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Fram Basin -4,665 m
  highest point: sea level 0 m

Natural resources: sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits,
  polymetallic nodules, oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals
  (seals and whales)

Natural hazards: ice islands occasionally break away from
  northern Ellesmere Island; icebergs calved from glaciers in western
  Greenland and extreme northeastern Canada; permafrost in islands;
  virtually icelocked from October to June; ships subject to
  superstructure icing from October to May

Environment--current issues: endangered marine species include
  walruses and whales; fragile ecosystem slow to change and slow to
  recover from disruptions or damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: major chokepoint is the southern Chukchi Sea
  (northern access to the Pacific Ocean via the Bering Strait);
  strategic location between North America and Russia; shortest marine
  link between the extremes of eastern and western Russia; floating
  research stations operated by the US and Russia; maximum snow cover
  in March or April about 20 to 50 centimeters over the frozen ocean;
  snow cover lasts about 10 months



Government



Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard
  for hydrographic codes--see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic
  Data Codes appendix



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity is limited to the
  exploitation of natural resources, including petroleum, natural gas,
  fish, and seals.



Communications



Telephone system:
  international: no submarine cables



Transportation



Ports and harbors: Churchill (Canada), Murmansk (Russia), Prudhoe
  Bay (US)

Transportation--note: sparse network of air, ocean, river, and
  land routes; the Northwest Passage (North America) and Northern Sea
  Route (Eurasia) are important seasonal waterways



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: some maritime disputes (see littoral
  states); Svalbard is the focus of a maritime boundary dispute
  between Norway and Russia



======================================================================




@Argentina
---------





Introduction



Background: A part of the Spanish empire until independence in
  1816, Argentina subsequently experienced periods of internal
  political conflict between conservatives and liberals and between
  civilian and military factions. Meantime, thanks to rich natural
  resources and foreign investment, a modern agriculture and a
  diversified industry were gradually developed. After World War II, a
  long period of Peronist dictatorship was followed by rule by a
  military junta. Democratic elections finally came in 1983, but both
  the political and economic atmosphere remain susceptible to turmoil.



Geography



Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic
  Ocean, between Chile and Uruguay

Geographic coordinates: 34 00 S, 64 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 2,766,890 sq km
  land: 2,736,690 sq km
  water: 30,200 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than three-tenths the size of the
  US

Land boundaries:
  total: 9,665 km
  border countries: Bolivia 832 km, Brazil 1,224 km, Chile 5,150 km,
  Paraguay 1,880 km, Uruguay 579 km

Coastline: 4,989 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly temperate; arid in southeast; subantarctic in
  southwest

Terrain: rich plains of the Pampas in northern half, flat to
  rolling plateau of Patagonia in south, rugged Andes along western
  border

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Salinas Chicas -40 m (located on Peninsula Valdes)
  highest point: Cerro Aconcagua 6,962 m

Natural resources: fertile plains of the pampas, lead, zinc, tin,
  copper, iron ore, manganese, petroleum, uranium

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 52%
  forests and woodland: 19%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 17,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: San Miguel de Tucuman and Mendoza areas in the
  Andes subject to earthquakes; pamperos are violent windstorms that
  can strike the Pampas and northeast; heavy flooding

Environment--current issues: erosion results from inadequate flood
  controls and improper land use practices; irrigated soil
  degradation; desertification; air pollution in Buenos Aires and
  other major cities; water pollution in urban areas; rivers becoming
  polluted due to increased pesticide and fertilizer use

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine Life
  Conservation

Geography--note: second-largest country in South America (after
  Brazil); strategic location relative to sea lanes between South
  Atlantic and South Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle
  Channel, Drake Passage)



People



Population: 36,737,664 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 5,124,087; female 4,932,060)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 11,457,399; female 11,469,346)
  65 years and over: 11% (male 1,553,158; female 2,201,614) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.29% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 19.91 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.64 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.41 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.76 years
  male: 71.13 years
  female: 78.56 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.66 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Argentine(s)
  adjective: Argentine

Ethnic groups: white 85%, mestizo, Amerindian, or other nonwhite
  groups 15%

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 90% (less than 20%
  practicing), Protestant 2%, Jewish 2%, other 6%

Languages: Spanish (official), English, Italian, German, French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 96.2%
  male: 96.2%
  female: 96.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Argentine Republic
  conventional short form: Argentina
  local long form: Republica Argentina
  local short form: Argentina

Data code: AR

Government type: republic

Capital: Buenos Aires

Administrative divisions: 23 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia), and 1 federal district* (distrito federal);
  Buenos Aires; Catamarca; Chaco; Chubut; Cordoba; Corrientes;
  Distrito Federal*; Entre Rios; Formosa; Jujuy; La Pampa; La Rioja;
  Mendoza; Misiones; Neuquen; Rio Negro; Salta; San Juan; San Luis;
  Santa Cruz; Santa Fe; Santiago del Estero; Tierra del Fuego,
  Antartida e Islas del Atlantico Sur; Tucuman
  note: the US does not recognize any claims to Antarctica

Independence: 9 July 1816 (from Spain)

National holiday: Revolution Day, 25 May (1810)

Constitution: 1 May 1853; revised August 1994

Legal system: mixture of US and West European legal systems; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Carlos Saul MENEM (since 8 July 1989);
  Vice President Carlos RUCKAUF (since 8 July 1995); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Carlos Saul MENEM (since 8 July 1989);
  Vice President Carlos RUCKAUF (since 8 July 1995); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 14 May 1995
  (next to be held NA October 1999)
  election results: Carlos Saul MENEM reelected president; percent of
  vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso
  Nacional consists of the Senate (72 seats; formerly, three members
  appointed by each of the provincial legislatures; presently
  transitioning to one-third of the members being elected every two
  years to a six-year term) and the Chamber of Deputies (257 seats;
  one-half of the members elected every two years to four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--transition phase will continue through 2001
  elections when all seats will be fully contested; winners will
  randomly draw to determine whether they will serve a two-year,
  four-year, or full six-year term; Chamber of Deputies--last held 26
  October 1997 (next to be held NA October 1999)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PJ 39, UCR 1, others 32; Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote
  by party--NA; seats by party--PJ 119, UCR 69, Frepaso 36, other 33

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), the nine Supreme
  Court judges are appointed by the president with approval of the
  Senate

Political parties and leaders: Justicialist Party or PJ [Carlos
  Saul MENEM] (Peronist umbrella political organization); Radical
  NA]; Front for a Country in Solidarity or Frepaso (a four-party

Political pressure groups and leaders: Peronist-dominated labor
  movement; General Confederation of Labor or CGT (Peronist-leaning
  umbrella labor organization); Argentine Industrial Union
  (manufacturers' association); Argentine Rural Society (large
  landowners' association); Argentine Association of Pharmaceutical
  Labs (CILFA); business organizations; students; the Roman Catholic
  Church; the Armed Forces

International organization participation: AfDB, Australia Group,
  BCIE, CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G- 6, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES,
  LAIA, Mercosur, MINURSO, MIPONUH, MTCR, NSG, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA,
  RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR,
  UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Diego Ramiro GUELAR
  chancery: 1600 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  embassy: 4300 Colombia, 1425 Buenos Aires
  mailing address: international mail: use street address; APO
  address: Unit 4334, APO AA 34034

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of light blue
  (top), white, and light blue; centered in the white band is a
  radiant yellow sun with a human face known as the Sun of May



Economy



Economy--overview: Argentina benefits from rich natural resources,
  a highly literate population, an export-oriented agricultural
  sector, and a diversified industrial base. However, when President
  Carlos MENEM took office in 1989, the country had piled up huge
  external debts, inflation had reached 200% per month, and output was
  plummeting. To combat the economic crisis, the government embarked
  on a path of trade liberalization, deregulation, and privatization.
  In 1991, it implemented radical monetary reforms which pegged the
  peso to the US dollar and limited the growth in the monetary base by
  law to the growth in reserves. Inflation fell sharply in subsequent
  years. The Mexican peso crisis produced capital flight, the loss of
  banking system deposits, and a severe, but short-lived, recession in
  1995; a series of reforms to bolster the domestic banking system
  followed. Real GDP growth recovered strongly, reaching almost 9% in
  1997. In 1998, increasing investor anxiety over Brazil, its largest
  trading partner, produced the highest domestic interest rates in
  more than three years and slowed growth to 4.3%. Despite the
  relatively high level of growth in recent years, double-digit
  unemployment rates have persisted, largely because of rigidities in
  Argentina's labor laws.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$374 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7%
  industry: 37%
  services: 56% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 25.5% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 14 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 12%, industry 31%,
  services 57% (1985 est.)

Unemployment rate: 12% (October 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $56 billion
  expenditures: $60 billion, including capital expenditures of $4
  billion (1998 est.)

Industries: food processing, motor vehicles, consumer durables,
  textiles, chemicals and petrochemicals, printing, metallurgy, steel

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1998)

Electricity--production: 64.669 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 45%
  hydro: 44.3%
  nuclear: 10.7%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 67.509 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 330 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 3.17 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sunflower seeds, lemons, soybeans, grapes,
  corn, tobacco, peanuts, tea, wheat; livestock

Exports: $26 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: cereals, feed, motor vehicles, crude
  petroleum, steel manufactures

Exports--partners: Brazil 31%, US 8%, Chile 7.0%, China 3%,
  Uruguay 3% (1997 est.)

Imports: $32 billion (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: motor vehicles, motor vehicle parts, organic
  chemicals, telecommunications equipment, plastics

Imports--partners: Brazil 23%, US 20%, Italy 6%, Germany 5%,
  France 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $133 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $2.833 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 peso = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: peso is pegged to the US dollar at an exchange
  rate of 1 peso = $1

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 4.6 million (1990)

Telephone system: 12,000 public telephones; extensive modern
  system but many families do not have telephones; despite extensive
  use of microwave radio relay, the telephone system frequently
  grounds out during rainstorms, even in Buenos Aires
  domestic: microwave radio relay and a domestic satellite system with
  40 earth stations serve the trunk network
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 260 (including 10 inactive
  stations), FM NA (probably more than 1,000, mostly unlicensed),
  shortwave 6 (1998 est.)

Radios: 22.3 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 42 (in addition, there are 444
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 7.165 million (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 37,830 km
  broad gauge: 23,992 km 1.676-m gauge (167 km electrified)
  standard gauge: 2,765 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 11,073 km 1.000-m gauge (26 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 208,350 km
  paved: 47,550 km (including 567 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 160,800 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 11,000 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 4,090 km; petroleum products 2,900 km;
  natural gas 9,918 km

Ports and harbors: Bahia Blanca, Buenos Aires, Comodoro
  Rivadavia, Concepcion del Uruguay, La Plata, Mar del Plata,
  Necochea, Rio Gallegos, Rosario, Santa Fe, Ushuaia

Merchant marine:
  total: 29 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 233,856 GRT/363,335 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 10, container 1, oil tanker 13, railcar carrier
  1, refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea
  passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1,374 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 141
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 26
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 58
  914 to 1,523 m: 45
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1,233
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 67
  914 to 1,523 m: 621
  under 914 m: 541 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Argentine Army, Navy of the Argentine Republic
  (includes Naval Aviation, Marines, and Coast Guard), Argentine Air
  Force, National Gendarmerie, National Aeronautical Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 9,169,681 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 7,435,551 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 343,038 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $4.6 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: short section of the southwestern
  boundary with Chile is indefinite--process to resolve boundary issues
  is underway; claims UK-administered Falkland Islands (Islas
  Malvinas); claims UK-administered South Georgia and the South
  Sandwich Islands; territorial claim in Antarctica

Illicit drugs: increasing use as a transshipment country for
  cocaine headed for Europe and the US; increasing money-laundering
  center



======================================================================




@Armenia
-------





Introduction



Background: Armenia was one of the 15 successor republics to the
  USSR in December 1991. Its leaders remain preoccupied by the long
  conflict with Azerbaijan over the Nagorno-Karabakh enclave. Although
  a cease-fire has been in effect since May 1994, the sides have not
  made substantial progress toward a peaceful resolution. In January
  1998, differences between President TER-PETROSSIAN and members of
  his cabinet over the Nagorno-Karabakh peace process came to a head.
  With the prime minister, defense minister, and security minister
  arrayed against him, an isolated TER-PETROSSIAN resigned the
  presidency on 3 February 1998. Prime Minister Robert KOCHARIAN was
  elected president in March 1998. Concerns about Armenia's economic
  performance have continued since 1997 with a slowdown in growth and
  the serious impact of the 1998 financial crisis in Russia.



Geography



Location: Southwestern Asia, east of Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 45 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 29,800 sq km
  land: 28,400 sq km
  water: 1,400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,254 km
  border countries: Azerbaijan-proper 566 km, Azerbaijan-Naxcivan
  exclave 221 km, Georgia 164 km, Iran 35 km, Turkey 268 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: highland continental, hot summers, cold winters

Terrain: Armenian Highland with mountains; little forest land;
  fast flowing rivers; good soil in Aras River valley

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Debed River 400 m
  highest point: Aragats Lerr 4,095 m

Natural resources: small deposits of gold, copper, molybdenum,
  zinc, alumina

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 24%
  forests and woodland: 15%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,870 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasionally severe earthquakes; droughts

Environment--current issues: soil pollution from toxic chemicals
  such as DDT; energy blockade, the result of conflict with
  Azerbaijan, has led to deforestation when citizens scavenged for
  firewood; pollution of Hrazdan (Razdan) and Aras Rivers; the
  draining of Sevana Lich (Lake Sevan), a result of its use as a
  source for hydropower, threatens drinking water supplies; restart of
  Metsamor nuclear power plant without adequate (IAEA-recommended)
  safety and backup systems

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Nuclear Test Ban, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 3,409,234 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 25% (male 442,117; female 425,561)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 1,100,334; female 1,148,595)
  65 years and over: 9% (male 122,170; female 170,457) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.38% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.53 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.03 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.26 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 41.12 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 66.56 years
  male: 62.21 years
  female: 71.13 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.68 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Armenian(s)
  adjective: Armenian

Ethnic groups: Armenian 93%, Azeri 3%, Russian 2%, other (mostly
  Yezidi Kurds) 2% (1989)
  note: as of the end of 1993, virtually all Azeris had emigrated from
  Armenia

Religions: Armenian Orthodox 94%

Languages: Armenian 96%, Russian 2%, other 2%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 98% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Armenia
  conventional short form: Armenia
  local long form: Hayastani Hanrapetut'yun
  local short form: Hayastan
  former: Armenian Soviet Socialist Republic; Armenian Republic

Data code: AM

Government type: republic

Capital: Yerevan

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces (marzer, singular--marz)
  and 1 city* (k'aghak'ner, singular--k'aghak'); Aragatsotn, Ararat,
  Armavir, Geghark'unik', Kotayk', Lorri, Shirak, Syunik', Tavush,
  Vayots' Dzor, Yerevan*

Independence: 28 May 1918-2 December 1920 (First Armenian
  Republic); 23 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Referendum Day, 21 September

Constitution: adopted by nationwide referendum 5 July 1995

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Robert KOCHARIAN (since 30 March 1998)
  head of government: Prime Minister Armen DARBINYAN (since 10 April
  1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  special election last held 30 March 1998 (next election to be held
  March 2003); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Robert KOCHARIAN elected president; percent of
  vote--Robert KOCHARIAN 59%, Karen DEMIRCHYAN 41%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (Parliament) or
  Azgayin Zhoghov (190 seats; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 5 July 1995 (next to be held in the spring of
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Republican Bloc 159 (ANM 63, DLP-Hanrapetutyun Bloc 6,
  Republic Party 4, CDU 3, Intellectual Armenia 3, Social Democratic
  Party 2, independents 78), SWM 8, ACP 7, NDU 5, NSDU 3, DLP 1, ARF
  1, other 4, vacant 2; note--seats by party change frequently

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Armenian National Movement or ANM

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE (guest),
  CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM
  (observer), OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Rouben R. SHUGARIAN
  chancery: 2225 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Michael LEMMON
  embassy: 18 General Bagramian Avenue, Yerevan
  mailing address: American Embassy Yerevan, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7020

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  blue, and gold



Economy



Economy--overview: Under the old Soviet central planning system,
  Armenia had developed a modern industrial sector, supplying machine
  tools, textiles, and other manufactured goods to sister republics in
  exchange for raw materials and energy. Since the implosion of the
  USSR in December 1991, Armenia has switched to small-scale
  agriculture away from the large agroindustrial complexes of the
  Soviet area. The agricultural sector has long-term needs for more
  investment and updated technology. The privatization of industry has
  been at a slower pace, but has been given renewed emphasis by the
  current administration. Armenia is a food importer, and its mineral
  deposits (gold, bauxite) are small. The ongoing conflict with
  Azerbaijan over the ethnic Armenian-dominated region of
  Nagorno-Karabakh and the breakup of the centrally directed economic
  system of the former Soviet Union contributed to a severe economic
  decline in the early 1990s. By 1994, however, the Armenian
  Government had launched an ambitious IMF-sponsored economic program
  that has resulted in positive growth rates in 1995-98. Armenia also
  managed to slash inflation and to privatize most small- and
  medium-sized enterprises. The chronic energy shortages Armenia
  suffered in recent years have been largely offset by the energy
  supplied by one of its nuclear power plants at Metsamor. The Russian
  financial crisis generated concerns about Armenia's economic
  performance in 1998. Although inflation dropped to 10% and GDP grew
  about 6%, the industrial sector remained moribund. Much of Armenia's
  population remains heavily dependent on remittances from relatives
  abroad, and remittances from Russia fell off sharply in 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$9.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 35%
  industry: 30%
  services: 35% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 50% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.6 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: manufacturing, mining, and
  construction 25%, agriculture 38%, services 37%

Unemployment rate: 20% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $322 million
  expenditures: $424 million, including capital expenditures of $80
  million (1998 est.)

Industries: much of industry is shut down; metal-cutting machine
  tools, forging-pressing machines, electric motors, tires, knitted
  wear, hosiery, shoes, silk fabric, washing machines, chemicals,
  trucks, watches, instruments, microelectronics

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 7.6 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 46.05%
  hydro: 26.32%
  nuclear: 27.63%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 7.6 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruit (especially grapes), vegetables;
  livestock

Exports: $230 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: gold and jewelry, aluminum, transport
  equipment, electrical equipment, scrap metal

Exports--partners: Iran, Russia, Turkmenistan, Georgia

Imports: $840 million (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: grain, other foods, fuel, other energy

Imports--partners: Iran, Russia, Turkmenistan, Georgia, US, EU

Debt--external: $820 million (of which $75 million to Russia)
  (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $245.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 dram = 100 luma

Exchange rates: dram per US$1--535.62 (January 1999), 504.92
  (1998), 490.85 (1997), 414.04 (1996), 405.91 (1995), 288.65 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 730,000 (1998 est.)

Telephone system: the Ministry of Communications oversees the
  Ministry of Posts and Telecommunications; the national operator is
  Armentel; the Greek Telecoms Company owns 90% of Armentel and will
  provide a $60 million eight-year loan; Armenia has about 4,000
  Internet users on one satellite channel
  domestic: local--350,000 telephones are located in Yerevan; a
  fiber-optic loop provides digital service to 80,000 of Yerevan's
  customers; GSM cellular is available in Yerevan, as is paging;
  intercity--the former Soviet system provides service to 380,000
  numbers mostly governmental
  international: Yerevan is connected to the Trans-Asia-Europe line
  through Iran; additional international service is available by
  microwave, land line, and satellite through the Moscow switch; 1
  INTELSAT earth station

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 6, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, programs are
  received by relay from Russia; 100% of the population receive
  Armenian and Russian TV programs) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 825 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
  lines
  broad gauge: 825 km 1.520-m gauge (1992)

Highways:
  total: 8,580 km
  paved: 8,580 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: NA km

Pipelines: natural gas 900 km (1991)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 11 (1996 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1996 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force and Air Defense Aviation, Air
  Defense Force, Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 922,124 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 732,495 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 32,052 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $72.1 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the
  Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding,
  separatist conflict against the Azerbaijani Government; traditional
  demands on former Armenian lands in Turkey have subsided

Illicit drugs: illicit cultivator of cannabis mostly for domestic
  consumption; increasingly used as a transshipment point for illicit
  drugs--mostly opium and hashish--to Western Europe and the US via
  Iran, Central Asia, and Russia



======================================================================




@Aruba
-----





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, north of
  Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 12 30 N, 69 58 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 193 sq km
  land: 193 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 68.5 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: flat with a few hills; scant vegetation

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Jamanota 188 m

Natural resources: NEGL; white sandy beaches

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 89% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies outside the Caribbean hurricane belt

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 68,675 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 22% (male 7,724; female 7,106)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 22,723; female 24,747)
  65 years and over: 9% (male 2,623; female 3,752) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.55% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.28 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.48 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.31 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.84 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.04 years
  male: 73.33 years
  female: 80.94 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.8 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Aruban(s)
  adjective: Aruban

Ethnic groups: mixed white/Caribbean Amerindian 80%

Religions: Roman Catholic 82%, Protestant 8%, Hindu, Muslim,
  Confucian, Jewish

Languages: Dutch (official), Papiamento (a Spanish, Portuguese,
  Dutch, English dialect), English (widely spoken), Spanish

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Aruba

Data code: AA

Dependency status: part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; full
  autonomy in internal affairs obtained in 1986 upon separation from
  the Netherlands Antilles

Government type: parliamentary

Capital: Oranjestad

Administrative divisions: none (part of the Kingdom of the
  Netherlands)

Independence: none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; in
  1990, Aruba requested and received from the Netherlands cancellation
  of the agreement to automatically give independence to the island in
  1996)

National holiday: Flag Day, 18 March

Constitution: 1 January 1986

Legal system: based on Dutch civil law system, with some English
  common law influence

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard of the Netherlands
  (since 30 April 1980), represented by Governor General Olindo
  KOOLMAN (since 1 January 1992)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jan (Henny) H. EMAN (since 29
  July 1994) and Deputy Prime Minister Glenbert F. CROES
  cabinet: Council of Ministers (elected by the Staten)
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed for
  a six-year term by the monarch; prime minister and deputy prime
  minister elected by the Staten for a four-year term; election last
  held 12 July 1997 (next to be held by December 2001)
  election results: inconclusive; no party won majority in December
  1997 parliamentary elections; no new government formed as of May 1998

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislature or Staten (21 seats;
  members elected by direct popular vote and serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 December 1997 (next to be held by NA
  December 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--AVP
  10, MEP 9, OLA 2

Judicial branch: Joint High Court of Justice (judges are
  appointed by the monarch)

Political parties and leaders: Electoral Movement Party or MEP

International organization participation: Caricom (observer),
  ECLAC (associate), Interpol, IOC, UNESCO (associate), WCL, WToO
  (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (represented by the
  Kingdom of the Netherlands)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Consul General James L. WILLIAMS
  embassy: J. B. Gorsiraweg #1, Curacao
  mailing address: P. O. Box 158, Willemstad, Curacao

Flag description: blue, with two narrow, horizontal, yellow
  stripes across the lower portion and a red, four-pointed star
  outlined in white in the upper hoist-side corner



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism is the mainstay of the Aruban economy,
  although offshore banking and oil refining and storage are also
  important. The rapid growth of the tourism sector over the last
  decade has resulted in a substantial expansion of other activities.
  Construction has boomed, with hotel capacity five times the 1985
  level. In addition, the reopening of the country's oil refinery in
  1993, a major source of employment and foreign exchange earnings,
  has further spurred growth. Aruba's small labor force and less than
  1% unemployment rate have led to a large number of unfilled job
  vacancies, despite sharp rises in wage rates in recent years.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.5 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1997)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (1997)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: most employment is in the tourist
  industry (1996)

Unemployment rate: 0.6% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $345.3 million
  expenditures: $378.5 million, including capital expenditures of $107
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: tourism, transshipment facilities, oil refining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 470 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 470 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: aloes; livestock; fish

Exports: $1.73 billion (including oil reexports)(1997)

Exports--commodities: mostly refined petroleum products

Exports--partners: US 64%, EU

Imports: $2.12 billion (1997)

Imports--commodities: food, consumer goods, manufactures,
  petroleum products, crude oil for refining and reexport

Imports--partners: US 55.5%, Netherlands 12.3%, Japan 3.5%

Debt--external: $285 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $26 million (1995); note?the Netherlands
  provided a $127 million aid package to Aruba and Suriname in 1996

Currency: 1 Aruban florin (Af.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Aruban florins (Af.) per US$1--1.7900 (fixed rate
  since 1986)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 22,922 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: more than adequate
  international: 1 submarine cable to Sint Maarten (Netherlands
  Antilles); extensive interisland microwave radio relay links

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 19,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 300 km
  paved: 130 km
  unpaved: 170 km
  note: most coastal roads are paved, while unpaved roads serve large
  tracts of the interior

Ports and harbors: Barcadera, Oranjestad, Sint Nicolaas

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,366 GRT/1,595 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the Kingdom of
  the Netherlands



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: drug-money-laundering center and transit point for
  narcotics bound for the US and Europe; added to the US list of major
  drug producing or drug transit countries in December 1996



======================================================================




@Ashmore and Cartier Islands
---------------------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, islands in the Indian Ocean,
  northwest of Australia

Geographic coordinates: 12 14 S, 123 05 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 5 sq km
  land: 5 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Ashmore Reef (West, Middle, and East Islets) and
  Cartier Island

Area--comparative: about eight times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 74.1 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 12 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: low with sand and coral

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 3 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (all grass and sand)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: surrounded by shoals and reefs that can pose
  maritime hazards

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: Ashmore Reef National Nature Reserve established
  in August 1983



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there are only seasonal caretakers



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of Ashmore and Cartier Islands
  conventional short form: Ashmore and Cartier Islands

Data code: AT

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Australian Department of the Environment, Sport, and
  Territories

Legal system: relevant laws of the Northern Territory of Australia

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of
  Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Australia;
  periodic visits by the Royal Australian Navy and Royal Australian
  Air Force



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Atlantic Ocean
--------------





Geography



Location: body of water between Africa, Europe, Antarctica, and
  the Western Hemisphere

Geographic coordinates: 0 00 N, 25 00 W

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 82.217 million sq km
  note: includes Baltic Sea, Black Sea, Caribbean Sea, Davis Strait,
  Denmark Strait, Drake Passage, Gulf of Mexico, Mediterranean Sea,
  North Sea, Norwegian Sea, Scotia Sea, Weddell Sea, and other
  tributary water bodies

Area--comparative: slightly less than nine times the size of the
  US; second-largest of the world's four oceans (after the Pacific
  Ocean, but larger than Indian Ocean or Arctic Ocean)

Coastline: 111,866 km

Climate: tropical cyclones (hurricanes) develop off the coast of
  Africa near Cape Verde and move westward into the Caribbean Sea;
  hurricanes can occur from May to December, but are most frequent
  from August to November

Terrain: surface usually covered with sea ice in Labrador Sea,
  Denmark Strait, and Baltic Sea from October to June; clockwise
  warm-water gyre (broad, circular system of currents) in the northern
  Atlantic, counterclockwise warm-water gyre in the southern Atlantic;
  the ocean floor is dominated by the Mid-Atlantic Ridge, a rugged
  north-south centerline for the entire Atlantic basin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Puerto Rico Trench -8,605 m
  highest point: in the Milwaukee Deep at sea level 0 m

Natural resources: oil and gas fields, fish, marine mammals
  (seals and whales), sand and gravel aggregates, placer deposits,
  polymetallic nodules, precious stones

Natural hazards: icebergs common in Davis Strait, Denmark Strait,
  and the northwestern Atlantic Ocean from February to August and have
  been spotted as far south as Bermuda and the Madeira Islands;
  icebergs from Antarctica occur in the extreme southern Atlantic
  Ocean; ships subject to superstructure icing in extreme northern
  Atlantic from October to May and extreme southern Atlantic from May
  to October; persistent fog can be a maritime hazard from May to
  September

Environment--current issues: endangered marine species include the
  manatee, seals, sea lions, turtles, and whales; drift net fishing is
  hastening the decline of fish stocks and contributing to
  international disputes; municipal sludge pollution off eastern US,
  southern Brazil, and eastern Argentina; oil pollution in Caribbean
  Sea, Gulf of Mexico, Lake Maracaibo, Mediterranean Sea, and North
  Sea; industrial waste and municipal sewage pollution in Baltic Sea,
  North Sea, and Mediterranean Sea

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: major chokepoints include the Dardanelles, Strait
  of Gibraltar, access to the Panama and Suez Canals; strategic
  straits include the Strait of Dover, Straits of Florida, Mona
  Passage, The Sound (Oresund), and Windward Passage; the Equator
  divides the Atlantic Ocean into the North Atlantic Ocean and South
  Atlantic Ocean



Government



Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard
  for hydrographic codes--see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic
  Data Codes appendix



Economy



Economy--overview: The Atlantic Ocean provides some of the world's
  most heavily trafficked sea routes, between and within the Eastern
  and Western Hemispheres. Other economic activity includes the
  exploitation of natural resources, e.g., fishing, the dredging of
  aragonite sands (The Bahamas), and production of crude oil and
  natural gas (Caribbean Sea, Gulf of Mexico, and North Sea).



Communications



Telephone system:
  international: numerous submarine cables with most between
  continental Europe and the UK, between North America and the UK, and
  in the Mediterranean; numerous direct links across Atlantic via
  satellite networks



Transportation



Ports and harbors: Alexandria (Egypt), Algiers (Algeria), Antwerp
  (Belgium), Barcelona (Spain), Buenos Aires (Argentina), Casablanca
  (Morocco), Colon (Panama), Copenhagen (Denmark), Dakar (Senegal),
  Gdansk (Poland), Hamburg (Germany), Helsinki (Finland), Las Palmas
  (Canary Islands, Spain), Le Havre (France), Lisbon (Portugal),
  London (UK), Marseille (France), Montevideo (Uruguay), Montreal
  (Canada), Naples (Italy), New Orleans (US), New York (US), Oran
  (Algeria), Oslo (Norway), Peiraiefs or Piraeus (Greece), Rio de
  Janeiro (Brazil), Rotterdam (Netherlands), Saint Petersburg
  (Russia), Stockholm (Sweden)

Transportation--note: Kiel Canal and Saint Lawrence Seaway are two
  important waterways



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: some maritime disputes (see littoral
  states)



======================================================================




@Australia
---------





Introduction



Background: Australia became a British commonwealth in 1901.
  Blessed by rich natural resources, the country enjoyed rapid gains
  in herding, agriculture, and manufacturing and made a major
  contribution to the British effort in World Wars I and II. Australia
  subsequently developed its minerals, metals, and fossil fuel
  markets, all of which have become key Australian exports. Long-term
  concerns include pollution, particularly depletion of the ozone
  layer, and management and conservation of coastal areas, especially
  the Great Barrier Reef. Sydney will host the 2000 summer Olympics.



Geography



Location: Oceania, continent between the Indian Ocean and the
  South Pacific Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 27 00 S, 133 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 7,686,850 sq km
  land: 7,617,930 sq km
  water: 68,920 sq km
  note: includes Lord Howe Island and Macquarie Island

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than the US

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 25,760 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: generally arid to semiarid; temperate in south and east;
  tropical in north

Terrain: mostly low plateau with deserts; fertile plain in
  southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lake Eyre -15 m
  highest point: Mount Kosciusko 2,229 m

Natural resources: bauxite, coal, iron ore, copper, tin, silver,
  uranium, nickel, tungsten, mineral sands, lead, zinc, diamonds,
  natural gas, petroleum

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 54%
  forests and woodland: 19%
  other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 21,070 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cyclones along the coast; severe droughts

Environment--current issues: soil erosion from overgrazing,
  industrial development, urbanization, and poor farming practices;
  soil salinity rising due to the use of poor quality water;
  desertification; clearing for agricultural purposes threatens the
  natural habitat of many unique animal and plant species; the Great
  Barrier Reef off the northeast coast, the largest coral reef in the
  world, is threatened by increased shipping and its popularity as a
  tourist site; limited natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification

Geography--note: world's smallest continent but sixth-largest
  country; population concentrated along the eastern and southeastern
  coasts; regular, tropical, invigorating, sea breeze known as "the
  Doctor" occurs along the west coast in the summer



People



Population: 18,783,551 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 21% (male 2,023,569; female 1,926,901)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 6,317,045; female 6,172,735)
  65 years and over: 13% (male 1,022,485; female 1,320,816) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.9% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.21 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.9 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.11 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 80.14 years
  male: 77.22 years
  female: 83.23 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.81 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Australian(s)
  adjective: Australian

Ethnic groups: Caucasian 92%, Asian 7%, aboriginal and other 1%

Religions: Anglican 26.1%, Roman Catholic 26%, other Christian
  24.3%, non-Christian 11%

Languages: English, native languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 100%
  male: 100%
  female: 100% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Commonwealth of Australia
  conventional short form: Australia

Data code: AS

Government type: democratic, federal-state system recognizing the
  British monarch as sovereign

Capital: Canberra

Administrative divisions: 6 states and 2 territories*; Australian
  Capital Territory*, New South Wales, Northern Territory*,
  Queensland, South Australia, Tasmania, Victoria, Western Australia

Dependent areas: Ashmore and Cartier Islands, Christmas Island,
  Cocos (Keeling) Islands, Coral Sea Islands, Heard Island and
  McDonald Islands, Norfolk Island

Independence: 1 January 1901 (federation of UK colonies)

National holiday: Australia Day, 26 January (1788)

Constitution: 9 July 1900, effective 1 January 1901

Legal system: based on English common law; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir William DEANE (since 16 February
  1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister John Winston HOWARD (since 11
  March 1996); Deputy Prime Minister Timothy Andrew FISCHER (since 11
  March 1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet selected from among the members of Federal
  Parliament by the governor general on the advice of the prime
  minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the governor general for a
  three-year term

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Parliament consists of the
  Senate (76 seats--12 from each of the six states and two from each of
  the two territories; one-half of the members elected every three
  years by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the House of
  Representatives (148 seats; members elected by popular vote on the
  basis of proportional representation to serve three-year terms; no
  state can have fewer than five representatives)
  elections: Senate--last held 3 October 1998 (next to be held by
  October 2001); House of Representatives--last held 3 October 1998
  (next to be held by October 2001)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Liberal-National 35, Labor 29, Australian Democrats 9, Greens
  1, One Nation 1, independent 1; House of Representatives--percent of
  vote by party--NA; seats by party--Liberal-National 80, Labor 67,
  independent 1

Judicial branch: High Court, the Chief Justice and six other
  justices are appointed by the governor general

Political parties and leaders:

Political pressure groups and leaders: Australian Democratic
  Labor Party (anti-Communist Labor Party splinter group); Peace and
  Nuclear Disarmament Action (Nuclear Disarmament Party splinter group)

International organization participation: ANZUS, APEC, AsDB,
  Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NAM
  (guest), NEA, NSG, OECD, OPCW, PCA, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNITAR, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Andrew Sharp PEACOCK
  chancery: 1601 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Honolulu, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Genta Hawkins HOLMES
  embassy: Moonah Place, Yarralumla, Canberra, Australian Capital
  Territory 2600
  mailing address: APO AP 96549
  consulate(s) general: Melbourne, Perth, and Sydney

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and a large seven-pointed star in the lower
  hoist-side quadrant; the remaining half is a representation of the
  Southern Cross constellation in white with one small five-pointed
  star and four, larger, seven-pointed stars



Economy



Economy--overview: Australia has a prosperous Western-style
  capitalist economy, with a per capita GDP at the level of the four
  dominant West European economies. Rich in natural resources,
  Australia is a major exporter of agricultural products, minerals,
  metals, and fossil fuels. Commodities account for 57% of the value
  of total exports, so that a downturn in world commodity prices can
  have a big impact on the economy. The government is pushing for
  increased exports of manufactured goods, but competition in
  international markets continues to be severe. Australia has suffered
  from the low growth and high unemployment characterizing the OECD
  countries in the early 1990s, but the economy has expanded at
  reasonably steady rates in recent years. Canberra's emphasis on
  reforms is a key factor behind the economy's resilience to the
  regional crisis and its stronger than expected growth rate that
  reached 4.5% last year. After a slow start in 1998, exports
  rebounded in the second half of the year because of a sharp currency
  depreciation and a redirection of sales to Europe, North America,
  and Latin America.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$393.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$21,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 31%
  services: 65% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.5%
  highest 10%: 24.8% (1989)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1% (1998)

Labor force: 9.2 million (December 1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services 73%, industry 22%,
  agriculture 5% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 8.1% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $90.73 billion
  expenditures: $89.04 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY98/99 est.)

Industries: mining, industrial and transportation equipment, food
  processing, chemicals, steel

Industrial production growth rate: 1.2% (1995)

Electricity--production: 166.683 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 91.14%
  hydro: 8.84%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0.02% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 166.683 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, sugarcane, fruits; cattle,
  sheep, poultry

Exports: $56 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: coal, gold, meat, wool, alumina, iron ore,
  wheat, machinery and transport equipment

Exports--partners: Japan 20%, ASEAN 16%, EU 10%, South Korea 9%,
  US 9%, NZ 8%, Taiwan, Hong Kong, China (1997)

Imports: $61 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment, computers
  and office machines, telecommunication equipment and parts; crude
  oil and petroleum products

Imports--partners: EU 25%, US 23%, Japan 13%, China, NZ (1997)

Debt--external: $156 billion (June 1997)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.43 billion (FY97/98)

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1--1.56 (February
  1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995),
  1.3668 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 8.7 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international service
  domestic: domestic satellite system
  international: submarine cables to New Zealand, Papua New Guinea,
  and Indonesia; satellite earth stations--10 Intelsat (4 Indian Ocean
  and 6 Pacific Ocean), 2 Inmarsat (Indian and Pacific Ocean Regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 262, FM 345, shortwave 1
  (Australia's only shortwave station, Radio Australia, broadcasts to
  the world in seven languages, using 23 frequencies) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 104 (64 of these stations are
  government-owned and 40 are commercial) (1997)

Televisions: 9.2 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 38,563 km (2,914 km electrified)
  broad gauge: 6,083 km 1.600-m gauge
  standard gauge: 16,752 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 15,728 km 1.067-m gauge
  dual gauge: 172 km NA gauges

Highways:
  total: 913,000 km
  paved: 353,331 km (including 13,630 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 559,669 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 8,368 km; mainly by small, shallow-draft craft

Pipelines: crude oil 2,500 km; petroleum products 500 km; natural
  gas 5,600 km

Ports and harbors: Adelaide, Brisbane, Cairns, Darwin, Devonport
  (Tasmania), Fremantle, Geelong, Hobart (Tasmania), Launceston
  (Tasmania), Mackay, Melbourne, Sydney, Townsville

Merchant marine:
  total: 57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,767,387 GRT/2,426,710
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 29, cargo 3, chemical tanker 4, container 4,
  liquefied gas tanker 4, oil tanker 8, passenger 1, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 4 (1998 est.)

Airports: 408 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 262
  over 3,047 m: 11
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 112
  914 to 1,523 m: 120
  under 914 m: 8 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 146
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 19
  914 to 1,523 m: 114
  under 914 m: 13 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Australian Army, Royal Australian Navy, Royal
  Australian Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,882,693 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,212,272 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 130,570 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $6.9 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.9% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial claim in Antarctica
  (Australian Antarctic Territory)

Illicit drugs: Tasmania is one of the world's major suppliers of
  licit opiate products; government maintains strict controls over
  areas of opium poppy cultivation and output of poppy straw
  concentrate



======================================================================




@Austria
-------





Introduction



Background: Once the center of power for the large
  Austro-Hungarian empire, Austria was reduced to a small republic
  after its defeat in World War I. After the annexation to Nazi
  Germany in 1938 and subsequent occupation by the victorious Allied
  powers, Austria's 1955 State Treaty declared the country
  "permanently neutral" as a condition of the Soviet military
  withdrawal. The Soviet collapse relieved the external pressure to
  remain unaligned, but neutrality had evolved into a part of Austrian
  cultural identity, which has led to an ongoing public debate over
  whether Vienna legitimately can remain outside of European security
  structures. A wealthy country, Austria joined the European Union in
  1995 and, like many EU members, is adjusting to the new European
  currency and struggling with high unemployment.



Geography



Location: Central Europe, north of Italy and Slovenia

Geographic coordinates: 47 20 N, 13 20 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 83,858 sq km
  land: 82,738 sq km
  water: 1,120 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,562 km
  border countries: Czech Republic 362 km, Germany 784 km, Hungary 366
  km, Italy 430 km, Liechtenstein 35 km, Slovakia 91 km, Slovenia 330
  km, Switzerland 164 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; continental, cloudy; cold winters with
  frequent rain in lowlands and snow in mountains; cool summers with
  occasional showers

Terrain: in the west and south mostly mountains (Alps); along the
  eastern and northern margins mostly flat or gently sloping

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Neusiedler See 115 m
  highest point: Grossglockner 3,797 m

Natural resources: iron ore, oil, timber, magnesite, lead, coal,
  lignite, copper, hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 23%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 20% (1996 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: some forest degradation caused by air
  and soil pollution; soil pollution results from the use of
  agricultural chemicals; air pollution results from emissions by
  coal- and oil-fired power stations and industrial plants and from
  trucks transiting Austria between northern and southern Europe

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Geography--note: landlocked; strategic location at the crossroads
  of central Europe with many easily traversable Alpine passes and
  valleys; major river is the Danube; population is concentrated on
  eastern lowlands because of steep slopes, poor soils, and low
  temperatures elsewhere



People



Population: 8,139,299 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 702,261; female 666,310)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 2,792,484; female 2,713,397)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 478,071; female 786,776) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.09% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.62 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.04 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.48 years
  male: 74.31 years
  female: 80.82 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.37 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Austrian(s)
  adjective: Austrian

Ethnic groups: German 99.4%, Croatian 0.3%, Slovene 0.2%, other
  0.1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 78%, Protestant 5%, other 17%

Languages: German

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1974 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Austria
  conventional short form: Austria
  local long form: Republik Oesterreich
  local short form: Oesterreich

Data code: AU

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Vienna

Administrative divisions: 9 states (bundeslaender,
  singular--bundesland); Burgenland, Kaernten, Niederoesterreich,
  Oberoesterreich, Salzburg, Steiermark, Tirol, Vorarlberg, Wien

Independence: 1156 (from Bavaria)

National holiday: National Day, 26 October (1955)

Constitution: 1920; revised 1929 (reinstated 1 May 1945)

Legal system: civil law system with Roman law origin; judicial
  review of legislative acts by the Constitutional Court; separate
  administrative and civil/penal supreme courts; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; compulsory for presidential
  elections

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Thomas KLESTIL (since 8 July 1992)
  head of government: Chancellor Viktor KLIMA (since 28 January 1997);
  Vice Chancellor Wolfgang SCHUESSEL (since 22 April 1995)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers chosen by the president on the advice
  of the chancellor
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  presidential election last held 19 April 1998 (next to be held in
  the spring of 2004); chancellor chosen by the president from the
  majority party in the National Council; vice chancellor chosen by
  the president on the advice of the chancellor
  election results: Thomas KLESTIL reelected president; percent of
  vote--Thomas KLESTIL 63%, Gertraud KNOLL 14%, Heide SCHMIDT 11%,
  Richard LUGNER 10%, Karl NOWAK 2%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or
  Bundesversammlung consists of Federal Council or Bundesrat (64
  members; members represent each of the states on the basis of
  population, but with each state having at least three
  representatives; members serve a four- or six-year term) and the
  National Council or Nationalrat (183 seats; members elected by
  direct popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: National Council--last held 17 December 1995 (next to be
  held in the fall of 1999)
  election results: National Council--percent of vote by party--SPOe
  38.3%, OeVP 28.3%, FPOe 22.1%, LF 5.3%, Greens 4.6%, other 1.4%;
  seats by party--SPOe 71, OeVP 53, FPOe 40, LF 10, Greens 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Judicial Court or Oberster Gerichtshof;
  Administrative Court or Verwaltungsgerichtshof; Constitutional Court
  or Verfassungsgerichtshof

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party of Austria
  caucus floor leader and Alexander VAN DER BELLEN, party spokesman];

Political pressure groups and leaders: Federal Chamber of Trade
  and Commerce; Austrian Trade Union Federation (primarily Socialist)
  or OeGB; three composite leagues of the Austrian People's Party or
  OeVP representing business, labor, and farmers; OeVP-oriented League
  of Austrian Industrialists or VOeI; Roman Catholic Church, including
  its chief lay organization, Catholic Action

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, BSEC (observer), CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE,
  EIB, EMU, ESA, EU, FAO, G- 9, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO,
  UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNTSO,
  UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU (observer), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Helmut TUERK
  chancery: 3524 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008-3035
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kathryn Walt HALL
  embassy: Boltzmanngasse 16, A-1091, Vienna
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and red



Economy



Economy--overview: Austria has a well-developed market economy
  with a high standard of living. As a member of the European Monetary
  Union (EMU), Austria's economy is closely integrated with other EU
  member countries, especially with Germany. Austria's membership in
  the EU has drawn an influx of foreign investors attracted by
  Austria's access to the single European market. Through
  privatization efforts, the 1996-98 budget consolidation programs,
  and austerity measures, Austria brought its total public sector
  deficit down to 2.5% of GDP in 1997 and public debt--at 66% of GDP in
  1997--more or less in line with the 60% of GDP required by the EU's
  Maastricht criteria. Cuts mainly affect the civil service and
  Austria's generous social system, the two major causes of the
  government deficit. To meet increased competition from both EU and
  Central European countries, Austria will need to emphasize
  knowledge-based sectors of the economy and deregulate the service
  sector, particularly telecommunications and energy. The strong GDP
  growth of 1998 is expected to dwindle back to 2.3% in 1999, and
  observers caution that this projection may be revised downwards in
  view of the Asian and Brazilian crises and Germany's lower growth
  projection.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$184.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1.4%
  industry: 30.8%
  services: 67.8% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.9% (1998)

Labor force: 3.7 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: services 67.7%, industry and crafts
  29%, agriculture and forestry 0.7% (salaried employees, 1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 7% (1999 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $50.4 billion
  expenditures: $55.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: construction, machinery, vehicles and parts, food,
  chemicals, lumber and wood processing, paper and paperboard,
  communications equipment, tourism (1997)

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 52.15 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 34.4%
  hydro: 65.6%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 56.1 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 9.8 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--imports: 9 billion kWh (1997)

Agriculture--products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, wine, fruit;
  dairy products, cattle, pigs, poultry; lumber

Exports: $62.5 billion (1998)

Exports--commodities: vehicles, machinery and equipment, paper and
  paperboard, metal goods, iron and steel, telecommunication
  equipment, textiles, medical and pharmaceutical products (1997)

Exports--partners: EU 62% (Germany 35.1%, Italy 8.3%), Central and
  Eastern Europe 17.6% (Hungary 4.9%), Japan 1.3%, US 3.7% (1997)

Imports: $65.8 billion (1998)

Imports--commodities: vehicles, machinery and equipment, apparel,
  metal goods, oil and oil products, office and data-processing
  machinery, medical and pharmaceutical products, telecommunication
  equipment, textiles (1997)

Imports--partners: EU 68.9% (Germany 41.7%, Italy 8%), Central and
  Eastern Europe 11% (Hungary 3.1%), Asia 7.1% (Japan 2.2%), US 5.4%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $24.33 billion (1997)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $513 million (1997); of which, bilateral
  $298 million, multilateral $215 million

Currency: 1 Austrian schilling (AS) = 100 groschen

Exchange rates: Austrian schillings (AS) per US$1--11.86 (January
  1999), 12.379 (1998), 12.204 (1997), 10.587 (1996), 10.081 (1995),
  11.422 (1994)
  note: on 9 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 13.7603 Austrian shillings per euro; the euro will replace
  the local currency in consenting countries for all transactions in
  2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 3.47 million (1986 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: highly developed and efficient
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean) and 2 Eutelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 61 (several hundred
  repeaters), shortwave 1 (Austria's single shortwave station, Radio
  Austria International, transmits its programs to the world in six
  languages using 12 frequencies and six communication satellite
  relays) (1998)

Radios: 70% of all households had radiosaccoding to the 1993
  census

Television broadcast stations: 51 (in addition, there are 920
  repeaters) (1998)

Televisions: 2,418,584 (1984 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 5,849 km (there is also 594 km of private tracks)
  standard gauge: 5,470 km 1.435-m gauge (3,418 km electrified)
  narrow gauge: 379 km 1.000-m and 0.760-m gauge (84 km electrified)
  (1997)

Highways: 129,061 km
  paved: 129,061 km (including 1,613 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 358 km (1997)

Pipelines: crude oil 777 km; natural gas 840 km (1997)

Ports and harbors: Linz, Vienna, Enns, Krems

Merchant marine:
  total: 22 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 67,066 GRT/95,693 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 18, combination bulk 2, container 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 55 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 22
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 12 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 33
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 29 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (includes Flying Division)

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,091,902 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,735,469 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 48,872 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.8 billion (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.82% (1999 est.)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and
  South American cocaine destined for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Azerbaijan
----------





Introduction



Background: In 1806, Azerbaijan, a region of Turkic Muslim
  people, was conquered by the Russians. In 1918, Azerbaijan declared
  independence from Russia, but was incorporated into the Soviet Union
  in 1920. It again declared its independence in 1991, following the
  collapse of the USSR. The conflict between Azerbaijan and Armenia
  over the Nagorno-Karabakh region is still unresolved after 10 years
  and Baku has yet to settle disputes with its neighbors over oil
  rights in the Caspian Sea. During the war, Karabakh Armenians
  declared independence and seized almost 20% of the country's
  territory, creating some 750,000 Azerbaijani refugees in the
  process. Both sides have generally observed a Russian-mediated
  cease-fire in place since May 1994.



Geography



Location: Southwestern Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea, between
  Iran and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 40 30 N, 47 30 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 86,600 sq km
  land: 86,100 sq km
  water: 500 sq km
  note: includes the exclave of Naxcivan Autonomous Republic and the
  Nagorno-Karabakh region; the region's autonomy was abolished by
  Azerbaijani Supreme Soviet on 26 November 1991

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,013 km
  border countries: Armenia (with Azerbaijan-proper) 566 km, Armenia
  (with Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave) 221 km, Georgia 322 km, Iran
  (with Azerbaijan-proper) 432 km, Iran (with Azerbaijan-Naxcivan
  exclave) 179 km, Russia 284 km, Turkey 9 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)
  note: Azerbaijan borders the Caspian Sea (800 km, est.)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: dry, semiarid steppe

Terrain: large, flat Kur-Araz Ovaligi (Kura-Araks Lowland) (much
  of it below sea level) with Great Caucasus Mountains to the north,
  Qarabag Yaylasi (Karabakh Upland) in west; Baku lies on Abseron
  Yasaqligi (Apsheron Peninsula) that juts into Caspian Sea

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caspian Sea -28 m
  highest point: Bazarduzu Dagi 4,485 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, nonferrous
  metals, alumina

Land use:
  arable land: 18%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 11%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: droughts; some lowland areas threatened by
  rising levels of the Caspian Sea

Environment--current issues: local scientists consider the Abseron
  Yasaqligi (Apsheron Peninsula) (including Baku and Sumqayit) and the
  Caspian Sea to be the ecologically most devastated area in the world
  because of severe air, water, and soil pollution; soil pollution
  results from the use of DDT as a pesticide and also from toxic
  defoliants used in the production of cotton

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Desertification, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 7,908,224 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 32% (male 1,292,018; female 1,240,745)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 2,361,792; female 2,496,721)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 202,755; female 314,193) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.63% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.58 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.5 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.76 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.65 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 82.52 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 63.08 years
  male: 58.76 years
  female: 67.63 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.67 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Azerbaijani(s)
  adjective: Azerbaijani

Ethnic groups: Azeri 90%, Dagestani Peoples 3.2%, Russian 2.5%,
  Armenian 2%, other 2.3% (1998 est.)
  note: almost all Armenians live in the separatist Nagorno-Karabakh
  region

Religions: Muslim 93.4%, Russian Orthodox 2.5%, Armenian Orthodox
  2.3%, other 1.8% (1995 est.)
  note: religious affiliation is still nominal in Azerbaijan;
  percentages for actual practicing adherents are much lower

Languages: Azeri 89%, Russian 3%, Armenian 2%, other 6% (1995
  est.)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 99%
  female: 96% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Azerbaijani Republic
  conventional short form: Azerbaijan
  local long form: Azarbaycan Respublikasi
  local short form: none
  former: Azerbaijan Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: AJ

Government type: republic

Capital: Baku (Baki)

Administrative divisions: 59 rayons (rayonlar; rayon--singular),
  11 cities* (saharlar; sahar--singular), 1 autonomous republic**
  (muxtar respublika); Abseron Rayonu, Agcabadi Rayonu, Agdam Rayonu,
  Agdas Rayonu, Agstafa Rayonu, Agsu Rayonu, Ali Bayramli Sahari*,
  Astara Rayonu, Baki Sahari*, Balakan Rayonu, Barda Rayonu, Beylaqan
  Rayonu, Bilasuvar Rayonu, Cabrayil Rayonu, Calilabad Rayonu,
  Daskasan Rayonu, Davaci Rayonu, Fuzuli Rayonu, Gadabay Rayonu, Ganca
  Sahari*, Goranboy Rayonu, Goycay Rayonu, Haciqabul Rayonu, Imisli
  Rayonu, Ismayilli Rayonu, Kalbacar Rayonu, Kurdamir Rayonu, Lacin
  Rayonu, Lankaran Rayonu, Lankaran Sahari*, Lerik Rayonu, Masalli
  Rayonu, Mingacevir Sahari*, Naftalan Sahari*, Naxcivan Muxtar
  Respublikasi**, Neftcala Rayonu, Oguz Rayonu, Qabala Rayonu, Qax
  Rayonu, Qazax Rayonu, Qobustan Rayonu, Quba Rayonu, Qubadli Rayonu,
  Qusar Rayonu, Saatli Rayonu, Sabirabad Rayonu, Saki Rayonu, Saki
  Sahari*, Salyan Rayonu, Samaxi Rayonu, Samkir Rayonu, Samux Rayonu,
  Siyazan Rayonu, Sumqayit Sahari*, Susa Rayonu, Susa Sahari*, Tartar
  Rayonu, Tovuz Rayonu, Ucar Rayonu, Xacmaz Rayonu, Xankandi Sahari*,
  Xanlar Rayonu, Xizi Rayonu, Xocali Rayonu, Xocavand Rayonu, Yardimli
  Rayonu, Yevlax Rayonu, Yevlax Sahari*, Zangilan Rayonu, Zaqatala
  Rayonu, Zardab Rayonu

Independence: 30 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 May

Constitution: adopted 12 November 1995

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Heydar ALIYEV (since 18 June 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Artur RASIZADE (since 26 November
  1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president and
  confirmed by the National Assembly
  elections: president elected by popular vote to a five-year term;
  election last held 11 October 1998 (next to be held October 2003);
  prime minister and first deputy prime ministers appointed by the
  president and confirmed by the National Assembly
  election results: Heydar ALIYEV elected president; percent of
  vote--Heydar ALIYEV 76%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Milli Mejlis
  (125 seats; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 and 26 November 1995 (next to be held NA
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NAP
  and allies 115, APF 4, PNIA 3, Musavat Party 1, vacant 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: New Azerbaijan Party or NAP
  ELCHIBEY, chairman]; Party for National Independence of Azerbaijan

Political pressure groups and leaders: self-proclaimed Armenian
  Nagorno-Karabakh Republic; Talysh independence movement; Sadval,
  Lezgin movement

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE (guest),
  CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM
  (observer), OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Hafiz Mir Jalal PASHAYEV
  chancery: (temporary) Suite 700, 927 15th Street NW, Washington, DC
  20005 or P. O. Box 28790, Washington, DC 20038-8790

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Stanley T. ESCUDERO
  embassy: Azadliq Prospekt 83, Baku 370007
  mailing address: American Embassy Baku, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7050

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  red, and green; a crescent and eight-pointed star in white are
  centered in red band



Economy



Economy--overview: Azerbaijan is less developed industrially than
  either Armenia or Georgia, the other Caucasian states. It resembles
  the Central Asian states in its majority Muslim population, high
  structural unemployment, and low standard of living. The economy's
  most prominent products are oil, cotton, and natural gas. Production
  from the Caspian oil field declined through 1997 but registered an
  increase in 1998. Negotiation of more than a dozen
  production-sharing arrangements (PSAs) with foreign firms, which
  have thus far committed $30 billion to oil field development, should
  generate the funds needed to spur future industrial development. Oil
  production under the first of these PSAs, with the Azerbaijan
  International Operating Company, began in November 1997. Azerbaijan
  shares all the formidable problems of the former Soviet republics in
  making the transition from a command to a market economy, but its
  considerable energy resources brighten its long-term prospects. Baku
  has only recently begun making progress on economic reform, and old
  economic ties and structures are slowly being replaced. A major
  short-term obstacle to economic progress, including stepped up
  foreign investment, is the continuing conflict with Armenia over the
  Nagorno-Karabakh region. Trade with Russia and the other former
  Soviet republics is declining in importance while trade is building
  up with Turkey, Iran, the UAE, and the nations of Europe. A serious
  long-term challenge is the maintenance of the competitiveness of
  non-oil exports in world markets.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$12.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 10% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,640 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 22%
  industry: 18%
  services: 60% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -7.6% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.9 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and forestry 32%, industry
  and construction 15%, services 53% (1997)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $565 million
  expenditures: $682 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum and natural gas, petroleum products,
  oilfield equipment; steel, iron ore, cement; chemicals and
  petrochemicals; textiles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 16.035 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 90.55%
  hydro: 9.45%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 16.8 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 600 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 745 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, grain, rice, grapes, fruit,
  vegetables, tea, tobacco; cattle, pigs, sheep, goats

Exports: $781 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: oil and gas, chemicals, oilfield equipment,
  textiles, cotton

Exports--partners: CIS, European countries, Turkey

Imports: $794 million (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and parts, consumer durables,
  foodstuffs, textiles

Imports--partners: CIS, European countries, Turkey

Debt--external: $100 million (of which $75 million to Russia)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $113 million (1996)

Currency: manat=100 gopiks

Exchange rates: manats per US$1--3,865.00 (November 1998),
  3,985.38 (1997), 4,301.26 (1996), 4,413.54 (1995), 1,570.23 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.414 million (1998)

Telephone system: Azerbaijani telecommunications fall under the
  Ministry of Communications; Azerbaijan's telephone system is a
  combination of old Soviet era technology used by Azerbaijani
  citizens and small- to medium-size commercial establishments, and
  modern cellular phones used by an increasing middle class, large
  commercial ventures, international companies, and most government
  officials; the average citizen waits on a 200,000-person list for
  telephone service; Internet and E-mail service are available in Baku
  domestic: local--the majority of telephones are in Baku or other
  industrial centers; intercity--about 700 villages still do not have
  public phone service; all long distance service must use Azertel's
  (Ministry of Communications) lines; satellite service connects Baku
  to a modern switch in its separated enclave to Nakhichevan
  international: the old Soviet system of cable and microwave is still
  serviceable; satellite service between Baku and Turkey provides
  access to 200 countries; additional satellite providers supply
  services between Baku and specific countries; Azerbaijan is a
  signator of the Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber-Optic Line (TAE); their
  lines are not laid but the Turkish satellite and a microwave between
  Azerbaijan and Iran can provide Azerbaijan worldwide access through
  this system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 17, shortwave 1 (Azerbaijan's
  single shortwave station transmits its programs to the Middle East
  in eight languages)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2; note--the Ministry of
  Communications is the monopoly broadcaster and rebroadcaster of
  television in Azerbaijan; Azerbaijani, Russian, Armenian, Iranian,
  British broadcasting companies, Voice of America, and other European
  channels are available via satellite; television is broadcast to
  Nakhichevan by satellite

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,125 km in common carrier service; does not include
  industrial lines
  broad gauge: 2,125 km 1.520-m gauge (1,278 km electrified) (1993)

Highways:
  total: 57,770 km
  paved: 54,188 km
  unpaved: 3,582 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,130 km; petroleum products 630 km; natural
  gas 1,240 km

Ports and harbors: Baku (Baki)

Merchant marine:
  total: 57 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 251,404 GRT/ 306,264 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 12, oil tanker 42, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2,
  short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 69 (1996 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 29
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 17
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 40
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 33 (1996 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Border
  Guards

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,041,863 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,639,144 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 73,486 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $121 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.6% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Armenia supports ethnic Armenians in the
  Nagorno-Karabakh region of Azerbaijan in the longstanding,
  separatist conflict against the Azerbaijani Government; Caspian Sea
  boundaries are not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran,
  Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivation of cannabis and opium
  poppy, mostly for CIS consumption; limited government eradication
  program; transshipment point for opiates via Iran, Central Asia, and
  Russia to Western Europe



======================================================================




@Bahamas, The
------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, chain of islands in the North Atlantic
  Ocean, southeast of Florida

Geographic coordinates: 24 15 N, 76 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 13,940 sq km
  land: 10,070 sq km
  water: 3,870 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,542 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; moderated by warm waters of Gulf Stream

Terrain: long, flat coral formations with some low rounded hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Alvernia, on Cat Island 63 m

Natural resources: salt, aragonite, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 67% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes and other tropical storms that cause
  extensive flood and wind damage

Environment--current issues: coral reef decay; solid waste disposal

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location adjacent to US and Cuba;
  extensive island chain



People



Population: 283,705 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 39,271; female 38,740)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 92,830; female 96,814)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 6,696; female 9,354) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.36% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.58 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.55 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.38 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.25 years
  male: 70.94 years
  female: 77.64 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.31 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bahamian(s)
  adjective: Bahamian

Ethnic groups: black 85%, white 15%

Religions: Baptist 32%, Anglican 20%, Roman Catholic 19%,
  Methodist 6%, Church of God 6%, other Protestant 12%, none or
  unknown 3%, other 2%

Languages: English, Creole (among Haitian immigrants)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98.2%
  male: 98.5%
  female: 98% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Commonwealth of The Bahamas
  conventional short form: The Bahamas

Data code: BF

Government type: commonwealth

Capital: Nassau

Administrative divisions: 21 districts; Acklins and Crooked
  Islands, Bimini, Cat Island, Exuma, Freeport, Fresh Creek,
  Governor's Harbour, Green Turtle Cay, Harbour Island, High Rock,
  Inagua, Kemps Bay, Long Island, Marsh Harbour, Mayaguana, New
  Providence, Nicholls Town and Berry Islands, Ragged Island, Rock
  Sound, Sandy Point, San Salvador and Rum Cay

Independence: 10 July 1973 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 10 July (1973)

Constitution: 10 July 1973

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Orville TURNQUEST (since 2
  January 1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister Hubert Alexander INGRAHAM (since
  19 August 1992) and Deputy Prime Minister Frank WATSON (since
  December 1994)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the prime
  minister's recommendation
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister and deputy prime minister
  appointed by the governor general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (16-member body appointed by the governor general upon the advice of
  the prime minister and the opposition leader for a five-year term)
  and the House of Assembly (40 seats; members elected by direct
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 14 March 1997 (next to be held by March 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--FNM
  35, PLP 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Progressive Liberal Party or PLP
  INGRAHAM]

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC,
  CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAS,
  OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Arlington Griffith BUTLER
  chancery: 2220 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Arthur SCHECHTER
  embassy: Queen Street, Nassau
  mailing address: local or express mail address: P.O. Box N-8197,
  Nassau; stateside address: American Embassy Nassau, P.O. Box 599009,
  Miami, FL 33159-9009; pouch address: Nassau, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-3370

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of aquamarine
  (top), gold, and aquamarine, with a black equilateral triangle based
  on the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: The Bahamas is a stable, developing nation with
  an economy heavily dependent on tourism and offshore banking.
  Tourism alone accounts for more than 60% of GDP and directly or
  indirectly employs 40% of the archipelago's labor force. Moderate
  growth in tourism receipts and a boom in construction of new hotels,
  resorts, and residences led to an increase of the country's GDP by
  an estimated 4% in 1998. Manufacturing and agriculture together
  contribute less than 10% of GDP and show little growth, despite
  government incentives aimed at those sectors. Overall growth
  prospects in the short run will depend heavily on the fortunes of
  the tourism sector and continued income growth in the US, which
  accounts for the majority of tourist visitors.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.63 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$20,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 5%
  services: 92% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.4% (1997)

Labor force: 148,000 (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: government 30%, tourism 40%, business
  services 10%, agriculture 5% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 9% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $766 million
  expenditures: $845 million, including capital expenditures of $97
  million (FY97/98)

Industries: tourism, banking, cement, oil refining and
  transshipment, salt production, rum, aragonite, pharmaceuticals,
  spiral-welded steel pipe

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: citrus, vegetables; poultry

Exports: $300 million (1998)

Exports--commodities: pharmaceuticals, cement, rum, crawfish,
  refined petroleum products

Exports--partners: US 24.5%, EU (excluding UK) 23.9%, UK 12.6%,
  Singapore 5.6% (1997)

Imports: $1.37 billion (1998)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods, crude oil,
  vehicles, electronics

Imports--partners: US 34.9%, EU 24.3%, Japan 15.5%, Russia 6.3%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $381.7 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $9.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Bahamian dollar (B$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Bahamian dollar (B$) per US$1--1.000 (fixed rate
  pegged to the dollar)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 200,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: 91,183 telephone subscribers; totally automatic system;
  highly developed
  international: tropospheric scatter and submarine cable to Florida;
  3 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat
  (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 200,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 60,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 2,693 km
  paved: 1,546 km
  unpaved: 1,147 km (1997 est.)

Ports and harbors: Freeport, Matthew Town, Nassau

Merchant marine:
  total: 1,079 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 26,631,924
  GRT/41,196,326 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 209, cargo 241, chemical tanker 43, combination
  bulk 13, combination ore/oil 22, container 61, liquefied gas tanker
  34, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 170, passenger 62,
  passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 140,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 48, short-sea passenger 12, specialized
  tanker 2, vehicle carrier 19
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 49
  countries among which are Norway 177, Greece 141, UK 113, US 61,
  Denmark 39, Finland 27, Japan 25, Sweden 24, France 22, and Italy 22
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 62 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 33
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
  914 to 1,523 m: 13
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 29
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Bahamas Defense Force (Coast Guard
  only), Royal Bahamas Police Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $20 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana
  bound for US and Europe; banking industry vulnerable to money
  laundering



======================================================================




@Bahrain
-------





Geography



Location: Middle East, archipelago in the Persian Gulf, east of
  Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 26 00 N, 50 33 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 620 sq km
  land: 620 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 161 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: extending to boundaries to be determined
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: arid; mild, pleasant winters; very hot, humid summers

Terrain: mostly low desert plain rising gently to low central
  escarpment

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
  highest point: Jabal ad Dukhan 122 m

Natural resources: oil, associated and nonassociated natural gas,
  fish

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 92% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; dust storms

Environment--current issues: desertification resulting from the
  degradation of limited arable land, periods of drought, and dust
  storms; coastal degradation (damage to coastlines, coral reefs, and
  sea vegetation) resulting from oil spills and other discharges from
  large tankers, oil refineries, and distribution stations; no natural
  fresh water resources so that groundwater and sea water are the only
  sources for all water needs

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: close to primary Middle Eastern petroleum
  sources; strategic location in Persian Gulf which much of Western
  world's petroleum must transit to reach open ocean



People



Population: 629,090 (July 1999 est.)
  note: includes 227,801 non-nationals (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 31% (male 97,316; female 94,708)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 249,594; female 169,337)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 9,241; female 8,894) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.86 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.24 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.42 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.47 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.04 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.3 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.81 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.32 years
  male: 72.75 years
  female: 77.96 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.97 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bahraini(s)
  adjective: Bahraini

Ethnic groups: Bahraini 63%, Asian 13%, other Arab 10%, Iranian
  8%, other 6%

Religions: Shi'a Muslim 75%, Sunni Muslim 25%

Languages: Arabic, English, Farsi, Urdu

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 85.2%
  male: 89.1%
  female: 79.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: State of Bahrain
  conventional short form: Bahrain
  local long form: Dawlat al Bahrayn
  local short form: Al Bahrayn

Data code: BA

Government type: traditional monarchy

Capital: Manama

Administrative divisions: 12 municipalities (manatiq,
  singular--mintaqah); Al Hadd, Al Manamah, Al Mintaqah al Gharbiyah,
  Al Mintaqah al Wusta, Al Mintaqah ash Shamaliyah, Al Muharraq, Ar
  Rifa' wa al Mintaqah al Janubiyah, Jidd Hafs, Madinat Hamad, Madinat
  'Isa, Juzur Hawar, Sitrah
  note: all municipalities administered from Manama

Independence: 15 August 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 16 December (1971)

Constitution: 26 May 1973, effective 6 December 1973

Legal system: based on Islamic law and English common law

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Amir HAMAD bin Isa Al Khalifa (since 6 March 1999);
  Heir Apparent Crown Prince SALMAN bin Hamad (son of the monarch,
  born NA 1969)
  head of government: Prime Minister KHALIFA bin Salman Al Khalifa
  (since 19 January 1970)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly was dissolved 26
  August 1975 and legislative powers were assumed by the Cabinet;
  appointed Advisory Council established 16 December 1992

Judicial branch: High Civil Appeals Court

Political parties and leaders: political parties prohibited

Political pressure groups and leaders: several small, clandestine
  leftist and Islamic fundamentalist groups are active; following the
  arrest of a popular Shi'a cleric, Shi'a activists have fomented
  unrest sporadically since late 1994, demanding the return of an
  elected National Assembly and an end to unemployment

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
  ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent),
  ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW, UN, UN Security Council (temporary),
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dr. Muhammad ABD AL-GHAFFAR Abdallah
  chancery: 3502 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Johnny YOUNG
  embassy: Building No. 979, Road 3119 (next to Al-Ahli Sports Club),
  Block 3119, Zinj District, Manama
  mailing address: American Embassy Manama, PSC 451, FPO AE
  09834-5100; International Mail: American Embassy, Box 26431, Manama

Flag description: red with a white serrated band (eight white
  points) on the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: In Bahrain, petroleum production and processing
  account for about 60% of export receipts, 60% of government
  revenues, and 30% of GDP. Economic conditions have fluctuated with
  the changing fortunes of oil since 1985, for example, during and
  following the Gulf crisis of 1990-91. With its highly developed
  communication and transport facilities, Bahrain is home to numerous
  multinational firms with business in the Gulf. A large share of
  exports consists of petroleum products made from imported crude.
  Construction proceeds on several major industrial projects.
  Unemployment, especially among the young, and the depletion of both
  oil and underground water resources are major long-term economic
  problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$13,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1%
  industry: 46%
  services: 53% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.2% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 150,000 (1997 est.)
  note: 44% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
  (July 1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: industry, commerce, and service 79%,
  government 20%, agriculture 1% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.5 billion
  expenditures: $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 budget)

Industries: petroleum processing and refining, aluminum smelting,
  offshore banking, ship repairing; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1995)

Electricity--production: 4.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 4.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruit, vegetables; poultry, dairy products;
  shrimp, fish

Exports: $4.7 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 61%,
  aluminum 7%

Exports--partners: India 18%, Japan 11%, Saudi Arabia 8%, South
  Korea 7%, UAE 5% (1997)

Imports: $4.4 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: nonoil 59%, crude oil 41%

Imports--partners: Saudi Arabia 45%, US 10%, UK 6%, Japan 5%,
  Germany 4% (1997)

Debt--external: $2 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $48.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Bahraini dinar (BD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Bahraini dinars (BD) per US$1--0.3760 (fixed rate)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 73,552 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern system; good domestic services and
  excellent international connections
  domestic: NA
  international: tropospheric scatter to Qatar and UAE; microwave
  radio relay to Saudi Arabia; submarine cable to Qatar, UAE, and
  Saudi Arabia; satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 320,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1997)

Televisions: 270,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 3,103 km
  paved: 2,374 km
  unpaved: 729 km (1997 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 56 km; petroleum products 16 km; natural gas
  32 km

Ports and harbors: Manama, Mina' Salman, Sitrah

Merchant marine:
  total: 8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 228,273 GRT/304,654 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 3, container 2, oil tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Force, Navy, Air Force, Coast Guard,
  Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 15 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 220,670 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 121,451 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $276.9 million (1994)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.5% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial dispute with Qatar over the
  Hawar Islands and maritime boundary dispute with Qatar currently
  before the International Court of Justice (ICJ)



======================================================================




@Baker Island
------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 0 13 N, 176 31 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 1.4 sq km
  land: 1.4 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 2.5 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 4.8 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Terrain: low, nearly level coral island surrounded by a narrow
  fringing reef

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 8 m

Natural resources: guano (deposits worked until 1891)

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island
  can be a maritime hazard

Environment--current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: treeless, sparse, and scattered vegetation
  consisting of grasses, prostrate vines, and low growing shrubs;
  primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds,
  shorebirds, and marine wildlife



People



Population: uninhabited
  note: American civilians evacuated in 1942 after Japanese air and
  naval attacks during World War II; occupied by US military during
  World War II, but abandoned after the war; public entry is by
  special-use permit from US Fish and Wildlife Service only and
  generally restricted to scientists and educators; a cemetery and
  remnants of structures from early settlement are located near the
  middle of the west coast; visited annually by US Fish and Wildlife
  Service



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Baker Island

Data code: FQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC by the Fish and Wildlife Service of
  the US Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife
  Refuge system

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only; note--there is
  one boat landing area along the middle of the west coast

Airports: 1 abandoned World War II runway of 1,665 m, completely
  covered with vegetation and unusable

Transportation--note: there is a day beacon near the middle of the
  west coast



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US; visited
  annually by the US Coast Guard



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Bangladesh
----------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, bordering the Bay of Bengal, between
  Burma and India

Geographic coordinates: 24 00 N, 90 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 144,000 sq km
  land: 133,910 sq km
  water: 10,090 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,246 km
  border countries: Burma 193 km, India 4,053 km

Coastline: 580 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 18 nm
  continental shelf: up to the outer limits of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; cool, dry winter (October to March); hot,
  humid summer (March to June); cool, rainy monsoon (June to October)

Terrain: mostly flat alluvial plain; hilly in southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Keokradong 1,230 m

Natural resources: natural gas, arable land, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 73%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 15%
  other: 5% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 31,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: droughts, cyclones; much of the country
  routinely flooded during the summer monsoon season

Environment--current issues: many people are landless and forced
  to live on and cultivate flood-prone land; limited access to potable
  water; water-borne diseases prevalent; water pollution especially of
  fishing areas results from the use of commercial pesticides;
  intermittent water shortages because of falling water tables in the
  northern and central parts of the country; soil degradation;
  deforestation; severe overpopulation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea



People



Population: 127,117,967 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 38% (male 24,516,722; female 23,346,904)
  15-64 years: 59% (male 38,441,064; female 36,586,743)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 2,303,613; female 1,922,921) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.59% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.2 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.5 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.79 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.2 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 69.68 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 60.6 years
  male: 60.73 years
  female: 60.46 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.86 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bangladeshi(s)
  adjective: Bangladesh

Ethnic groups: Bengali 98%, Biharis 250,000, tribals less than 1
  million

Religions: Muslim 88.3%, Hindu 10.5%, other 1.2%

Languages: Bangla (official), English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 38.1%
  male: 49.4%
  female: 26.1% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: People's Republic of Bangladesh
  conventional short form: Bangladesh
  former: East Pakistan

Data code: BG

Government type: republic

Capital: Dhaka

Administrative divisions: 5 divisions; Barisal, Chittagong,
  Dhaka, Khulna, Rajshahi
  note: there may be one additional division named Sylhet

Independence: 16 December 1971 (from Pakistan)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 March (1971)

Constitution: 4 November 1972, effective 16 December 1972,
  suspended following coup of 24 March 1982, restored 10 November
  1986, amended many times

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Shahabuddin AHMED (since 9 October 1996);
  note--the president's duties are normally ceremonial, but with the
  13th amendment to the constitution ("Caretaker Government
  Amendment"), the president's role becomes significant at times when
  Parliament is dissolved and a caretaker government is installed--at
  presidential direction--to supervise the elections
  head of government: Prime Minister Sheikh HASINA Wajed (since 23
  June 1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet selected by the prime minister and appointed by the
  president
  elections: president elected by National Parliament for a five-year
  term; election last held 24 July 1996 (next to be held by NA October
  2001); following legislative elections, the leader of the party that
  wins the most seats is usually appointed prime minister by the
  president
  election results: Shahabuddin AHMED elected president without
  opposition; percent of National Parliament vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament or Jatiya
  Sangsad (330 seats; 300 elected by popular vote from single
  territorial constituencies, 30 seats reserved for women; members
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 June 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--AL 33.87%, BNP 30.87%;
  seats by party--AL 178, BNP 113, JP 33, JI 3, other 2, election still
  to be held 1; note--the elections of 12 June 1996 brought to power an
  Awami League government for the first time in twenty-one years; held
  under a neutral, caretaker administration, the elections were
  characterized by a peaceful, orderly process and massive voter
  turnout, ending a bitter two-year impasse between the former BNP and
  opposition parties that had paralyzed National Parliament and led to
  widespread street violence

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, the Chief Justices and other
  judges are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Bangladesh Nationalist Party or

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MONUA, NAM, OIC,
  OPCW, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH,
  UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNOMIL, UNPREDEP, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Khwaja Mohammad SHEHABUDDIN
  chancery: 2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John C. HOLZMAN
  embassy: Diplomatic Enclave, Madani Avenue, Baridhara, Dhaka 1212
  mailing address: G.P.O. Box 323, Dhaka 1000

Flag description: green with a large red disk slightly to the
  hoist side of center; the red sun of freedom represents the blood
  shed to achieve independence; the green field symbolizes the lush
  countryside, and secondarily, the traditional color of Islam



Economy



Economy--overview: Despite sustained domestic and international
  efforts to improve economic and demographic prospects, Bangladesh
  remains one of the world's poorest, most densely populated, and
  least developed nations. The economy is largely agricultural, with
  the cultivation of rice the single most important activity in the
  economy. Major impediments to growth include frequent cyclones and
  floods, the inefficiency of state-owned enterprises, a rapidly
  growing labor force that cannot be absorbed by agriculture, delays
  in exploiting energy resources (natural gas), inadequate power
  supplies, and slow implementation of economic reforms. Prime
  Minister Sheikh HASINA Wajed's Awami League government has made some
  headway improving the climate for foreign investors and liberalizing
  the capital markets; for example, it has negotiated with foreign
  firms for oil and gas exploration, better countrywide distribution
  of cooking gas, and the construction of natural gas pipelines and
  power plants. Progress on other economic reforms has been halting
  because of opposition from the bureaucracy, public sector unions,
  and other vested interest groups. Severe floods, lasting from July
  to October 1998, endangered the livelihoods of more than 20 million
  people. Foodgrain production fell by 4 million tons, forcing Dhaka
  to triple its normal foodgrain imports and placing severe pressure
  on Bangladesh's balance of payments. The floods increased the
  country's reliance on large-scale international aid. So far the East
  Asian financial crisis has not had major impact on the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$175.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,380 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 30%
  industry: 17%
  services: 53% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 35.6% (1995-96 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.1%
  highest 10%: 23.7% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7% (1998)

Labor force: 56 million
  note: extensive export of labor to Saudi Arabia, Kuwait, UAE, and
  Oman (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, services 25%,
  industry and mining 10% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 35.2% (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $3.8 billion
  expenditures: $5.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: jute manufacturing, cotton textiles, food processing,
  steel, fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 3.6% (1997)

Electricity--production: 11.5 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 97.35%
  hydro: 2.65%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 11.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, jute, tea, wheat, sugarcane,
  potatoes; beef, milk, poultry

Exports: $4.4 billion (1997)

Exports--commodities: garments, jute and jute goods, leather,
  frozen fish and seafood

Exports--partners: Western Europe 42%, US 30%, Hong Kong 4%, Japan
  3% (FY95/96 est.)

Imports: $7.1 billion (1997)

Imports--commodities: capital goods, textiles, food, petroleum
  products

Imports--partners: India 21%, China 10%, Western Europe 8%, Hong
  Kong 7%, Singapore 6% (FY95/96 est.)

Debt--external: $16.7 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.475 billion (FY96/97)

Currency: 1 taka (Tk) = 100 poisha

Exchange rates: taka (Tk) per US$1--48.500 (January 1999), 46.906
  (1998), 43.892 (1997), 41.794 (1996), 40.278 (1995), 40.212 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 249,800 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: poor domestic telephone service
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean);
  international radiotelephone communications and landline service to
  neighboring countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 12, shortwave 2 (one of
  Bangladesh's two shortwave stations, Bangladesh Betar or Radio
  Bangladesh, transmits its programs to the world in six languages on
  four frequencies) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 11 (1997)

Televisions: 350,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,745 km
  broad gauge: 923 km 1.676-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 1,822 km 1.000-m gauge (1998 est.)

Highways:
  total: 204,022 km
  paved: 25,095 km
  unpaved: 178,927 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 5,150-8,046 km navigable waterways (includes
  2,575-3,058 km main cargo routes)

Pipelines: natural gas 1,220 km

Ports and harbors: Chittagong, Dhaka, Mongla Port

Merchant marine:
  total: 40 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 315,855 GRT/453,002 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 33, oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 16 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 15
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary forces
  (includes Bangladesh Rifles, Bangladesh Ansars, Village Defense
  Parties, National Cadet Corps)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 33,374,195 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 19,772,013 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $559 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: a portion of the boundary with India is
  indefinite; dispute with India over South Talpatty/New Moore Island

Illicit drugs: transit country for illegal drugs produced in
  neighboring countries



======================================================================




@Barbados
--------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 13 10 N, 59 32 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 430 sq km
  land: 430 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 97 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (June to October)

Terrain: relatively flat; rises gently to central highland region

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Hillaby 336 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 37%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 12%
  other: 46% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: infrequent hurricanes; periodic landslides

Environment--current issues: pollution of coastal waters from
  waste disposal by ships; soil erosion; illegal solid waste disposal
  threatens contamination of aquifers

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity

Geography--note: easternmost Caribbean island



People



Population: 259,191 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 23% (male 30,132; female 29,359)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 85,437; female 88,131)
  65 years and over: 10% (male 9,862; female 16,270) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.46 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.16 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.86 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.74 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.98 years
  male: 72.22 years
  female: 77.81 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.83 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Barbadian(s)
  adjective: Barbadian

Ethnic groups: black 80%, white 4%, other 16%

Religions: Protestant 67% (Anglican 40%, Pentecostal 8%,
  Methodist 7%, other 12%), Roman Catholic 4%, none 17%, other 12%

Languages: English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 97.4%
  male: 98%
  female: 96.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Barbados

Data code: BB

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Bridgetown

Administrative divisions: 11 parishes; Christ Church, Saint
  Andrew, Saint George, Saint James, Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint
  Lucy, Saint Michael, Saint Peter, Saint Philip, Saint Thomas
  note: the city of Bridgetown may be given parish status

Independence: 30 November 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 November (1966)

Constitution: 30 November 1966

Legal system: English common law; no judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Clifford Straughn HUSBANDS
  (since 1 June 1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Owen Seymour ARTHUR (since 6
  September 1994); Deputy Prime Minister Billie MILLER (since 6
  September 1994)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary monarch; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister appointed by the governor
  general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (21-member body appointed by the governor general) and the House of
  Assembly (28 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Assembly--last held 20 January 1999 (next to be
  held by January 2004)
  election results: House of Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--BLP 26, DLP 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Judicature (judges are
  appointed by the Service Commissions for the Judicial and Legal
  Service)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Labor Party or DLP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Barbados Workers Union

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU,
  LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Courtney N. BLACKMAN
  chancery: 2144 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Coral Gables (Florida), Miami, and New York
  consulate(s): Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador E. William CROTTY
  embassy: Canadian Imperial Bank of Commerce Building, Broad Street,
  Bridgetown
  mailing address: P.O. Box 302, Bridgetown; FPO AA 34055

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist
  side), gold, and blue with the head of a black trident centered on
  the gold band; the trident head represents independence and a break
  with the past (the colonial coat of arms contained a complete
  trident)



Economy



Economy--overview: Historically, the Barbadian economy had been
  dependent on sugarcane cultivation and related activities, but
  production in recent years has diversified into manufacturing and
  tourism. The start of the Port Charles Marina project in
  Speightstown helped the tourism industry continue to expand in
  1996-98. Offshore finance and informatics are important foreign
  exchange earners, and there is also a light manufacturing sector.
  The government continues its efforts to reduce the unacceptably high
  unemployment rate, encourage direct foreign investment, and
  privatize remaining state-owned enterprises.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$11,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 15%
  services: 79% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.6% (1997)

Labor force: 136,000 (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 75%, industry 15%,
  agriculture 10% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $725.5 million
  expenditures: $750.6 million, including capital expenditures of
  $126.3 million (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: tourism, sugar, light manufacturing, component
  assembly for export

Industrial production growth rate: 0.8% (1996)

Electricity--production: 600 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 600 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, vegetables, cotton

Exports: $280 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: sugar and molasses, rum, other foods and
  beverages, chemicals, electrical components, clothing

Exports--partners: Caricom 34.8%, US 18.4%, UK 16.6%, Canada 4.4%
  (1996)

Imports: $982 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, machinery, foodstuffs,
  construction materials, chemicals, fuel, electrical components

Imports--partners: US 40.5%, Caricom 14.7%, UK 8.4%, Canada 5%
  (1996)

Debt--external: $581.4 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $9.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Barbadian dollar (Bds$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Barbadian dollars (Bds$) per US$1--2.0000 (fixed
  rate pegged to the dollar)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 87,343 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: island wide automatic telephone system
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  tropospheric scatter to Trinidad and Saint Lucia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are two
  cable channels) (1997)

Televisions: 69,350 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,650 km
  paved: 1,582 km
  unpaved: 68 km (1998 est.)

Ports and harbors: Bridgetown, Speightstown (Port Charles Marina)

Merchant marine:
  total: 44 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 641,550 GRT/1,087,042
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 11, cargo 26, combination bulk 1, oil tanker 4,
  refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 2 countries:
  Canada owns 2 ships, Hong Kong 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Barbados Defense Force (includes Ground
  Forces and Coast Guard), Royal Barbados Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 72,111 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 49,600 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: one of many Caribbean transshipment points for
  narcotics bound for the US and Europe



======================================================================




@Bassas da India
---------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, islands in the southern Mozambique
  Channel, about one-half of the way from Madagascar to Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 21 30 S, 39 50 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 0.2 sq km
  land: 0.2 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about one-third the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 35.2 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: a volcanic rock 2.4 m high

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 2.4 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (all rock)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: maritime hazard since it is usually under water
  during high tide and surrounded by reefs; subject to periodic
  cyclones

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Bassas da India

Data code: BS

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (possession of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Madagascar



======================================================================




@Belarus
-------





Introduction



Background: For centuries Byelorussia has been fought over,
  devastated, and partitioned among Russia, Poland, Lithuania, and, in
  World Wars I and II, Germany. After seven decades as a Soviet
  republic, the newly named Belarus declared its independence in
  August 1991. It has retained closer political and economic ties to
  Russia than any of the other former Soviet republics. On 25 December
  1998, Russian President Boris YEL'TSIN and Belarusian President
  Aleksandr LUKASHENKO signed several agreements intended to provide
  greater political, economic, and social integration while preserving
  both states' sovereignty.



Geography



Location: Eastern Europe, east of Poland

Geographic coordinates: 53 00 N, 28 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 207,600 sq km
  land: 207,600 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Kansas

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,098 km
  border countries: Latvia 141 km, Lithuania 502 km, Poland 605 km,
  Russia 959 km, Ukraine 891 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: cold winters, cool and moist summers; transitional
  between continental and maritime

Terrain: generally flat and contains much marshland

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Nyoman River 90 m
  highest point: Dzyarzhynskaya Hara 346 m

Natural resources: forests, peat deposits, small quantities of
  oil and natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 29%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 15%
  forests and woodland: 34%
  other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: soil pollution from pesticide use;
  southern part of the country contaminated with fallout from 1986
  nuclear reactor accident at Chornobyl' in northern Ukraine

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Biodiversity, Environmental Modification,
  Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 10,401,784 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 1,027,974; female 985,342)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 3,390,552; female 3,591,245)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 463,369; female 943,302) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.09% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.7 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.71 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.49 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.88 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.39 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.13 years
  male: 62.04 years
  female: 74.52 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.32 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Belarusian(s)
  adjective: Belarusian

Ethnic groups: Byelorussian 77.9%, Russian 13.2%, Polish 4.1%,
  Ukrainian 2.9%, other 1.9%

Religions: Eastern Orthodox 80%, other (including Roman Catholic,
  Protestant, Jewish, and Muslim) 20% (1997 est.)

Languages: Byelorussian, Russian, other

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 97% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Belarus
  conventional short form: Belarus
  local long form: Respublika Byelarus'
  local short form: none
  former: Belorussian (Byelorussian) Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: BO

Government type: republic

Capital: Minsk

Administrative divisions: 6 voblastsi (singular--voblasts') and
  one municipality* (harady, singular--horad); Brestskaya (Brest),
  Homyel'skaya (Homyel'), Horad Minsk*, Hrodzyenskaya (Hrodna),
  Mahilyowskaya (Mahilyow), Minskaya, Vitsyebskaya (Vitsyebsk)
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 25 August 1991 (Belarusian Supreme Soviet
  declaration of independence from the Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 July (1944); note--date set
  by referendum of 24 November 1996; represents Minsk liberation from
  German occupation

Constitution: 30 March 1994; revised by national referendum of 24
  November 1996 giving the presidency greatly expanded powers and
  became effective 27 November 1996

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Aleksandr LUKASHENKO (since 20 July 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Sergey LING (acting since 18
  November 1996, confirmed 19 February 1997); First Deputy Prime
  Ministers Petr PROKOPOVICH (since 23 December 1996) and Vasiliy
  DOLGOLEV (since 2 December 1998); Deputy Prime Ministers Valeriy
  KOKOREV (since 23 August 1994), Vladimir ZAMETALIN (since 15 July
  1997), Ural LATYPOV (since 30 December 1997), Gennadiy NOVITSKIY
  (since 11 February 1997), Leonid KOZIK (since 4 February 1997),
  Aleksandr POPKOV (since 10 November 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 24 June and 10 July 1994 (next to be held NA;
  according to the 1994 constitution, the next election should be in
  1999, however LUKASHENKO extended his term to 2001 via the November
  1996 referendum); prime minister and deputy prime ministers
  appointed by the president
  election results: Aleksandr LUKASHENKO elected president; percent of
  vote--Aleksandr LUKASHENKO 85%, Vyacheslav KEBICH 15%
  note: first presidential elections took place in June-July 1994

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Natsionalnoye
  Sobranie consists of the Council of the Republic or Soviet
  Respubliki (64 seats; eight appointed by the president and 56
  indirectly elected by deputies of local councils for four-year
  terms) and the Chamber of Representatives or Palata Pretsaviteley
  (110 seats; note--present members came from the former Supreme Soviet
  which LUKASHENKO disbanded in November 1996)
  elections: last held May and November-December 1995 (two rounds,
  each with a run-off; disbanded after the November 1996 referendum;
  next to be held NA)
  election results: after the November 1996 referendum, seats for the
  Chamber of Representatives were filled by former Supreme Soviet
  members as follows: PKB 24, Agrarian 14, Party of Peoples Concord 5,
  LDPB 1, UPNAZ 1, Green World Party 1, Belarusian Social Sports Party
  1, Ecological Party 1, Republican Party of Labor and Justice 1,
  independents 61; 58 of the 64 seats in the Council of the Republic
  have been appointed/elected

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president; Constitutional Court, half of the judges appointed by the
  president and half appointed by the Chamber of Representatives

Political parties and leaders: Party of Communists Belarusian or
  chairman]; Belarusian Patriotic Movement (Belarusian Patriotic

International organization participation: CCC, CEI, CIS, EAPC,
  EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
  ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires CHEREPANSKY
  chancery: 1619 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Daniel V. SPECKHARD (recalled to
  Washington in June 1998; Charge d'Affaires Randall LE COCQ)
  embassy: Starovilenskaya #46-220002, Minsk
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: red horizontal band (top) and green horizontal
  band one-half the width of the red band; a white vertical stripe of
  white on the hoist side bears the Belarusian national ornament in red



Economy



Economy--overview: Belarus has seen little structural reform since
  1995, when President LUKASHENKO launched the country on the path of
  "market socialism". In keeping with this policy, LUKASHENKO
  re-imposed administrative controls over prices and currency exchange
  rates and expanded the state's right to intervene in the management
  of private enterprise. This produced a climate hostile to private
  business, inhibiting domestic and foreign investment. The Government
  of Belarus has artificially revived economic output since mid-1996
  by pursuing a policy of rapid credit expansion. In a vain attempt to
  keep the rapidly rising inflation in check, the government placed
  strict price controls on food and consumer products, which resulted
  in food shortages. Long lines for dairy products, chicken, and pork
  became common in the closing months of 1998. With the goal of
  slowing down the devaluation of the Belarusian ruble, LUKASHENKO in
  1997 introduced a new, complex system of legal buying/selling hard
  currencies. The new "command" system proved to be totally unworkable
  and resulted in galloping devaluation. In addition to the burdens
  imposed on businesses by high inflation and an artificial currency
  regime, businesses have also been subject to pressure on the part of
  central and local governments, e.g., arbitrary changes in
  regulations, numerous rigorous inspections, and retroactive
  application of new business regulations prohibiting practices that
  had been legal. A further economic problem is the sizable trade
  deficit.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$53.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$5,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 20%
  industry: 43%
  services: 37% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 77% (1997 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.9%
  highest 10%: 19.4% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 182% (1998)

Labor force: 4.3 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: industry and construction 40%,
  agriculture and forestry 19%, services 41% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 2.3% officially registered unemployed
  (December 1998); large number of underemployed workers

Budget:
  revenues: $4 billion
  expenditures: $4.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $180
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: tractors, metal-cutting machine tools, off-highway
  dump trucks up to 110-metric-ton load capacity, wheel-type earth
  movers for construction and mining, eight-wheel-drive,
  high-flotation trucks with cargo capacity of 25 metric tons for use
  in tundra and roadless areas, equipment for animal husbandry and
  livestock feeding, motorcycles, television sets, chemical fibers,
  fertilizer, linen fabric, wool fabric, radios, refrigerators, other
  consumer goods

Industrial production growth rate: 11% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 26.1 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 99.92%
  hydro: 0.08%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 33.7 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 2.7 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--imports: 10.3 billion kWh (1997)

Agriculture--products: grain, potatoes, vegetables, sugar beets,
  flax; beef, milk

Exports: $7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  chemicals, foodstuffs

Exports--partners: Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Germany

Imports: $8.5 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: fuel, natural gas, industrial raw materials,
  textiles, sugar, foodstuffs

Imports--partners: Russia, Ukraine, Poland, Germany

Debt--external: $1.03 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $194.3 million (1995)

Currency: Belarusian rubel (BR)

Exchange rates: Belarusian rubels per US$1--139,000 (25 January
  1999 official Belarusian exchange rate), 46,080 (2nd qtr 1998),
  25,964 (1997), 15,500 (yearend 1996), 11,500 (yearend 1995), 10,600
  (yearend 1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2.55 million (October 1998)

Telephone system: the Ministry of Telecommunications controls all
  telecommunications through its carrier (a joint stock company)
  Beltelcom which is a monopoly
  domestic: local--Minsk has a digital metropolitan network and a
  cellular NMT-450 network; waiting lists for telephones are long;
  local service outside Minsk is neglected and poor; intercity--Belarus
  has a partly developed fiber-optic backbone system presently serving
  at least 13 major cities (1998); Belarus's fiber optics form
  synchronous digital hierarchy rings through other countries'
  systems; an inadequate analog system remains operational
  international: Belarus is a member of the Trans-European Line (TEL),
  Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber-Optic Line (TAE) and has access to the
  Trans-Siberia Line (TSL); three fiber-optic segments provide
  connectivity to Latvia, Poland, Russia, and Ukraine; worldwide
  service is available to Belarus due to this infrastructure;
  additional analog lines to Russia; Intelsat, Eutelsat and
  Intersputnik earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 28, FM 37, shortwave 11

Radios: 3.17 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 17 (1997); note--Belarus has a
  state-run television broadcasting network; independent local
  television stations exist

Televisions: 9,686,854 (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 5,563 km
  broad gauge: 5,563 km 1.520-m gauge (894 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 53,407 km
  paved: 52,446 km
  unpaved: 961 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: NA km; note--Belarus has extensive and widely used
  canal and river systems

Pipelines: crude oil 1,470 km; refined products 1,100 km; natural
  gas 1,980 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Mazyr

Airports: 118 (1996 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 18
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  under 914 m: 11 (1996 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 82
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 62 (1996 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, Air Defense Force, Interior
  Ministry Troops, Border Guards

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,700,034 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,115,121 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 79,905 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $100 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis,
  mostly for the domestic market; transshipment point for illicit
  drugs to and via Russia, and to the Baltics and Western Europe



======================================================================




@Belgium
-------





Introduction



Background: Belgium became independent from the Netherlands in
  1830 and was occupied by Germany during World Wars I and II. In the
  half century following, it has prospered as a small, modern,
  technologically advanced European state and member of the European
  Union. Its unique political circumstance is the long-standing
  differences between the wealthier Dutch-speaking Flemings of the
  north and the poorer French-speaking Walloons of the south,
  differences that are becoming increasingly acute.



Geography



Location: Western Europe, bordering the North Sea, between France
  and the Netherlands

Geographic coordinates: 50 50 N, 4 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 30,510 sq km
  land: 30,230 sq km
  water: 280 sq km

Area--comparative: about the size of Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,385 km
  border countries: France 620 km, Germany 167 km, Luxembourg 148 km,
  Netherlands 450 km

Coastline: 64 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: median line with neighbors
  exclusive fishing zone: median line with neighbors (extends about 68
  km from coast)
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; mild winters, cool summers; rainy, humid,
  cloudy

Terrain: flat coastal plains in northwest, central rolling hills,
  rugged mountains of Ardennes Forest in southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: North Sea 0 m
  highest point: Signal de Botrange 694 m

Natural resources: coal, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 21%
  other: 34%

Irrigated land: 10 sq km including Luxembourg (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding is a threat in areas of reclaimed
  coastal land, protected from the sea by concrete dikes

Environment--current issues: the environment is exposed to intense
  pressures from human activities: urbanization, dense transportation
  network, industry, intense animal breeding and crop cultivation; air
  and water pollution also have repercussions for neighboring
  countries; uncertainties regarding federal and regional
  responsibilities (now resolved) have impeded progress in tackling
  environmental challenges

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
  Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Geography--note: crossroads of Western Europe; majority of West
  European capitals within 1,000 km of Brussels which is the seat of
  both the EU and NATO



People



Population: 10,182,034 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 895,987; female 853,494)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 3,389,572; female 3,318,266)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 703,933; female 1,020,782) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.06% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.98 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.01 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.17 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.53 years
  male: 74.31 years
  female: 80.9 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.49 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Belgian(s)
  adjective: Belgian

Ethnic groups: Fleming 55%, Walloon 33%, mixed or other 12%

Religions: Roman Catholic 75%, Protestant or other 25%

Languages: Flemish 56%, French 32%, German 1%, legally bilingual
  11%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1980 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Belgium
  conventional short form: Belgium
  local long form: Royaume de Belgique/Koninkrijk Belgie
  local short form: Belgique/Belgie

Data code: BE

Government type: federal parliamentary democracy under a
  constitutional monarch

Capital: Brussels

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces (French: provinces,
  singular--province; Flemish: provincien, singular--provincie);
  Antwerpen, Brabant Wallon, Hainaut, Liege, Limburg, Luxembourg,
  Namur, Oost-Vlaanderen, Vlaams Brabant, West-Vlaanderen
  note: the Brussels Capitol Region is not included within the 10
  provinces

Independence: 4 October 1830 (from the Netherlands)

National holiday: National Day, 21 July (ascension of King
  LEOPOLD I to the throne in 1831)

Constitution: 7 February 1831, last revised 14 July 1993;
  parliament approved a constitutional package creating a federal state

Legal system: civil law system influenced by English
  constitutional theory; judicial review of legislative acts; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King ALBERT II (since 9 August 1993); Heir Apparent
  Prince PHILIPPE, son of the monarch
  head of government: Prime Minister Jean-Luc DEHAENE (since 6 March
  1992)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch and approved
  by Parliament
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch and then approved by Parliament

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of a Senate or
  Senaat in Flemish, Senat in French (71 seats; 40 members are
  directly elected by popular vote, 31 are indirectly elected; members
  serve four-year terms) and a Chamber of Deputies or Kamer van
  Volksvertegenwoordigers in Flemish, Chambre des Representants in
  French (150 seats; members are directly elected by popular vote on
  the basis of proportional representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate and Chamber of Deputies--last held 21 May 1995
  (next to be held in June 1999)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--CVP 7, SP 6, VLD 6, VU 2, AGALEV 1, VB 3, PS 5, PRL 5, PSC 3,
  ECOLO 2; note--before the 1995 elections, there were 184 seats;
  Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by party--CVP 17.2%, PS 11.9%, SP
  12.6%, VLD 13.1%, PRL 10.3%, PSC 7.7%, VB 7.8%, VU 4.7%, ECOLO 4.0%,
  AGALEV 4.4%, FN 2.3%; seats by party--CVP 29, PS 21, SP 20, VLD 21,
  PRL 18, PSC 12, VB 11, VU 5, ECOLO 6, AGALEV 5, FN 2; note--before
  the 1995 elections, there were 212 seats
  note: as a result of the 1993 constitutional revision that furthered
  devolution into a federal state, there are now three levels of
  government (federal, regional, and linguistic community) with a
  complex division of responsibilities; this reality leaves six
  governments each with its own legislative assembly; for other
  acronyms of the listed parties see Political parties and leaders

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice or Hof van Cassatie in
  Flemish, Cour de Cassation in French, judges are appointed for life
  by the Belgian monarch

Political parties and leaders: Flemish Christian Democrats or CVP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Christian and Socialist
  Trade Unions; Federation of Belgian Industries; numerous other
  associations representing bankers, manufacturers, middle-class
  artisans, and the legal and medical professions; various
  organizations represent the cultural interests of Flanders and
  Wallonia; various peace groups such as the Flemish Action Committee
  Against Nuclear Weapons and Pax Christi

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AsDB,
  Australia Group, Benelux, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB,
  EMU, ESA, EU, FAO, G- 9, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNMOGIP, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Alexis REYN
  chancery: 3330 Garfield Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Paul CEJAS
  embassy: 27 Boulevard du Regent, B-1000 Brussels
  mailing address: PSC 82, Box 002, APO AE 09710

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of black (hoist
  side), yellow, and red; the design was based on the flag of France



Economy



Economy--overview: This highly developed private enterprise
  economy has capitalized on its central geographic location, highly
  developed transport network, and diversified industrial and
  commercial base. Industry is concentrated mainly in the populous
  Flemish area in the north, although the government is encouraging
  reinvestment in the southern region of Wallonia. With few natural
  resources, Belgium must import substantial quantities of raw
  materials and export a large volume of manufactures, making its
  economy unusually dependent on the state of world markets.
  Two-thirds of its trade is with other EU countries. Belgium's public
  debt fell from 127% of GDP in 1996 to 122% of GDP in 1998 and the
  government is trying to control its expenditures to bring the figure
  more into line with other industrialized countries. Belgium became a
  charter member of the European Monetary Union (EMU) in January 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$236 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$23,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1.9%
  industry: 27.2%
  services: 70.9% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.7%
  highest 10%: 20.2% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.283 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services 69.7%, industry 27.7%,
  agriculture 2.6% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: engineering and metal products, motor vehicle
  assembly, processed food and beverages, chemicals, basic metals,
  textiles, glass, petroleum, coal

Industrial production growth rate: 9.7% (1995)

Electricity--production: 71.066 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 41.73%
  hydro: 0.33%
  nuclear: 57.93%
  other: 0.01% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 75.266 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 5.4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 9.6 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugar beets, fresh vegetables, fruits,
  grain, tobacco; beef, veal, pork, milk

Exports: $145.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: iron and steel, transportation equipment,
  tractors, diamonds, petroleum products

Exports--partners: EU 67.2% (Germany 19%), US 5.8% (1994)

Imports: $137.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: fuels, grains, chemicals, foodstuffs

Imports--partners: EU 75% (Germany 22.1%), US 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $22.3 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Belgian franc (BF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Belgian francs (BF) per US$1--34.77 (January
  1999), 36.229 (1998), 35.774 (1997), 30.962 (1996), 29.480 (1995),
  33.456 (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 40.3399 Belgian francs per euro; the euro will replace the
  local currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 5.691 million (1992 est.); 1.7 million cellular
  telephone subscribers (1998)

Telephone system: highly developed, technologically advanced, and
  completely automated domestic and international telephone and
  telegraph facilities
  domestic: nationwide cellular telephone system; extensive cable
  network; limited microwave radio relay network
  international: 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--2
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Eutelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 77, shortwave 1 (Belgium's
  single shortwave station, Radio Vlaanderen Internationaal, transmits
  its programs internationally in Dutch, English, French, and German,
  using 21 shortwave frequencies)

Radios: 100,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 24 (in addition, there are Dutch
  programs on cable, TV-5 Europe by satellite relay, and American
  Forces Network by relay from Germany) (1997)

Televisions: 3,315,662 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,380 km (2,459 km electrified; 2,563 km double track)
  standard gauge: 3,380 km 1.435-m gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 143,175 km
  paved: 143,175 km (including 1,674 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,043 km (1,528 km in regular commercial use)

Pipelines: crude oil 161 km; petroleum products 1,167 km; natural
  gas 3,300 km

Ports and harbors: Antwerp (one of the world's busiest ports),
  Brugge, Gent, Hasselt, Liege, Mons, Namur, Oostende, Zeebrugge

Merchant marine:
  total: 23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 35,668 GRT/56,412 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 8, chemical tanker 8, oil tanker 6
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 42 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 24
  over 3,047 m: 6
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 16 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,537,544 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,098,883 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 64,180 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $4.6 billion (1995)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.7% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: source of precursor chemicals for South American
  cocaine processors; transshipment point for cocaine, heroin,
  hashish, and marijuana entering Western Europe



======================================================================




@Belize
------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
  Guatemala and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 17 15 N, 88 45 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 22,960 sq km
  land: 22,800 sq km
  water: 160 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
  total: 516 km
  border countries: Guatemala 266 km, Mexico 250 km

Coastline: 386 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm in the north, 3 nm in the south; note--from
  the mouth of the Sarstoon River to Ranguana Cay, Belize's
  territorial sea is 3 nm; according to Belize's Maritime Areas Act,
  1992, the purpose of this limitation is to provide a framework for
  the negotiation of a definitive agreement on territorial differences
  with Guatemala

Climate: tropical; very hot and humid; rainy season (May to
  February)

Terrain: flat, swampy coastal plain; low mountains in south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Victoria Peak 1,160 m

Natural resources: arable land potential, timber, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 2%
  forests and woodland: 92%
  other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent, devastating hurricanes (September to
  December) and coastal flooding (especially in south)

Environment--current issues: deforestation; water pollution from
  sewage, industrial effluents, agricultural runoff; Hurricane Mitch
  damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertication, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Marine Dumping, Ship Pollution, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: national capital moved 80 km inland from Belize
  City to Belmopan because of hurricanes; only country in Central
  America without a coastline on the North Pacific Ocean



People



Population: 235,789 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 42% (male 49,991; female 48,074)
  15-64 years: 55% (male 65,507; female 63,796)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 4,129; female 4,292) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.42% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 30.22 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.39 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.96 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 31.57 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.2 years
  male: 67.23 years
  female: 71.26 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.74 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Belizean(s)
  adjective: Belizean

Ethnic groups: mestizo 44%, Creole 30%, Maya 11%, Garifuna 7%,
  other 8%

Religions: Roman Catholic 62%, Protestant 30% (Anglican 12%,
  Methodist 6%, Mennonite 4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 3%, Pentecostal
  2%, Jehovah's Witnesses 1%, other 2%), none 2%, other 6% (1980)

Languages: English (official), Spanish, Mayan, Garifuna (Carib)

Literacy:
  definition: age 14 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 70.3%
  male: 70.3%
  female: 70.3% (1991 est.)
  note: other sources list the literacy rate as high as 75%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Belize
  former: British Honduras

Data code: BH

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Belmopan

Administrative divisions: 6 districts; Belize, Cayo, Corozal,
  Orange Walk, Stann Creek, Toledo

Independence: 21 September 1981 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 21 September (1981)

Constitution: 21 September 1981

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Colville YOUNG (since 17
  November 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Said MUSA (since 2 August 1998);
  Deputy Prime Minister Dean BARROW (since NA July 1993)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister appointed by the governor
  general

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly consists of the
  Senate (eight members; members are appointed for five-year terms,
  five on the advice of the prime minister, two on the advice of the
  leader of the opposition, and one after consultation with the Belize
  Advisory Council--this council serves as an independent body to
  advise the governor general with respect to difficult decisions such
  as granting pardons, commutations, stays of execution, the removal
  of justices of appeal who appear to be incompetent, etc.) and the
  National Assembly (29 seats; members are elected by direct popular
  vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: National Assembly--last held 1 August 1998 (next to be
  held NA August 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PUP
  26, UDP 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, the chief justice is appointed by
  the governor general on advice of the prime minister

Political parties and leaders: People's United Party or PUP [Said
  GOLDSON]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Society for the Promotion
  Front

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James Schofield MURPHY
  chancery: 2535 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Carolyn CURIEL
  embassy: Gabourel Lane and Hutson Street, Belize City
  mailing address: P. O. Box 286, Unit 7401, APO AA 34025

Flag description: blue with a narrow red stripe along the top and
  the bottom edges; centered is a large white disk bearing the coat of
  arms; the coat of arms features a shield flanked by two workers in
  front of a mahogany tree with the related motto SUB UMBRA FLOREO (I
  Flourish in the Shade) on a scroll at the bottom, all encircled by a
  green garland



Economy



Economy--overview: The small, essentially private enterprise
  economy is based primarily on agriculture, agro-based industry, and
  merchandising, with tourism and construction assuming greater
  importance. Sugar, the chief crop, accounts for nearly half of
  exports, while the banana industry is the country's largest
  employer. The government's tough austerity program in 1997 resulted
  in an economic slowdown that continued in 1998. The trade deficit
  has been growing, mostly as a result of low export prices for sugar
  and bananas. The new government faces important challenges to
  economic stability. Rapid action to improve tax collection has been
  promised, but a lack of progress in reigning in spending could bring
  the exchange rate under pressure.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$700 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 22%
  industry: 22%
  services: 56% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 71,000
  note: shortage of skilled labor and all types of technical personnel
  (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 30%, services 16%,
  government 15.4%, commerce 11.2%, manufacturing 10.3%

Unemployment rate: 13% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $140 million
  expenditures: $142 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: garment production, food processing, tourism,
  construction

Industrial production growth rate: 0.2% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 145 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 145 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, coca, citrus, sugarcane; lumber;
  fish, cultured shrimp

Exports: $95.3 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: sugar 46%, bananas 26%, citrus fruits,
  clothing, fish products, molasses, wood

Exports--partners: US 45%, UK 30%, Mexico 3%, Canada 3% (1997)

Imports: $149.7 million (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transportation equipment,
  manufactured goods, food, fuels, chemicals, pharmaceuticals

Imports--partners: US 52%, Mexico 13%, UK 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $288 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $23.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Belizean dollar (Bz$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Belizean dollars (Bz$) per US$1--2.0000 (fixed
  rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 29,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: above-average system
  domestic: trunk network depends primarily on microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1 (Voice of America relay station),
  FM 12, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 27,048 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 2,248 km
  paved: 427 km
  unpaved: 1,821 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 825 km river network used by shallow-draft craft;
  seasonally navigable

Ports and harbors: Belize City, Big Creek, Corozol, Punta Gorda

Merchant marine:
  total: 403 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,740,325
  GRT/2,511,709 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 34, cargo 259, chemical tanker 5, container 9,
  liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 58, passenger-cargo 2,
  refrigerated cargo 21, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8, short-sea/passenger
  3, specialized tanker 2, vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 7 countries:
  Cuba 2, Cyprus 1, Greece 1, Singapore 2, UAE 12, UK 1, and US 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 44 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 41
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 10
  under 914 m: 30 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Belize Defense Force (includes Ground Forces,
  Maritime Wing, Air Wing, and Volunteer Guard), Belize National Police

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 58,201 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 34,531 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 2,619 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $15 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: border with Guatemala in dispute

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine; small-scale
  illicit producer of cannabis for the international drug trade; minor
  money-laundering center



======================================================================




@Benin
-----





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Nigeria and Togo

Geographic coordinates: 9 30 N, 2 15 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 112,620 sq km
  land: 110,620 sq km
  water: 2,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,989 km
  border countries: Burkina Faso 306 km, Niger 266 km, Nigeria 773 km,
  Togo 644 km

Coastline: 121 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plain; some hills and low
  mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Sokbaro 658 m

Natural resources: small offshore oil deposits, limestone,
  marble, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 13%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 31%
  other: 48% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan wind may affect north
  in winter

Environment--current issues: recent droughts have severely
  affected marginal agriculture in north; inadequate supplies of
  potable water; poaching threatens wildlife populations;
  deforestation; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: no natural harbors



People



Population: 6,305,567 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 1,510,703; female 1,501,437)
  15-64 years: 50% (male 1,511,114; female 1,637,155)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 62,459; female 82,699) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.3% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 45.37 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.4 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 97.76 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 54.08 years
  male: 51.98 years
  female: 56.24 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.4 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Beninese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Beninese

Ethnic groups: African 99% (42 ethnic groups, most important
  being Fon, Adja, Yoruba, Bariba), Europeans 5,500

Religions: indigenous beliefs 70%, Muslim 15%, Christian 15%

Languages: French (official), Fon and Yoruba (most common
  vernaculars in south), tribal languages (at least six major ones in
  north)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 37%
  male: 48.7%
  female: 25.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Benin
  conventional short form: Benin
  local long form: Republique du Benin
  local short form: Benin
  former: Dahomey

Data code: BN

Government type: republic under multiparty democratic rule;
  dropped Marxism-Leninism December 1989; democratic reforms adopted
  February 1990; transition to multiparty system completed 4 April 1991

Capital: Porto-Novo is the official capital; Cotonou is the seat
  of government

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces; Atakora, Atlantique,
  Borgou, Mono, Oueme, Zou
  note: six additional provinces have been reported but not confirmed;
  they are Alibori, Collines, Couffo, Donga, Littoral, and Plateau;
  moreover, the term "province" may have been changed to "department"

Independence: 1 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 1 August (1990)

Constitution: December 1990

Legal system: based on French civil law and customary law; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Mathieu KEREKOU (since 4 April 1996);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Mathieu KEREKOU (since 4 April 1996);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 18 March 1996 (next to be held NA March 2001)
  election results: Mathieu KEREKOU elected president; percent of
  vote--Mathieu KEREKOU 52.49%, Nicephore SOGLO 47.51%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (83 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 28 March 1995 (next to be held 28 March 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PRB
  20, PRD 19, FARD-ALAFIA 10, PSD 7, NCC 3, RDL-VIVOTEN 3, PCB 2, AC
  1, RDP 1, other 17

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court or Cour Constitutionnelle,
  Supreme Court or Cour Supreme, High Court of Justice

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Civic Renewal or ARC
  Sylvain AKINDES]; Alliance of the Social Democratic Party or PSD and
  KINA]; Liberal Democrats' Rally for National Reconstruction-Vivoten
  note: as of December 1998, more than 110 political parties were
  officially recognized; among them are Benin Renaissance Party or
  PRB, Our Common Cause or NCC, Cameleon Alliance or AC, Rally for
  Democracy and Pan-Africanism or RDP

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, ECA,
  ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO
  (subscriber), ITU, MINURCA, MIPONUH, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Lucien Edgar TONOUKOUIN
  chancery: 2737 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Robert C. FELDER
  embassy: Rue Caporal Bernard Anani, Cotonou
  mailing address: B. P. 2012, Cotonou

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and
  red with a vertical green band on the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy of Benin remains underdeveloped and
  dependent on subsistence agriculture, cotton production, and
  regional trade. Growth in real output has averaged a sound 4% in
  1990-95 and 5% in 1996-98. Rapid population growth has offset much
  of this growth in output. Inflation has subsided over the past three
  years. Commercial and transport activities, which make up a large
  part of GDP, are vulnerable to developments in Nigeria, particularly
  fuel shortages. Support by the Paris Club and official bilateral
  creditors has eased the external debt situation in recent years. The
  government, still burdened with money-losing state enterprises and a
  bloated civil service, has been gradually implementing a World Bank
  supported structural adjustment program since 1991.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 34%
  industry: 14%
  services: 52% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 33% (1995 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.6% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $299 million
  expenditures: $445 million, including capital expenditures of $14
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: textiles, cigarettes; beverages, food; construction
  materials, petroleum

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 6 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 251 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 245 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, sorghum, cassava (tapioca), yams,
  beans, rice, cotton, palm oil, peanuts; poultry, livestock

Exports: $250 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: cotton, crude oil, palm products, cocoa

Exports--partners: Brazil 18%, Portugal 11%, Morocco 10%, Libya
  6%, France (1997)

Imports: $314 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, beverages, tobacco, petroleum
  products, intermediate goods, capital goods, light consumer goods

Imports--partners: France 21%, UK 9%, Thailand 9%, Hong Kong 8%,
  China (1997)

Debt--external: $1.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $281.2 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1--566.36 (January 1999),
  589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 38,354 (6,286 cellular telephone subscribers) (1998
  est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: fair system of open wire, microwave radio relay, and
  cellular connections
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  submarine cable

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 9, shortwave 4 (1998 est.)

Radios: 400,000 (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (one privately owned) (1997)

Televisions: 30,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 578 km (single track)
  narrow gauge: 578 km 1.000-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
  total: 6,787 km
  paved: 1,357 km (including 10 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 5,430 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: navigable along small sections, important only locally

Ports and harbors: Cotonou, Porto-Novo

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Armed Forces (includes Army, Navy, Air Force),
  National Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,363,878
  females age 15-49: 1,425,987 (1999 est.)
  note: both sexes are liable for military service

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 697,715
  females age 15-49: 722,323 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 67,622
  females: 67,238 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $27 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.2% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for narcotics associated with
  Nigerian trafficking organizations and most commonly destined for
  Western Europe and the US



======================================================================




@Bermuda
-------





Geography



Location: North America, group of islands in the North Atlantic
  Ocean, east of North Carolina (US)

Geographic coordinates: 32 20 N, 64 45 W

Map references: North America

Area:
  total: 50 sq km
  land: 50 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 103 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical; mild, humid; gales, strong winds common in
  winter

Terrain: low hills separated by fertile depressions

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Town Hill 76 m

Natural resources: limestone, pleasant climate fostering tourism

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 94% (1997 est.)
  note: developed (55%) and rural/open space (39%) comprise 94% of
  Bermudian land area

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes (June to November)

Environment--current issues: asbestos disposal; water pollution;
  preservation of open space

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: consists of about 360 small coral islands with
  ample rainfall, but no rivers or freshwater lakes; some land,
  reclaimed and otherwise, was leased by US Government from 1941 to
  1995



People



Population: 62,472 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 6,174; female 6,023)
  15-64 years: 70% (male 21,479; female 22,041)
  65 years and over: 10% (male 2,897; female 3,858) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.72% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.83 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.27 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.67 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9.27 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 76.97 years
  male: 75.19 years
  female: 78.83 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.71 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bermudian(s)
  adjective: Bermudian

Ethnic groups: black 61%, white and other 39%

Religions: Anglican 28%, Roman Catholic 15%, African Methodist
  Episcopal (Zion) 12%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6%, Methodist 5%, other
  34% (1991)

Languages: English (official), Portuguese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 98%
  female: 99% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Bermuda

Data code: BD

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Hamilton

Administrative divisions: 9 parishes and 2 municipalities*;
  Devonshire, Hamilton, Hamilton*, Paget, Pembroke, Saint George*,
  Saint Georges, Sandys, Smiths, Southampton, Warwick

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Bermuda Day, 24 May

Constitution: 8 June 1968

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor Thorold MASEFIELD (since NA June 1997)
  head of government: Premier Jennifer SMITH (since 10 November 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet nominated by the premier, appointed by the governor
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; premier appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (an 11-member body appointed by the governor) and the House of
  Assembly (40 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 9 November 1998 (next to be held NA November
  2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PLP 54%, UBP 44%, NLP 1%,
  independents 1%; seats by party--PLP 26, UBP 14

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: United Bermuda Party or UBP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Bermuda Industrial Union

International organization participation: Caricom (observer),
  CCC, ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Consul General Robert A. FARMER
  consulate(s) general: Crown Hill, 16 Middle Road, Devonshire,
  Hamilton
  mailing address: P.O. Box HM325, Hamilton HMBX; American Consulate
  General Hamilton, Department of State, Washington, DC 20520-5300

Flag description: red, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Bermudian coat of arms (white and blue
  shield with a red lion holding a scrolled shield showing the sinking
  of the ship Sea Venture off Bermuda in 1609) centered on the outer
  half of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Bermuda enjoys one of the highest per capita
  incomes in the world, having successfully exploited its location by
  providing financial services for international firms and luxury
  tourist facilities for 360,000 visitors annually. The tourist
  industry, which accounts for an estimated 28% of GDP, attracts 84%
  of its business from North America. The industrial sector is small,
  and agriculture is severely limited by a lack of suitable land.
  About 80% of food needs are imported. International business
  contributes over 60% of Bermuda's economic output; a failed
  independence vote in late 1995 can be partially attributed to
  Bermudian fears of scaring away foreign firms.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.9 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$30,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.1% (1997)

Labor force: 35,296 (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: clerical 23%, services 22%, laborers
  17%, professional and technical 17%, administrative and managerial
  12%, sales 7%, agriculture and fishing 2% (1996)

Unemployment rate: NEGL% (1995)

Budget:
  revenues: $504.6 million
  expenditures: $537 million, including capital expenditures of $75
  million (FY97/98)

Industries: tourism, finance, insurance, structural concrete
  products, paints, perfumes, pharmaceuticals, ship repairing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 480 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 480 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, vegetables, citrus, flowers; dairy
  products

Exports: $57 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: reexports of pharmaceuticals

Exports--partners: Netherlands 50%, Brazil 13%, Canada 6% (1996)

Imports: $617 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: miscellaneous manufactured articles,
  machinery and transport equipment, food and live animals, chemicals

Imports--partners: US 73%, UK 5%, Canada 4% (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $27.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Bermudian dollar (Bd$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Bermudian dollar (Bd$) per US$1--1.0000 (fixed
  rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 54,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: modern, fully automatic telephone system
  international: 3 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--3
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 78,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1997)

Televisions: 57,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 225 km
  paved: 225 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1997 est.)
  note: in addition, there are 232 km of paved and unpaved roads that
  are privately owned

Ports and harbors: Hamilton, Saint George

Merchant marine:
  total: 97 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,647,576 GRT/7,612,686
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 18, cargo 3, chemical tanker 1, container 20,
  liquefied gas tanker 7, oil tanker 27, refrigerated cargo 15,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 4, short-sea passenger 2
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 11
  countries among which are UK 24, Canada 12, Hong Kong 11, US 11,
  Nigeria 4, Sweden 4, Norway 3, and Switzerland 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Bermuda Regiment, Bermuda Police Force,
  Bermuda Reserve Constabulary

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Bhutan
------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, between China and India

Geographic coordinates: 27 30 N, 90 30 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 47,000 sq km
  land: 47,000 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about half the size of Indiana

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,075 km
  border countries: China 470 km, India 605 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies; tropical in southern plains; cool winters and
  hot summers in central valleys; severe winters and cool summers in
  Himalayas

Terrain: mostly mountainous with some fertile valleys and savanna

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Drangme Chhu 97 m
  highest point: Kula Kangri 7,553 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, gypsum, calcium carbide

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 66%
  other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 340 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: violent storms coming down from the Himalayas
  are the source of the country's name which translates as Land of the
  Thunder Dragon; frequent landslides during the rainy season

Environment--current issues: soil erosion; limited access to
  potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked; strategic location between China and
  India; controls several key Himalayan mountain passes



People



Population: 1,951,965 (July 1999 est.)
  note: other estimates range as low as 600,000

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 40% (male 405,745; female 376,738)
  15-64 years: 56% (male 561,754; female 530,420)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 39,251; female 38,057) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.25% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 36.76 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.26 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.03 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 109.33 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 52.75 years
  male: 53.19 years
  female: 52.29 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.16 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bhutanese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Bhutanese

Ethnic groups: Bhote 50%, ethnic Nepalese 35%, indigenous or
  migrant tribes 15%

Religions: Lamaistic Buddhism 75%, Indian- and
  Nepalese-influenced Hinduism 25%

Languages: Dzongkha (official), Bhotes speak various Tibetan
  dialects, Nepalese speak various Nepalese dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 42.2%
  male: 56.2%
  female: 28.1% (1995 est.)

People--note: refugee issue over the presence in Nepal of
  approximately 91,000 Bhutanese refugees, 90% of whom are in seven
  United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
  camps



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Bhutan
  conventional short form: Bhutan

Data code: BT

Government type: monarchy; special treaty relationship with India

Capital: Thimphu

Administrative divisions: 18 districts (dzongkhag, singular and
  plural); Bumthang, Chhukha, Chirang, Daga, Geylegphug, Ha, Lhuntshi,
  Mongar, Paro, Pemagatsel, Punakha, Samchi, Samdrup Jongkhar,
  Shemgang, Tashigang, Thimphu, Tongsa, Wangdi Phodrang

Independence: 8 August 1949 (from India)

National holiday: National Day, 17 December (1907) (Ugyen
  WANGCHUCK became first hereditary king)

Constitution: no written constitution or bill of rights
  note: Bhutan uses 1953 Royal decree for the Constitution of the
  National Assembly

Legal system: based on Indian law and English common law; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: each family has one vote in village-level elections

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King Jigme Singye WANGCHUCK (since 24 July 1972);
  note--the monarch is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: King Jigme Singye WANGCHUCK (since 24 July
  1972); note--the monarch is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers (Lhengye Shungtsog) appointed by the
  monarch, approved by the National Assembly
  note: there is also a Royal Advisory Council (Lodoi Tsokde), members
  nominated by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Tshogdu (150
  seats; 105 elected from village constituencies, 10 represent
  religious bodies, and 35 are designated by the monarch to represent
  government and other secular interests; members serve three-year
  terms)
  elections: last held NA (next to be held NA)
  election results: NA

Judicial branch: the Supreme Court of Appeal is the monarch; High
  Court, judges appointed by the monarch

Political parties and leaders: no legal parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: United Front for Democracy
  (exiled); Buddhist clergy; Indian merchant community; ethnic
  Nepalese organizations leading militant antigovernment campaign

International organization participation: AsDB, CP, ESCAP, FAO,
  G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IMF, Intelsat, IOC, ITU, NAM, OPCW,
  SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note--Bhutan has a
  Permanent Mission to the UN; address: 2 United Nations Plaza, 27th
  Bhutanese mission to the UN has consular jurisdiction in the US
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US and Bhutan have no
  formal diplomatic relations, although informal contact is maintained
  between the Bhutanese and US Embassy in New Delhi (India)

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side
  corner; the upper triangle is yellow and the lower triangle is
  orange; centered along the dividing line is a large black and white
  dragon facing away from the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy, one of the world's smallest and
  least developed, is based on agriculture and forestry, which provide
  the main livelihood for 90% of the population and account for about
  40% of GDP. Agriculture consists largely of subsistence farming and
  animal husbandry. Rugged mountains dominate the terrain and make the
  building of roads and other infrastructure difficult and expensive.
  The economy is closely aligned with India's through strong trade and
  monetary links. The industrial sector is technologically backward,
  with most production of the cottage industry type. Most development
  projects, such as road construction, rely on Indian migrant labor.
  Bhutan's hydropower potential and its attraction for tourists are
  key resources. The Bhutanese Government has made some progress in
  expanding the nation's productive base and improving social welfare.
  Model education, social, and environment programs in Bhutan are
  underway with support from multilateral development organizations.
  Each economic program takes into account the government's desire to
  protect the country's environment and cultural traditions. Detailed
  controls and uncertain policies in areas like industrial licensing,
  trade, labor, and finance continue to hamper foreign investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 38%
  industry: 38%
  services: 24% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.4% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA
  note: massive lack of skilled labor

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 93%, services 5%, industry
  and commerce 2%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $146 million
  expenditures: $152 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY95/96 est.)
  note: the government of India finances nearly three-fifths of
  Bhutan's budget expenditures

Industries: cement, wood products, processed fruits, alcoholic
  beverages, calcium carbide

Industrial production growth rate: 9.3% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.717 billion kWh (1996)
  note: exports electricity to India

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.41%
  hydro: 99.59%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 246 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1.475 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 4 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, corn, root crops, citrus, foodgrains;
  dairy products, eggs

Exports: $99 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: cardamom, gypsum, timber, handicrafts,
  cement, fruit, electricity (to India), precious stones, spices

Exports--partners: India 94%, Bangladesh

Imports: $131 million (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: fuel and lubricants, grain, machinery and
  parts, vehicles, fabrics, rice

Imports--partners: India 77%, Japan, UK, Germany, US

Debt--external: $87 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $73.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 ngultrum (Nu) = 100 chetrum; note--Indian currency is
  also legal tender

Exchange rates: ngultrum (Nu) per US$1--42.508 (January 1999),
  41.259 (1998), 36.313 (1997), 35.433 (1996), 32.427 (1995), 31.374
  (1994); note--the Bhutanese ngultrum is at par with the Indian rupee

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 4,620 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: domestic telephone service is very poor with very few
  telephones in use
  international: international telephone and telegraph service is by
  landline through India; a satellite earth station was planned (1990)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 1, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 23,000 (1989 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: 200 (1985 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 3,285 km
  paved: 1,994 km
  unpaved: 1,291 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Bhutan Army, Palace Guard, Militia,
  Royal Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 477,944 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 254,992 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 19,424 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: with Nepal over 91,000 Bhutanese refugees
  in Nepal



======================================================================




@Bolivia
-------





Introduction



Background: Bolivia broke away from Spanish rule in 1825. Its
  subsequent history has been marked by a seemingly endless series of
  coups, counter-coups, and abrupt changes in leaders and policies.
  Comparatively democratic civilian rule was established in the 1980s,
  but the leaders have faced difficult problems of deep-seated
  poverty, social unrest, strikes, and drug dealing. Current issues
  include encouraging and negotiating the terms for foreign
  investment; strengthening the educational system; continuing the
  privatization program; pursuing judicial reform and an
  anti-corruption campaign.



Geography



Location: Central South America, southwest of Brazil

Geographic coordinates: 17 00 S, 65 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 1,098,580 sq km
  land: 1,084,390 sq km
  water: 14,190 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than three times the size of
  Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 6,743 km
  border countries: Argentina 832 km, Brazil 3,400 km, Chile 861 km,
  Paraguay 750 km, Peru 900 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies with altitude; humid and tropical to cold and
  semiarid

Terrain: rugged Andes Mountains with a highland plateau
  (Altiplano), hills, lowland plains of the Amazon Basin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Rio Paraguay 90 m
  highest point: Nevado Sajama 6,542 m

Natural resources: tin, natural gas, petroleum, zinc, tungsten,
  antimony, silver, iron, lead, gold, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 24%
  forests and woodland: 53%
  other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cold, thin air of high plateau is obstacle to
  efficient fuel combustion, as well as to physical activity by those
  unaccustomed to it from birth; flooding in the northeast
  (March-April)

Environment--current issues: the clearing of land for agricultural
  purposes and the international demand for tropical timber are
  contributing to deforestation; soil erosion from overgrazing and
  poor cultivation methods (including slash-and-burn agriculture);
  desertification; loss of biodiversity; industrial pollution of water
  supplies used for drinking and irrigation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection

Geography--note: landlocked; shares control of Lago Titicaca,
  world's highest navigable lake (elevation 3,805 m), with Peru



People



Population: 7,982,850 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 39% (male 1,573,391; female 1,540,123)
  15-64 years: 56% (male 2,199,077; female 2,307,490)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 164,213; female 198,556) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.96% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 30.72 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.61 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 62.02 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 61.43 years
  male: 58.51 years
  female: 64.51 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.93 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bolivian(s)
  adjective: Bolivian

Ethnic groups: Quechua 30%, Aymara 25%, mestizo (mixed white and
  Amerindian ancestry) 30%, white 15%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Protestant (Evangelical Methodist)

Languages: Spanish (official), Quechua (official), Aymara
  (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 83.1%
  male: 90.5%
  female: 76% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Bolivia
  conventional short form: Bolivia
  local long form: Republica de Bolivia
  local short form: Bolivia

Data code: BL

Government type: republic

Capital: La Paz (seat of government); Sucre (legal capital and
  seat of judiciary)

Administrative divisions: 9 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento); Chuquisaca, Cochabamba, Beni, La Paz, Oruro,
  Pando, Potosi, Santa Cruz, Tarija

Independence: 6 August 1825 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 August (1825)

Constitution: 2 February 1967; revised in August 1994

Legal system: based on Spanish law and Napoleonic Code; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age, universal and compulsory (married); 21
  years of age, universal and compulsory (single)

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Hugo BANZER Suarez (since 6 August 1997);
  Vice President Jorge Fernando QUIROGA Ramirez (since 6 August 1997);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Hugo BANZER Suarez (since 6 August
  1997); Vice President Jorge Fernando QUIROGA Ramirez (since 6 August
  1997); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from a panel of
  candidates proposed by the Senate
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 1 June 1997
  (next to be held June 2002)
  election results: Hugo BANZER Suarez elected president; percent of
  vote--Hugo BANZER Suarez (ADN) 22%; Jaime PAZ Zamora (MIR) 17%, Juan
  Carlos DURAN (MNR) 18%, Ivo KULJIS (UCS) 16%, Remedios LOZA
  (CONDEPA) 17%; no candidate received a majority of the popular vote;
  Hugo BANZER Suarez won a congressional runoff election on 5 August
  1997 after forming a "megacoalition" with MIR, UCS, CONDEPA, NFR and
  PDC

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso
  Nacional consists of Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (27
  seats; members are directly elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms) and Chamber of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (130
  seats; members are directly elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: Chamber of Senators and Chamber of Deputies--last held 1
  June 1997 (next to be held June 2002)
  election results: Chamber of Senators--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--ADN 11, MIR 7, MNR 4, CONDEPA 3, UCS 2; Chamber of
  Deputies--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--ADN 32, MNR 26,
  MIR 23, UCS 21, CONDEPA 19, MBL 5, IU 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges appointed
  for a 10-year term by National Congress

Political parties and leaders:
  Center-Left Parties: Movement of the Revolutionary Left or MIR
  SANCHEZ DE LOZADA]
  FERNANDEZ, Hugo VILLEGAS]
  Indigenous Parties: Tupac Katari Revolutionary Liberation Movement

International organization participation: CAN, ECLAC, FAO, G-11,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LAES,
  LAIA, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Marcelo PEREZ Monasterios
  chancery: 3014 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, Miami, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Donna Jean HRINAK
  embassy: Avenida Arce 2780, San Jorge, La Paz
  mailing address: P. O. Box 425, La Paz; APO AA 34032

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  yellow, and green with the coat of arms centered on the yellow band;
  similar to the flag of Ghana, which has a large black five-pointed
  star centered in the yellow band



Economy



Economy--overview: With its long history of semifeudal social
  controls, dependence on mineral exports, and bouts of
  hyperinflation, Bolivia has remained one of the poorest and least
  developed Latin American countries. However, Bolivia has experienced
  generally improving economic conditions since the PAZ Estenssoro
  administration (1985-89) introduced market-oriented policies which
  reduced inflation from 11,700% in 1985 to about 20% in 1988. PAZ
  Estenssoro was followed as president by Jaime PAZ Zamora (1989-93)
  who continued the free-market policies of his predecessor, despite
  opposition from his own party and from Bolivia's once powerful labor
  movement. President SANCHEZ DE LOZADA (1993-1997) vowed to advance
  the market-oriented economic reforms he helped launch as PAZ
  Estenssoro's planning minister. His successes included the signing
  of a free trade agreement with Mexico and the Southern Cone Common
  Market (Mercosur) as well as the privatization of the state airline,
  telephone company, railroad, electric power company, and oil
  company. Hugo BANZER Suarez has tried to further improve the
  country's investment climate with an anticorruption campaign. With
  the scheduled completion of a $2 billion natural gas pipeline to
  Brazil in 1999, Bolivia hopes to become an energy hub in the region.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$23.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 17%
  industry: 26%
  services: 57% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: 66%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.3%
  highest 10%: 31.7% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.4% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.5 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture NA%, services and
  utilities NA%, manufacturing, mining and construction NA%

Unemployment rate: 11.4% (1997) with widespread underemployment

Budget:
  revenues: $2.7 billion
  expenditures: $2.7 billion (1998)

Industries: mining, smelting, petroleum, food and beverages,
  tobacco, handicrafts, clothing

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 2.95 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 40.68%
  hydro: 59.32%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 2.948 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: soybeans, coffee, coca, cotton, corn,
  sugarcane, rice, potatoes; timber

Exports: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: metals 34%, natural gas 9.4%, soybeans 8.4%,
  jewelry 11%, wood 6.9%

Exports--partners: US 22%, UK 9.3%, Colombia 8.7%, Peru 7.4%,
  Argentina 7.2%

Imports: $1.7 billion (c.i.f. 1998)

Imports--commodities: capital goods 48%, chemicals 11%, petroleum
  5%, food 5% (1993 est.)

Imports--partners: US 20%, Japan 13%, Brazil 12, Chile 7.5% (1996)

Debt--external: $4.1 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $588 million (1997)

Currency: 1 boliviano ($B) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: bolivianos ($B) per US$1--5.6491 (January 1999),
  5.5101 (1998), 5.2543 (1997), 5.0746 (1996), 4.8003 (1995), 4.6205
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 144,300 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: new subscribers face bureaucratic difficulties;
  most telephones are concentrated in La Paz and other cities
  domestic: microwave radio relay system being expanded
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 177, FM 68, shortwave 112 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 48 (1997)

Televisions: 500,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,691 km (single track)
  narrow gauge: 3,652 km 1.000-m gauge; 39 km 0.760-m gauge (13 km
  electrified) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 52,216 km
  paved: 2,872 km (including 27 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 49,344 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 10,000 km of commercially navigable waterways

Pipelines: crude oil 1,800 km; petroleum products 580 km; natural
  gas 1,495 km

Ports and harbors: none; however, Bolivia has free port
  privileges in the maritime ports of Argentina, Brazil, Chile, and
  Paraguay

Merchant marine:
  total: 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 34,948 GRT/58,472 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 5 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1,130 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1,118
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 70
  914 to 1,523 m: 224
  under 914 m: 821 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (Ejercito Boliviano), Navy (Fuerza Naval
  Boliviana, includes Marines), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea Boliviana),
  National Police Force (Policia Nacional de Bolivia)

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,908,454 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,241,311 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 84,481 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $154 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: has wanted a sovereign corridor to the
  South Pacific Ocean since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in
  1884; dispute with Chile over Rio Lauca water rights

Illicit drugs: world's third-largest cultivator of coca (after
  Peru and Colombia) with an estimated 46,900 hectares under
  cultivation in 1997, a 2.5% decrease in overall cultivation of coca
  from 1996 levels; Bolivia, however, is the second-largest producer
  of coca leaf; even so, farmer abandonment and voluntary and forced
  eradication programs resulted in leaf production dropping from
  75,100 metric tons in 1996 to 73,000 tons in 1997, a 3% decrease
  from 1996; government considers all but 12,000 hectares illicit;
  intermediate coca products and cocaine exported to or through
  Colombia, Brazil, Argentina, and Chile to the US and other
  international drug markets; alternative crop program aims to reduce
  illicit coca cultivation



======================================================================




@Bosnia and Herzegovina
----------------------





Introduction



Background: On 21 November 1995, in Dayton, Ohio, the former
  Yugoslavia's three warring parties signed a peace agreement that
  brought to a halt over three years of interethnic civil strife in
  Bosnia and Herzegovina (the final agreement was signed in Paris on
  14 December 1995). The Dayton Agreement, signed then by Bosnian
  President IZETBEGOVIC, Croatian President TUDJMAN, and Serbian
  President MILOSEVIC, divides Bosnia and Herzegovina roughly equally
  between the Muslim/Croat Federation and the Republika Srpska while
  maintaining Bosnia's currently recognized borders. In 1995-96, a
  NATO-led international peacekeeping force (IFOR) of 60,000 troops
  served in Bosnia to implement and monitor the military aspects of
  the agreement. IFOR was succeeded by a smaller, NATO-led
  Stabilization Force (SFOR) whose mission is to deter renewed
  hostilities. SFOR remains in place. A High Representative appointed
  by the UN Security Council is responsible for civilian
  implementation of the accord, including monitoring implementation,
  facilitating any difficulties arising in connection with civilian
  implementation, and coordinating activities of the civilian
  organizations and agencies in Bosnia. The Bosnian conflict began in
  the spring of 1992 when the government of Bosnia and Herzegovina
  held a referendum on independence and the Bosnian Serbs--supported by
  neighboring Serbia--responded with armed resistance aimed at
  partitioning the republic along ethnic lines and joining Serb-held
  areas to form a "greater Serbia." In March 1994, Bosnia's Muslims
  and Croats reduced the number of warring factions from three to two
  by signing an agreement in Washington creating their joint
  Muslim/Croat Federation of Bosnia and Herzegovina. The Federation,
  formed by the Muslims and Croats in March 1994, is one of two
  entities (the other being the Bosnian Serb-led Republika Srpska)
  that comprise Bosnia and Herzegovina.



Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea and
  Croatia

Geographic coordinates: 44 00 N, 18 00 E

Map references: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Europe

Area:
  total: 51,233 sq km
  land: 51,233 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,459 km
  border countries: Croatia 932 km, Serbia and Montenegro 527 km (312
  km with Serbia, 215 km with Montenegro)

Coastline: 20 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: hot summers and cold winters; areas of high elevation
  have short, cool summers and long, severe winters; mild, rainy
  winters along coast

Terrain: mountains and valleys

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Maglic 2,386 m

Natural resources: coal, iron, bauxite, manganese, forests,
  copper, chromium, lead, zinc

Land use:
  arable land: 14%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent and destructive earthquakes

Environment--current issues: air pollution from metallurgical
  plants; sites for disposing of urban waste are limited; widespread
  casualties, water shortages, and destruction of infrastructure
  because of the 1992-95 civil strife

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: within Bosnia and Herzegovina's recognized
  borders, the country is divided into a joint Muslim/Croat Federation
  (about 51% of the territory) and the Bosnian Serb-led Republika
  Herzegovina is contiguous to Croatia and traditionally has been
  settled by an ethnic Croat majority



People



Population: 3,482,495 (July 1999 est.)
  note: all data dealing with population is subject to considerable
  error because of the dislocations caused by military action and
  ethnic cleansing

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 310,430; female 294,298)
  15-64 years: 71% (male 1,221,791; female 1,240,097)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 166,876; female 249,003) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.2% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.36 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.81 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 33.42 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.52 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 66.98 years
  male: 62.55 years
  female: 71.71 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.21 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bosnian(s), Herzegovinian(s)
  adjective: Bosnian, Herzegovinian

Ethnic groups: Serb 40%, Muslim 38%, Croat 22% (est.); note--the
  Croats claim they now make up only 17% of the total population

Religions: Muslim 40%, Orthodox 31%, Catholic 15%, Protestant 4%,
  other 10%

Languages: Croatian, Serbian, Bosnian

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Bosnia and Herzegovina
  local long form: none
  local short form: Bosna i Hercegovina

Data code: BK

Government type: emerging democracy

Capital: Sarajevo

Administrative divisions: there are two first-order
  administrative divisions--the Muslim/Croat Federation of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina (Federacija Bosna i Hercegovina) and the Bosnian
  Serb-led Republika Srpska; note--the status of Brcko in north eastern
  Bosnia is to be determined by arbitration

Independence: NA April 1992 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: Republika Srpska--"Republic Day," 9 January;
  Independence Day, 1 March; Federation of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina--"Republic Day," 25 November

Constitution: the Dayton Agreement, signed 14 December 1995,
  included a new constitution now in force

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 16 years of age, if employed; 18 years of age, universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Chairman of the Presidency Zivko RADISIC (since 13
  October 1998--Serb); other members of the three-member rotating
  (every 8 months) presidency: Ante JELAVIC (since NA September
  1998--Croat) and Alija IZETBEGOVIC (since 14 March 1996--Muslim)
  head of government: Cochairman of the Council of Ministers Haris
  SILAJDZIC (since NA January 1997); Cochairman of the Council of
  Ministers Suetozar MIHAJLOVIC (since 3 February 1999)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the council chairmen
  note: President of the Muslim/Croat Federation of Bosnia and
  Herzegovina: Ivo ANDRIC-LUZANIC (since 1 January 1999); Vice
  President is Ejup GANIC; note--president and vice president rotate
  every 3 months; President of the Republika Srpska: Nikola POPLASEN
  (since 29 October 1998)
  elections: the three-person presidency members (one Muslim, one
  Croat, one Serb) are elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  the president with the most votes becomes the chairman unless he was
  the incumbent chairman at the time of the election; election last
  held 12-13 September 1998 (next to be held September 2002); the
  cochairmen of the Council of Ministers are appointed by the
  presidency
  election results: percent of vote--Zivko RADISIC with 52% of the Serb
  vote was elected chairman of the collective presidency for the first
  8 months; Ante JELAVIC with 52% of the Croat vote will follow
  RADISIC in the rotation; Alija IZEBEGOVIC with 87% of the Muslim
  vote won the highest number of votes in the election but was
  ineligible to serve consecutive terms as chairman

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliamentary Assembly or Skupstina
  consists of the National House of Representatives or Vijece Opcina
  (42 seats--14 Serb, 14 Croat, and 14 Muslim; members elected by
  popular vote to serve two-year terms) and the House of Peoples or
  Vijece Gradanstvo (15 seats--5 Muslim, 5 Croat, 5 Serb; members
  elected by the Muslim/Croat Federation's House of Representatives
  and the Republika Srpska's National Assembly to serve two-year terms)
  elections: National House of Representatives--elections last held
  12-13 September 1998 (next to be held in the fall 2000); House of
  Peoples--last held NA (next to be held NA)
  election results: National House of Representatives--percent of vote
  by party/coalition--NA; seats by party/coalition--KCD 17, HDZ-BiH 6,
  SDP 4, Sloga 4, SDS 4, SDBIH 2, SRS-RS 2, DNZ 1, NHI 1, RSRS 1;
  House of Peoples--percent of vote by party/coalition--NA; seats by
  party/coalition--NA
  note: the Muslim/Croat Federation has a House of Representatives
  (140 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve NA year terms);
  elections last held NA (next to be held NA); percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party/coalition--KCD 68, HDZ-BiH 28, SDP 19, SDBIH
  6, NHI 4, DNZ 3, DSP 2, BPS 2, HSP 2, SPRS 2, BSP 1, KC 1, BOSS 1,
  HSS 1; the Republika Srpska has a National Assembly (83 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve NA year terms); elections
  last held NA (next to be held NA); percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party/coalition--SDS 19, KCD 15, SNS 12, SRS-RS 11, SPRS 10,
  SNSD 6, RSRS 3, SKRS 2, SDP 2, KKO 1, HDZ-BiH 1, NHI 1

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, consists of nine members:
  four members are selected by the Muslim/Croat Federation's House of
  Representatives, two members by the Republika Srpska National
  Assembly, and three non-Bosnian members by the president of the
  European Court of Human Rights

Political parties and leaders: Bosnian Party of Rights or BSP
  IZETBEGOVIC; includes SDA, SBH, GDS, LS]; Croatian Democratic Union
  BIH or SDP (formerly the Democratic Party of Socialists or DSS)
  note: note--SDP and SDBIH announced a merger in 1999

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: CE (guest), CEI, EBRD,
  ECE, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM (guest), OAS
  (observer), OIC (observer), OPCW, OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dragan BOZANIC
  chancery: 2109 E Street NW, Washington, DC 20037
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Richard D. KAUZLARICH
  embassy: Alipasina 43, 71000 Sarajevo
  mailing address: use street address

Flag description: a wide medium blue vertical band on the fly
  side with a yellow isosceles triangle abutting the band and the top
  of the flag; the remainder of the flag is medium blue with seven
  full five-pointed white stars and two half stars top and bottom
  along the hypotenuse of the triangle

Government--note: Until declaring independence in spring 1992,
  Bosnia and Herzegovina existed as a republic in the former
  Yugoslavia. Bosnia was partitioned by fighting during 1992-95 and
  governed by competing ethnic factions. Bosnia's current governing
  structures were created by the Dayton Agreement, the 1995 peace
  agreement which was officially signed in Paris on 14 December 1995
  by then Bosnian President IZETBEGOVIC, Croatian President TUDJMAN,
  and then Serbian President MILOSEVIC. This agreement retained
  Bosnia's exterior border and created a joint multi-ethnic and
  democratic government. This national government--based on
  proportional representation similar to that which existed in the
  former socialist regime--is charged with conducting foreign,
  economic, and fiscal policy. The Dayton Agreement also recognized a
  second tier of government, comprised of two entities--a joint
  Muslim/Croat Federation and the Bosnian Serb Republika Srpska
  (RS)--each presiding over roughly one-half the territory. The
  Federation and RS governments are charged with overseeing internal
  functions.



Economy



Economy--overview: Bosnia and Herzegovina ranked next to The
  Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia as the poorest republic in the
  old Yugoslav federation. Although agriculture has been almost all in
  private hands, farms have been small and inefficient, and the
  republic traditionally has been a net importer of food. Industry has
  been greatly overstaffed, one reflection of the rigidities of
  communist central planning and management. TITO had pushed the
  development of military industries in the republic with the result
  that Bosnia hosted a large share of Yugoslavia's defense plants. The
  bitter interethnic warfare in Bosnia caused production to plummet by
  80% from 1990 to 1995, unemployment to soar, and human misery to
  multiply. With an uneasy peace in place, output has recovered in
  1996-98 at high percentage rates on a low base, but remains far
  below the 1990 level. Key achievements in 1998 included approval of
  privatization legislation, the introduction of a national
  currency--the convertible mark, agreement with the Paris Club to
  reschedule official debt, and the conclusion of a Standby Agreement
  with the IMF. Economic data are of limited use because, although
  both entities issue figures, national-level statistics are not
  available. Moreover, official data do not capture the large share of
  activity that occurs on the black market. The country receives
  substantial amounts of reconstruction assistance and humanitarian
  aid from the international community. Wide regional differences in
  war damage and access to the outside world have resulted in
  substantial variations in living conditions among local areas and
  individual families. In 1999, Bosnia's major goals are to implement
  privatization and make progress in fiscal reform and management. In
  addition, Bosnia will have to prepare for an era of declining
  assistance from the international community.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 30% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,720 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 23%
  services: 58% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 1,026,254

Labor force--by occupation: NA%

Unemployment rate: 40%-50% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: steel, coal, iron ore, lead, zinc, manganese,
  bauxite, vehicle assembly, textiles, tobacco products, wooden
  furniture, tank and aircraft assembly, domestic appliances, oil
  refining (much of capacity damaged or shut down) (1995)

Industrial production growth rate: 35% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 2.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 34.78%
  hydro: 65.22%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 2.504 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 182 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 386 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, corn, fruits, vegetables; livestock

Exports: $152 million (1995 est.)

Exports--commodities: NA

Exports--partners: NA

Imports: $1.1 billion (1995 est.)

Imports--commodities: NA

Imports--partners: NA

Debt--external: $3.5 billion (yearend 1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.2 billion (1997 pledged)

Currency: 1 convertible marka (KM) = 100 convertible pfenniga

Exchange rates: NA

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 727,000

Telephone system: telephone and telegraph network is in need of
  modernization and expansion; many urban areas are below average when
  compared with services in other former Yugoslav republics
  domestic: NA
  international: no satellite earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 16, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: 840,000

Television broadcast stations: 21 (1997)

Televisions: 1,012,094



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,021 km (electrified 795 km; operating as diesel or steam
  until grids are repaired)
  standard gauge: 1,021 km 1.435-m gauge (1995); note--some segments
  still need repair and/or reconstruction

Highways:
  total: 21,846 km
  paved: 11,425 km
  unpaved: 10,421 km (1996 est.)
  note: roads need maintenance and repair

Waterways: NA km; large sections of Sava blocked by downed
  bridges, silt, and debris

Pipelines: crude oil 174 km; natural gas 90 km (1992);
  note--pipelines now disrupted

Ports and harbors: Bosanska Gradiska, Bosanski Brod, Bosanski
  Samac, and Brcko (all inland waterway ports on the Sava none of
  which are fully operational), Orasje

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 25 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 9
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 16
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 8 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Federation Army or VF (composed of both
  Croatian and Bosnian Muslim elements), Army of the Serb Republic
  (composed of Bosnian Serb elements); note--within both of these
  forces air and air defense are subordinate commands

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 951,541 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 764,992 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 28,438 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: disputes with Serbia over Serbian
  populated areas

Illicit drugs: minor transit point for marijuana and opiate
  trafficking routes to Western Europe



======================================================================




@Botswana
--------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, north of South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 22 00 S, 24 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 600,370 sq km
  land: 585,370 sq km
  water: 15,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,013 km
  border countries: Namibia 1,360 km, South Africa 1,840 km, Zimbabwe
  813 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: semiarid; warm winters and hot summers

Terrain: predominantly flat to gently rolling tableland; Kalahari
  Desert in southwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: junction of the Limpopo and Shashe Rivers 513 m
  highest point: Tsodilo Hills 1,489 m

Natural resources: diamonds, copper, nickel, salt, soda ash,
  potash, coal, iron ore, silver

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 47%
  other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; seasonal August winds blow
  from the west, carrying sand and dust across the country, which can
  obscure visibility

Environment--current issues: overgrazing; desertification; limited
  fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked; population concentrated in eastern
  part of the country



People



Population: 1,464,167 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 42% (male 310,578; female 303,495)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 379,836; female 416,073)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 20,224; female 33,961) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.05% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 31.46 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 21 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.6 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 59.08 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 39.89 years
  male: 39.42 years
  female: 40.37 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.91 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Motswana (singular), Batswana (plural)
  adjective: Motswana (singular), Batswana (plural)

Ethnic groups: Batswana 95%, Kalanga, Basarwa, and Kgalagadi 4%,
  white 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 50%, Christian 50%

Languages: English (official), Setswana

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 69.8%
  male: 80.5%
  female: 59.9% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Botswana
  conventional short form: Botswana
  former: Bechuanaland

Data code: BC

Government type: parliamentary republic

Capital: Gaborone

Administrative divisions: 10 districts and four town councils*;
  Central, Chobe, Francistown*, Gaborone*, Ghanzi, Kgalagadi,
  Kgatleng, Kweneng, Lobatse*, Ngamiland, North-East, Selebi-Pikwe*,
  South-East, Southern

Independence: 30 September 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 September (1966)

Constitution: March 1965, effective 30 September 1966

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and local customary law;
  judicial review limited to matters of interpretation; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Festus MOGAE (since 1 April 1998) and Vice
  President Seretse Ian KHAMA (since NA April 1998); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Festus MOGAE (since 1 April 1998) and
  Vice President Seretse Ian KHAMA (since NA April 1998); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 15 October 1994 (next to be held
  NA October 1999); vice president appointed by the president
  election results: Sir Ketumile MASIRE elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--NA
  note: President MASIRE resigned on 31 March 1998; Vice President
  MOGAE assumed the presidency pending elections to be held in 1999;
  on 2 April 1998, Festus MOGAE, then president, designated Seretse
  Ian KHAMA to be vice president

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the House of
  Chiefs (a largely advisory 15-member body consisting of the chiefs
  of the eight principal tribes, four elected subchiefs, and three
  members selected by the other 12) and the National Assembly (44
  seats, 40 members are directly elected by popular vote and 4
  appointed by the majority party; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: National Assembly--elections last held 15 October 1994
  (next to be held NA October 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--BDP
  27, BNF 13

Judicial branch: High Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Botswana Democratic Party or BDP

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Archibald Mooketsa MOGWE
  chancery: 1531-1533 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Robert C. KRUEGER
  embassy: address NA, Gaborone
  mailing address: P. O. Box 90, Gaborone

Flag description: light blue with a horizontal white-edged black
  stripe in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Agriculture still provides a livelihood for
  more than 80% of the population but supplies only about 50% of food
  needs and accounts for only 4% of GDP. Subsistence farming and
  cattle raising predominate. Diamond mining and tourism also are
  important to the economy. The sector is plagued by erratic rainfall
  and poor soils. Substantial mineral deposits were found in the 1970s
  and the mining sector grew from 25% of GDP in 1980 to 35% in 1997.
  Unemployment officially is 21% but unofficial estimates place it
  closer to 40%.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.25 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 45% (including 35% mining)
  services: 51% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 235,000 formal sector employees (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: 100,000 public sector; 135,000 private
  sector, including 14,300 who are employed in various mines in South
  Africa; most others engaged in cattle raising and subsistence
  agriculture (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 20-40% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.6 billion
  expenditures: $1.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $560
  million (FY96/97)

Industries: diamonds, copper, nickel, coal, salt, soda ash,
  potash; livestock processing

Industrial production growth rate: 4.6% (FY92/93)

Electricity--production: 990 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.675 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 685 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sorghum, maize, millet, pulses, groundnuts
  (peanuts), beans, cowpeas, sunflower seed; livestock

Exports: $2.25 billion (f.o.b. 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: diamonds 76%, copper, nickel 4%, meat (1997)

Exports--partners: EU 74%, Southern African Customs Union (SACU)
  21%, Zimbabwe 3% (1996)

Imports: $2.43 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, vehicles and transport
  equipment, textiles, petroleum products

Imports--partners: Southern African Customs Union (SACU) 78%,
  Europe 8%, Zimbabwe 6% (1996)

Debt--external: $610 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $73 million (1995)

Currency: 1 pula (P) = 100 thebe

Exchange rates: pulas (P) per US$1--4.5725 (January 1999), 4.2258
  (1998), 3.6508 (1997), 3.3242 (1996), 2.7722 (1995), 2.6846 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 19,109 (1985 est.)

Telephone system: sparse system
  domestic: small system of open-wire lines, microwave radio relay
  links, and a few radiotelephone communication stations
  international: microwave radio relay links to Zambia, Zimbabwe, and
  South Africa; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 15, shortwave 5 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: 13,800 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 971 km
  narrow gauge: 971 km 1.067-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 18,482 km
  paved: 4,343 km
  unpaved: 14,139 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 92 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 80
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 57
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Botswana Defense Force (includes Army and Air
  Wing), Botswana National Police

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 344,587 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 182,279 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 18,654 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $61 million (FY99/00)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.2% (FY99/00)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: quadripoint with Namibia, Zambia, and
  Zimbabwe is in disagreement; dispute with Namibia over uninhabited
  Kasikili (Sidudu) Island in Linyanti (Chobe) River is presently at
  the ICJ; at least one other island in Linyanti River is contested



======================================================================




@Bouvet Island
-------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the South Atlantic Ocean,
  south-southwest of the Cape of Good Hope (South Africa)

Geographic coordinates: 54 26 S, 3 24 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
  total: 58 sq km
  land: 58 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 29.6 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: antarctic

Terrain: volcanic; maximum elevation about 800 m; coast is mostly
  inaccessible

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 780 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (all ice)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: covered by glacial ice



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Bouvet Island

Data code: BV

Dependency status: territory of Norway; administered from Oslo

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Norway)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of Norway)

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity; declared a nature reserve



Communications



Communications--note: automatic meteorological station



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Norway



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Brazil
------





Geography



Location: Eastern South America, bordering the Atlantic Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 S, 55 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 8,511,965 sq km
  land: 8,456,510 sq km
  water: 55,455 sq km
  note: includes Arquipelago de Fernando de Noronha, Atol das Rocas,
  Ilha da Trindade, Ilhas Martin Vaz, and Penedos de Sao Pedro e Sao
  Paulo

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 14,691 km
  border countries: Argentina 1,224 km, Bolivia 3,400 km, Colombia
  1,643 km, French Guiana 673 km, Guyana 1,119 km, Paraguay 1,290 km,
  Peru 1,560 km, Suriname 597 km, Uruguay 985 km, Venezuela 2,200 km

Coastline: 7,491 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly tropical, but temperate in south

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling lowlands in north; some plains,
  hills, mountains, and narrow coastal belt

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pico da Neblina 3,014 m

Natural resources: bauxite, gold, iron ore, manganese, nickel,
  phosphates, platinum, tin, uranium, petroleum, hydropower, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 22%
  forests and woodland: 58%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 28,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts in northeast; floods and
  occasional frost in south

Environment--current issues: deforestation in Amazon Basin
  destroys the habitat and endangers the existence of a multitude of
  plant and animal species indigenous to the area; air and water
  pollution in Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo, and several other large
  cities; land degradation and water pollution caused by improper
  mining activities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: largest country in South America; shares common
  boundaries with every South American country except Chile and Ecuador



People



Population: 171,853,126 (July 1999 est.)
  note: Brazil took a census in August 1996 which reported a
  population of 157,079,573; that figure was about 5% lower than
  projections by the US Census Bureau, and is close to the implied
  underenumeration of 4.6% for 1991; the Factbook's demographic
  statistics for Brazil do not take into consideration the results of
  the1996 census since the full results have not been released for
  analysis

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 26,059,687; female 25,095,236)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 55,037,161; female 56,727,196)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 3,626,893; female 5,306,953) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.16% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.42 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.79 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 35.37 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.06 years
  male: 59.35 years
  female: 69.01 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.28 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Brazilian(s)
  adjective: Brazilian

Ethnic groups: white (includes Portuguese, German, Italian,
  Spanish, Polish) 55%, mixed white and black 38%, black 6%, other
  (includes Japanese, Arab, Amerindian) 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic (nominal) 70%

Languages: Portuguese (official), Spanish, English, French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 83.3%
  male: 83.3%
  female: 83.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federative Republic of Brazil
  conventional short form: Brazil
  local long form: Republica Federativa do Brasil
  local short form: Brasil

Data code: BR

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Brasilia

Administrative divisions: 26 states (estados, singular--estado)
  and 1 federal district* (distrito federal); Acre, Alagoas, Amapa,
  Amazonas, Bahia, Ceara, Distrito Federal*, Espirito Santo, Goias,
  Maranhao, Mato Grosso, Mato Grosso do Sul, Minas Gerais, Para,
  Paraiba, Parana, Pernambuco, Piaui, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande do
  Norte, Rio Grande do Sul, Rondonia, Roraima, Santa Catarina, Sao
  Paulo, Sergipe, Tocantins

Independence: 7 September 1822 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 September (1822)

Constitution: 5 October 1988

Legal system: based on Roman codes; has not accepted compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: voluntary between 16 and 18 years of age and over 70;
  compulsory over 18 and under 70 years of age

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Fernando Henrique CARDOSO (since 1 January
  1995); Vice President Marco MACIEL (since 1 January 1995); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Fernando Henrique CARDOSO (since 1
  January 1995); Vice President Marco MACIEL (since 1 January 1995);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 4 October
  1998 (next to be held NA October 2002)
  election results: Fernando Henrique CARDOSO reelected president;
  percent of vote--53%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congresso
  Nacional consists of the Federal Senate or Senado Federal (81 seats;
  three members from each state or federal district elected according
  to the principle of majority to serve eight-year terms; one-third
  elected after a four year period, two-thirds elected after the next
  four-year period) and the Chamber of Deputies or Camara dos
  Deputados (513 seats; members are elected by proportional
  representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Federal Senate--last held 4 October 1998 for one-third of
  Senate (next to be held NA October 2002 for two-thirds of the
  Senate); Chamber of Deputies--last held 4 October 1998 (next to be
  held NA October 2002)
  election results: Federal Senate--percent of vote by party--NA%; seats
  by party--PMDB 27, PFL 20, PSDB 16, PT 7, PPB 5; Chamber of
  Deputies--percent of vote by party--NA%; seats by party--PFL 106, PSDB
  99, PMDB 82, PPB 60, PT 58

Judicial branch: Supreme Federal Tribunal, 11 judges are
  appointed for life by the president and confirmed by the Senate

Political parties and leaders: Brazilian Democratic Movement

Political pressure groups and leaders: left wing of the Catholic
  Church, Landless Worker's Movement, and labor unions allied to
  leftist Workers' Party are critical of government's social and
  economic policies

International organization participation: AfDB, BIS, CCC, ECLAC,
  FAO, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
  Mercosur, MONUA, MTCR, NAM (observer), NSG, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA,
  RG, UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Rubens Antonio BARBOSA
  chancery: 3006 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los
  Angeles, Miami, New York, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador-designate J. Brian ATWOOD
  embassy: Avenida das Nacoes, Quadra 801, Lote 3, Brasilia, Distrito
  Federal Cep 70403-900 Brazil
  mailing address: Unit 3500, APO AA 34030
  consulate(s) general: Rio de Janeiro, Sao Paulo
  consulate(s): Recife

Flag description: green with a large yellow diamond in the center
  bearing a blue celestial globe with 27 white five-pointed stars (one
  for each state and the Federal District) arranged in the same
  pattern as the night sky over Brazil; the globe has a white
  equatorial band with the motto ORDEM E PROGRESSO (Order and Progress)



Economy



Economy--overview: Possessing large and well-developed
  agricultural, mining, manufacturing, and service sectors, Brazil's
  economy outweighs that of all other South American countries and is
  expanding its presence in world markets. Prior to the institution of
  a stabilization plan--the Plano Real (Real Plan) in mid-1994,
  stratospheric inflation rates had disrupted economic activity and
  discouraged foreign investment. Since then, tight monetary policy
  has brought inflation under control--consumer prices increased by 2%
  in 1998 compared to more than 1,000% in 1994. At the same time, GDP
  growth slowed from 5.7% in 1994 to about 3.0% in 1997 due to tighter
  credit. The Real Plan faced its strongest challenge in 1998, as the
  world financial crisis caused investors to more closely examine the
  country's structural weaknesses. The most severe spillover for
  Brazil--after Russia's debt default in August 1998--created
  unrelenting pressure on the currency which forced the country to
  hike annual interest rates to 50%. Approximately $30 billion in
  capital left the country in August and September. After crafting a
  fiscal adjustment program and pledging progress on structural
  reform, Brazil received a $41.5 billion IMF-led international
  support program in November 1998. Capital continued to leach out of
  the country, and investors, concerned about the rising mountain of
  debt and currency widely-viewed as overvalued, stayed on the
  sidelines. In January 1999, Brazil made an abrupt shift of course in
  exchange rate policy, abandoning the strong currency anti-inflation
  anchor of the Real Plan. On 13 January 1999, Central Bank officials
  announced a one-time 8% devaluation of the real, and on 15 January
  1999, the currency was declared to be freely floating. President
  CARDOSO remains committed to limiting inflation and weathering the
  financial crisis through austerity and sacrifice as the country
  rides out a deep recession. He hopes the country will resume
  economic growth in the second half of 1999, so that he can once
  again focus on his longer-term goal of reducing poverty and income
  inequality. CARDOSO still hopes to address mandated revenue sharing
  with the states and cumbersome procedures to amend the constitution
  before the end of his second term.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.0352 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.5% (1998)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14%
  industry: 36%
  services: 50% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 17.4% (1990 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.8%
  highest 10%: 47.9% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2% (1998)

Labor force: 57 million (1989 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 42%, agriculture 31%,
  industry 27%

Unemployment rate: 8.5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $151 billion
  expenditures: $149 billion, including capital expenditures of $36
  billion (1998)

Industries: textiles, shoes, chemicals, cement, lumber, iron ore,
  tin, steel, aircraft, motor vehicles and parts, other machinery and
  equipment

Industrial production growth rate: 4.5% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 291.63 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 4.38%
  hydro: 92.09%
  nuclear: 0.8%
  other: 2.73% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 323.215 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 8 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 37.5 billion kWh (1996)
  note: imported electricity from Paraguay

Agriculture--products: coffee, soybeans, wheat, rice, corn,
  sugarcane, cocoa, citrus; beef

Exports: $51 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: iron ore, soybean bran, orange juice,
  footwear, coffee, motor vehicle parts

Exports--partners: EU 28%, Latin America (excluding Argentina)
  23%, US 20%, Argentina 12% (1996)

Imports: $57.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: crude oil, capital goods, chemical products,
  foodstuffs, coal

Imports--partners: EU 26%, US 22%, Argentina 13%, Japan 5% (1996)

Debt--external: $258.1 billion (December 1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.012 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 real (R$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: reals (R$) per US$1--1.501 (January 1999), 1.161
  (1998), 1.078 (1997), 1.005 (1996), 0.918 (1995), 0.639 (1994); CR$
  per US$1--390.845 (January 1994)
  note: the real (R$) was introduced on 1 July 1994, equal to 2,750
  cruzeiro reais; from October 1994 through 14 January 1999, the
  official rate was determined by a managed float; since 15 January
  1999, the official rate floats independently with respect to the US$

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 14,426,673 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: good working system
  domestic: extensive microwave radio relay system and a domestic
  satellite system with 64 earth stations
  international: 3 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth
  stations--3 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean), 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean
  Region East)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1,627, FM 251, shortwave 114 (of
  which 91 are associated with AM stations) (1998)

Radios: 60 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 138 (1997)

Televisions: 30 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 28,862 km (1,187 km electrified)
  broad gauge: 4,123 km 1.600-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 24,390 km 1.000-m gauge; 13 km 0.760-m gauge
  dual gauge: 336 km 1.000-m and 1.600-m gauges (three rails)

Highways:
  total: 1.98 million km
  paved: 184,140 km
  unpaved: 1,795,860 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 50,000 km navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 2,980 km; petroleum products 4,762 km;
  natural gas 4,246 km (1998)

Ports and harbors: Belem, Fortaleza, Ilheus, Imbituba, Manaus,
  Paranagua, Porto Alegre, Recife, Rio de Janeiro, Rio Grande,
  Salvador, Santos, Vitoria

Merchant marine:
  total: 179 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,132,037
  GRT/6,642,442 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 35, cargo 28, chemical tanker 6, combination
  ore/oil 10, container 10, liquefied gas tanker 10, multifunction
  large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 61, passenger-cargo 5, refrigerated
  cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11, short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 3,265 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 514
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 19
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 134
  914 to 1,523 m: 325
  under 914 m: 31 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2,751
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 73
  914 to 1,523 m: 1,312
  under 914 m: 1,366 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Brazilian Army, Brazilian Navy (includes naval
  air and marines), Brazilian Air Force, Federal Police (paramilitary)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 47,230,426 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 31,723,597 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 1,841,858 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $14.7 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.9% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: two short sections of boundary with
  Uruguay are in dispute--Arroio Invernada (Arroyo de la Invernada)
  area of the Rio Quarai (Rio Cuareim) and the islands at the
  confluence of the Rio Quarai and the Uruguay River

Illicit drugs: limited illicit producer of cannabis, minor coca
  cultivation in the Amazon region, mostly used for domestic
  consumption; government has a large-scale eradication program to
  control cannabis; important transshipment country for Bolivian,
  Colombian, and Peruvian cocaine headed for the US and Europe;
  increasingly used by traffickers as a way station for narcotics air
  transshipments between Peru and Colombia



======================================================================




@British Indian Ocean Territory
------------------------------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, archipelago in the Indian Ocean, about
  one-half the way from Africa to Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 71 30 E

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 60 sq km
  land: 60 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes the entire Chagos Archipelago

Area--comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 698 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical marine; hot, humid, moderated by trade winds

Terrain: flat and low (up to four meters in elevation)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Diego Garcia 15 m

Natural resources: coconuts, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: archipelago of 2,300 islands; Diego Garcia,
  largest and southernmost island, occupies strategic location in
  central Indian Ocean; island is site of joint US-UK military facility



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: approximately 3,000 native inhabitants, known as the
  Chagosians or Ilois, were evacuated to Mauritius before construction
  of UK-US military facilities; now there are UK and US military
  personnel and civilian contractors living on the island



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: British Indian Ocean Territory
  conventional short form: none
  abbreviation: BIOT

Data code: IO

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK; administered by
  a commissioner, resident in the Foreign and Commonwealth Office in
  London

Legal system: NA

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  head of government: Commissioner David Ross MACLENNAN (since NA
  1994); Administrator Don CAIRNS (since NA); note--both reside in the
  UK
  cabinet: NA
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; commissioner and
  administrator appointed by the monarch

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: white with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and six blue wavy horizontal stripes bearing a
  palm tree and yellow crown centered on the outer half of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: All economic activity is concentrated on the
  largest island of Diego Garcia, where joint UK-US defense facilities
  are located. Construction projects and various services needed to
  support the military installations are done by military and contract
  employees from the UK, Mauritius, the Philippines, and the US. There
  are no industrial or agricultural activities on the islands.

Electricity--production: NA kWh
  note: electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system: facilities for military needs only
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: short stretch of paved road of NA km between port and
  airfield on Diego Garcia
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Diego Garcia

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK; the US
  lease on Diego Garcia expires in 2016



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: the Chagos Archipelago is claimed by
  Mauritius and Seychelles



======================================================================




@British Virgin Islands
----------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, between the Caribbean Sea and the North
  Atlantic Ocean, east of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 30 N, 64 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 150 sq km
  land: 150 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes the island of Anegada

Area--comparative: about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 80 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: subtropical; humid; temperatures moderated by trade winds

Terrain: coral islands relatively flat; volcanic islands steep,
  hilly

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Sage 521 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 20%
  permanent crops: 7%
  permanent pastures: 33%
  forests and woodland: 7%
  other: 33% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes and tropical storms (July to October)

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water resources
  (except for a few seasonal streams and springs on Tortola, most of
  the islands' water supply comes from wells and rainwater catchment)

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: strong ties to nearby US Virgin Islands and
  Puerto Rico



People



Population: 19,156 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 21% (male 2,012; female 1,965)
  15-64 years: 74% (male 7,300; female 6,896)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 539; female 444) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.37% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 15.92 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.65 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 12.37 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.21 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22.17 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.13 years
  male: 74.37 years
  female: 75.92 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.71 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: British Virgin Islander(s)
  adjective: British Virgin Islander

Ethnic groups: black 90%, white, Asian

Religions: Protestant 86% (Methodist 45%, Anglican 21%, Church of
  God 7%, Seventh-Day Adventist 5%, Baptist 4%, Jehovah's Witnesses
  2%, other 2%), Roman Catholic 6%, none 2%, other 6% (1981)

Languages: English (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97.8% (1991 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: British Virgin Islands
  abbreviation: BVI

Data code: VI

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Road Town

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Territory Day, 1 July

Constitution: 1 June 1977

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor David MACKILLIGIN (since NA June 1995)
  head of government: Chief Minister Ralph T. O'NEAL (since 15 May
  1995; appointed after the death of former Chief Minister H. Lavity
  STOUTT)
  cabinet: Executive Council appointed by the governor from members of
  the Legislative Council
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor from among the
  members of the Legislative Council

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (13 seats;
  members are elected by direct popular vote, one member from each of
  9 electoral districts, four at-large members; members serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 February 1995 (next to be held NA February
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--VIP 6,
  CCM 2, UP 2, independents 3

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court, consisting of
  the High Court of Justice and the Court of Appeal; (one judge of the
  Supreme Court is a resident of the islands and presides over the
  High Court); Magistrate's Court; Juvenile Court; Court of Summary
  Jurisdiction

Political parties and leaders: United Party or UP [Conrad

International organization participation: Caricom (associate),
  CDB, ECLAC (associate), Interpol (subbureau), IOC, OECS (associate),
  UNESCO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Virgin Islander coat of arms centered in
  the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms depicts a woman flanked
  on either side by a vertical column of six oil lamps above a scroll
  bearing the Latin word VIGILATE (Be Watchful)



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy, one of the most prosperous in the
  Caribbean, is highly dependent on tourism, which generates an
  estimated 45% of the national income. In the mid-1980s, the
  government began offering offshore registration to companies wishing
  to incorporate in the islands, and incorporation fees now generate
  substantial revenues. An estimated 250,000 companies were on the
  offshore registry by yearend 1997. The adoption of a comprehensive
  insurance law in late 1994, which provides a blanket of
  confidentiality with regulated statutory gateways for investigation
  of criminal offenses, is expected to make the British Virgin Islands
  even more attractive to international business. Livestock raising is
  the most important agricultural activity; poor soils limit the
  islands' ability to meet domestic food requirements. Because of
  traditionally close links with the US Virgin Islands, the British
  Virgin Islands has used the dollar as its currency since 1959.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$183 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.7% (1997)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1%
  industry: 1.4%
  services: 97.6% (1991-95 average)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.5% (1997)

Labor force: 4,911 (1980)

Labor force--by occupation: tourism NA%

Unemployment rate: 3% (1995)

Budget:
  revenues: $121.5 million
  expenditures: $115.5 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: tourism, light industry, construction, rum, concrete
  block, offshore financial center

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1985)

Electricity--production: 42 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 42 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruits, vegetables; livestock, poultry; fish

Exports: $23.9 million (1996)

Exports--commodities: rum, fresh fish, fruits, animals; gravel,
  sand

Exports--partners: Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US

Imports: $121.5 million (1996)

Imports--commodities: building materials, automobiles, foodstuffs,
  machinery

Imports--partners: Virgin Islands (US), Puerto Rico, US

Debt--external: $34.8 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $2.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 6,291 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: worldwide telephone service
  domestic: NA
  international: submarine cable to Bermuda

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 4, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 9,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there is one cable
  company) (1997)

Televisions: 4,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 113 km (1995 est.)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Road Town

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Brunei
------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and
  Malaysia

Geographic coordinates: 4 30 N, 114 40 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 5,770 sq km
  land: 5,270 sq km
  water: 500 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries:
  total: 381 km
  border countries: Malaysia 381 km

Coastline: 161 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm or to median line
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, rainy

Terrain: flat coastal plain rises to mountains in east; hilly
  lowland in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: Bukit Pagon 1,850 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 85%
  other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: typhoons, earthquakes, and severe flooding are
  very rare

Environment--current issues: seasonal smoke/haze resulting from
  forest fires in Indonesia

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: close to vital sea lanes through South China Sea
  linking Indian and Pacific Oceans; two parts physically separated by
  Malaysia; almost an enclave of Malaysia



People



Population: 322,982 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 54,154; female 51,766)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 106,492; female 95,921)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 7,945; female 6,704) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.38% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 24.69 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.21 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.11 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.19 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.09 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22.83 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.84 years
  male: 70.35 years
  female: 73.42 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.33 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bruneian(s)
  adjective: Bruneian

Ethnic groups: Malay 64%, Chinese 20%, other 16%

Religions: Muslim (official) 63%, Buddhism 14%, Christian 8%,
  indigenous beliefs and other 15% (1981)

Languages: Malay (official), English, Chinese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 88.2%
  male: 92.6%
  female: 83.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Negara Brunei Darussalam
  conventional short form: Brunei

Data code: BX

Government type: constitutional sultanate

Capital: Bandar Seri Begawan

Administrative divisions: 4 districts (daerah-daerah,
  singular--daerah); Belait, Brunei and Muara, Temburong, Tutong

Independence: 1 January 1984 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 23 February (1984)

Constitution: 29 September 1959 (some provisions suspended under
  a State of Emergency since December 1962, others since independence
  on 1 January 1984)

Legal system: based on English common law; for Muslims, Islamic
  Shari'a law supersedes civil law in a number of areas

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Sultan and Prime Minister His Majesty Paduka Seri
  Baginda Sultan Haji HASSANAL Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah (since 5
  October 1967); note--the monarch is both the chief of state and head
  of government
  head of government: Sultan and Prime Minister His Majesty Paduka
  Seri Baginda Sultan Haji HASSANAL Bolkiah Mu'izzaddin Waddaulah
  (since 5 October 1967); note--the monarch is both the chief of state
  and head of government
  cabinet: Council of Cabinet Ministers appointed and presided over by
  the monarch; deals with executive matters
  note: there is also a Religious Council (members appointed by the
  monarch) that advises on religious matters, a Privy Council (members
  appointed by the monarch) that deals with constitutional matters,
  and the Council of Succession (members appointed by the monarch)
  that determines the succession to the throne if the need arises
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council or Majlis
  Masyuarat Megeri (a privy council that serves only in a consultative
  capacity; NA seats; members appointed by the monarch)
  elections: last held in March 1962
  note: in 1970 the Council was changed to an appointive body by
  decree of the monarch; an elected Legislative Council is being
  considered as part of constitutional reform, but elections are
  unlikely for several years

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice and judges are
  sworn in by the monarch for three-year terms

Political parties and leaders: Brunei Solidarity National Party
  president]; the PPKB is the only legal political party in Brunei; it
  was registered in 1985, but became largely inactive after 1988; it
  has less than 200 registered party members; other parties include
  Brunei People's Party or PRB (banned in 1962) and Brunei National
  Democratic Party (registered in May 1985, deregistered by the Brunei
  Government in 1988)

International organization participation: APEC, ASEAN, C, CCC,
  ESCAP, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFRCS, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW,
  UN, UNCTAD, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Pengiran Anak Dato Haji PUTEH Ibni
  Mohammad Alam
  chancery: Watergate, Suite 300, 3rd floor, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW,
  Washington, DC 20037

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Glen Robert RASE
  embassy: Third Floor, Teck Guan Plaza, Jalan Sultan, Bandar Seri
  Begawan
  mailing address: PSC 470 (BSB), FPO AP 96534-0001

Flag description: yellow with two diagonal bands of white (top,
  almost double width) and black starting from the upper hoist side;
  the national emblem in red is superimposed at the center; the emblem
  includes a swallow-tailed flag on top of a winged column within an
  upturned crescent above a scroll and flanked by two upraised hands



Economy



Economy--overview: This small, wealthy economy is a mixture of
  foreign and domestic entrepreneurship, government regulation and
  welfare measures, and village tradition. It is almost totally
  supported by exports of crude oil and natural gas, with revenues
  from the petroleum sector accounting for over half of GDP. Per
  capita GDP is far above most other Third World countries, and
  substantial income from overseas investment supplements income from
  domestic production. The government provides for all medical
  services and subsidizes food and housing. The government is
  beginning to show progress on its basic policy of diversifying the
  economy away from oil and gas. Brunei's leaders are concerned that
  steadily increased integration in the world economy will undermine
  internal social cohesion. Because of low world oil prices and the
  Asian crisis, growth in 1999 is expected to be moderate.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$17,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 46%
  services: 49% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 144,000 (1995 est.); note--includes foreign workers
  and military personnel
  note: temporary residents make up 41% of labor force (1991)

Labor force--by occupation: government 48%, production of oil,
  natural gas, services, and construction 42%, agriculture, forestry,
  and fishing 4%, other 6% (1986 est.)

Unemployment rate: 4.8% (1994 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.5 billion
  expenditures: $2.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $768
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: petroleum, petroleum refining, liquefied natural gas,
  construction

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.48 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.48 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, cassava (tapioca), bananas; water
  buffalo

Exports: $2.62 billion (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil, liquefied natural gas, petroleum
  products

Exports--partners: ASEAN 31%, Japan 27%, South Korea 26%, UK,
  Taiwan (1996 est.)

Imports: $2.65 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  manufactured goods, food, chemicals

Imports--partners: Singapore 29%, UK 19%, US 13%, Malaysia 9%,
  Japan 5% (1994 est.)

Debt--external: $0

Economic aid--recipient: $4.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Bruneian dollar (B$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Bruneian dollars (B$) per US$1--1.6781 (January
  1999), 1.6736 (1998), 1.4848 (1997), 1.4100 (1996), 1.4174 (1995),
  1.5274 (1994); note--the Bruneian dollar is at par with the Singapore
  dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 90,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system: service throughout country is excellent;
  international service good to Europe, US, and East Asia
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 10, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 284,000 (1995 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 173,000 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 13 km (private line)
  narrow gauge: 13 km 0.610-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 1,150 km
  paved: 399 km
  unpaved: 751 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 209 km; navigable by craft drawing less than 1.2 m

Pipelines: crude oil 135 km; petroleum products 418 km; natural
  gas 920 km

Ports and harbors: Bandar Seri Begawan, Kuala Belait, Muara,
  Seria, Tutong

Merchant marine:
  total: 7 liquefied gas tankers (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 348,476
  GRT/340,635 DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Land Forces, Navy, Air Force, Royal Brunei
  Police

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 88,628 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 51,270 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 3,078 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $343 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 6% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: possibly involved in a complex dispute
  over the Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan,
  and Vietnam; in 1984, Brunei established an exclusive fishing zone
  that encompasses Louisa Reef in the southern Spratly Islands, but
  has not publicly claimed the island



======================================================================




@Bulgaria
--------





Introduction



Background: A Slavic state, Bulgaria achieved independence in
  1908 after 500 years of Ottoman rule. Bulgaria fought on the losing
  side in both World Wars. After World War II it fell within the
  Soviet sphere of influence. Communist domination ended in 1991 with
  the dissolution of the USSR, and Bulgaria began the contentious
  process of moving toward political democracy and a market economy.
  In addition to the problems of structural economic reform,
  particularly privatization, Bulgaria faces the serious issues of
  keeping inflation under control and unemployment, combatting
  corruption, and curbing black-market and mafia-style crime.



Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between
  Romania and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 43 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 110,910 sq km
  land: 110,550 sq km
  water: 360 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,808 km
  border countries: Greece 494 km, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia 148 km, Romania 608 km, Serbia and Montenegro 318 km (all
  with Serbia), Turkey 240 km

Coastline: 354 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; cold, damp winters; hot, dry summers

Terrain: mostly mountains with lowlands in north and southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
  highest point: Musala 2,925 m

Natural resources: bauxite, copper, lead, zinc, coal, timber,
  arable land

Land use:
  arable land: 37%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 16%
  forests and woodland: 35%
  other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,370 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes, landslides

Environment--current issues: air pollution from industrial
  emissions; rivers polluted from raw sewage, heavy metals,
  detergents; deforestation; forest damage from air pollution and
  resulting acid rain; soil contamination from heavy metals from
  metallurgical plants and industrial wastes

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location near Turkish Straits; controls
  key land routes from Europe to Middle East and Asia



People



Population: 8,194,772 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 16% (male 674,643; female 641,943)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 2,744,634; female 2,800,816)
  65 years and over: 16% (male 570,766; female 761,970) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.52% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 8.71 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.2 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.37 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.27 years
  male: 68.72 years
  female: 76.03 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.23 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Bulgarian(s)
  adjective: Bulgarian

Ethnic groups: Bulgarian 85%, Turk 9%, other 6%

Religions: Bulgarian Orthodox 85%, Muslim 13%, Jewish 0.8%, Roman
  Catholic 0.5%, Uniate Catholic 0.2%, Protestant, Gregorian-Armenian,
  and other 0.5%

Languages: Bulgarian, secondary languages closely correspond to
  ethnic breakdown

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 97% (1992 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Bulgaria
  conventional short form: Bulgaria

Data code: BU

Government type: republic

Capital: Sofia

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (oblasti, singular--oblast);
  Burgas, Grad Sofiya, Khaskovo, Lovech, Montana, Plovdiv, Ruse,
  Sofiya, Varna

Independence: 22 September 1908 (from Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 March (1878)

Constitution: adopted 12 July 1991

Legal system: civil law and criminal law based on Roman law;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Petar STOYANOV (since 22 January 1997);
  Vice President Todor KAVALDZHIEV (since 22 January 1997)
  head of government: Chairman of the Council of Ministers (Prime
  Minister) Ivan Kostov (since 19 May 1997); Deputy Prime Ministers
  Aleksandur BOZHKOV (since 12 February 1997), Evgeniy BAKURDZHIEV
  (since 21 May 1997), Veselin METODIEV (since 21 May 1997)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the National Assembly
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 27 October
  and 3 November 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); chairman of the
  Council of Ministers (prime minister) nominated by the president;
  deputy prime ministers nominated by the prime minister
  election results: Petar STOYANOV elected president; percent of
  vote--Petar STOYANOV 59.73%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Narodno
  Sobranie (240 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 19 April 1997 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--UDF 52%, BSP 22%, ANS 7%,
  Euro-left 5.5%, BBB 4.95%; seats by party--UDF 137, BSP 58, ANS 19,
  Euro-left 14, BBB 12

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chairman appointed for a
  seven-year term by the president; Constitutional Court, 12 justices
  appointed or elected for nine-year terms

Political parties and leaders: Bulgarian Socialist Party or BSP
  (coalition led mainly by Movement for Rights and Freedoms or DPS
  cochairmen]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Democratic Alliance for
  the Republic or DAR; New Union for Democracy or NUD; Podkrepa Labor
  Confederation; Confederation of Independent Trade Unions of Bulgaria
  or CITUB; Bulgarian Agrarian National Union--United or BZNS;
  Bulgarian Democratic Center; "Nikola Petkov" Bulgarian Agrarian
  National Union; Internal Macedonian Revolutionary Organization or
  IMRO; agrarian movement; numerous regional, ethnic, and national
  interest groups with various agendas

International organization participation: ACCT, BIS, BSEC, CCC,
  CE, CEI, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, G- 9, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member),
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  MONUA, NAM (guest), NSG, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Philip DIMITROV
  chancery: 1621 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Avis T. BOHLEN
  embassy: 1 Saborna Street, Sofia
  mailing address: American Embassy Sofia, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5740

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top),
  green, and red; the national emblem formerly on the hoist side of
  the white stripe has been removed--it contained a rampant lion within
  a wreath of wheat ears below a red five-pointed star and above a
  ribbon bearing the dates 681 (first Bulgarian state established) and
  1944 (liberation from Nazi control)



Economy



Economy--overview: In April 1997, the current ruling Union of
  Democratic Forces (UDF) government won pre-term parliamentary
  elections and introduced an IMF currency board system which
  succeeded in stabilizing the economy. The triple digit inflation of
  1996 and 1997 has given way to an official consumer price increase
  of 1% in 1998. Following declines in GDP in both 1996 and 1997, the
  economy grew an officially estimated 4% in 1998. In September 1998,
  the IMF approved a three-year Extended Fund Facility, which provides
  credits worth approximately $864 million, designed to support
  Bulgaria's reform efforts. The government's structural reform
  program includes: (a) privatization and, where appropriate,
  liquidation of state-owned enterprises (SOEs); (b) liberalization of
  agricultural policies, including creating conditions for the
  development of a land market; (c) reform of the country's social
  insurance programs; and, (d) reforms to strengthen contract
  enforcement and fight crime and corruption.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$33.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 26%
  industry: 29%
  services: 45% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.3%
  highest 10%: 24.7% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 3.57 million (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 12.2% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $4.1 billion
  expenditures: $3.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: machine building and metal working, food processing,
  chemicals, textiles, construction materials, ferrous and nonferrous
  metals

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 41.575 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 51.17%
  hydro: 6.1%
  nuclear: 42.73%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 41.08 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2.045 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.55 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, oilseed, vegetables, fruits,
  tobacco; livestock

Exports: $4.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment; metals, minerals,
  and fuels; chemicals and plastics; food, textiles (1997)

Exports--partners: Italy 12%, Germany 10%, Turkey, Greece, Russia
  (1997)

Imports: $4.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: fuels, minerals, and raw materials;
  machinery and equipment; metals and ores; chemicals and plastics;
  food, textiles (1997)

Imports--partners: Russia 28%, Germany 11%, Italy, Greece, US
  (1997)

Debt--external: $9.3 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 lev (Lv) = 100 stotinki

Exchange rates: leva (Lv) per US$1--1,685.10 (January 1999),
  1,760.36 (1998), 1,681.88 (1997), 177.89 (1996), 67.17 (1995), 54.13
  (1994)
  note: the official rate is pegged to the euro as of 1 January 1999

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2,773,293 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: almost two-thirds of the lines are residential
  domestic: extensive but antiquated transmission system of coaxial
  cable and microwave radio relay; telephone service is available in
  most villages
  international: direct dialing to 36 countries; satellite earth
  stations--1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region); Intelsat available
  through a Greek earth station

Radio broadcast stations: AM 24, FM 93, shortwave 2 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 33 (in addition, there are two
  relays of Russian program OK-1 and two relays of TV-5 Europe) (1997)

Televisions: 2.1 million (May 1990 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,292 km
  standard gauge: 4,047 km 1.435-m gauge (2,650 km electrified; 917 km
  double track)
  narrow gauge: 245 km 0.760-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 36,724 km
  paved: 33,786 km (including 314 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 2,938 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 470 km (1987)

Pipelines: crude oil 193 km; petroleum products 525 km; natural
  gas 1,400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Burgas, Lom, Nesebur, Ruse, Varna, Vidin

Merchant marine:
  total: 89 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,005,092 GRT/1,508,614
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 44, cargo 20, chemical tanker 4, container 2,
  oil tanker 8, passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, refrigerated
  cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 61 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 56
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 19
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
  under 914 m: 25 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Border
  Troops, Internal Troops

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,028,930 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,693,597 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 59,887 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $226.8 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: twenty bilateral agreements remain
  unsigned in a dispute over Bulgarian nonrecognition of Macedonian as
  a language distinct from Bulgarian

Illicit drugs: major European transshipment point for Southwest
  Asian heroin and, to a lesser degree, South American cocaine for the
  European market; limited producer of precursor chemicals;
  significant producer of amphetamines, much of which are consumed in
  the Middle East



======================================================================




@Burkina Faso
------------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, north of Ghana

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 274,200 sq km
  land: 273,800 sq km
  water: 400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Colorado

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,192 km
  border countries: Benin 306 km, Ghana 548 km, Cote d'Ivoire 584 km,
  Mali 1,000 km, Niger 628 km, Togo 126 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; warm, dry winters; hot, wet summers

Terrain: mostly flat to dissected, undulating plains; hills in
  west and southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mouhoun (Black Volta) River 200 m
  highest point: Tena Kourou 749 m

Natural resources: manganese, limestone, marble; small deposits
  of gold, antimony, copper, nickel, bauxite, lead, phosphates, zinc,
  silver

Land use:
  arable land: 13%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 22%
  forests and woodland: 50%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 200 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts

Environment--current issues: recent droughts and desertification
  severely affecting agricultural activities, population distribution,
  and the economy; overgrazing; soil degradation; deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 11,575,898 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 2,792,895; female 2,759,072)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 2,700,253; female 2,978,168)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 147,017; female 198,493) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.7% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 45.84 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 17.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.25 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 107.19 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 45.89 years
  male: 44.97 years
  female: 46.84 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.56 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Burkinabe (singular and plural)
  adjective: Burkinabe

Ethnic groups: Mossi about 24%, Gurunsi, Senufo, Lobi, Bobo,
  Mande, Fulani

Religions: indigenous beliefs 40%, Muslim 50%, Christian (mainly
  Roman Catholic) 10%

Languages: French (official), tribal languages belonging to
  Sudanic family, spoken by 90% of the population

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 19.2%
  male: 29.5%
  female: 9.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Burkina Faso
  former: Upper Volta

Data code: UV

Government type: parliamentary

Capital: Ouagadougou

Administrative divisions: 30 provinces; Bam, Bazega, Bougouriba,
  Boulgou, Boulkiemde, Ganzourgou, Gnagna, Gourma, Houe, Kadiogo,
  Kenedougou, Komoe, Kossi, Kouritenga, Mouhoun, Namentenga, Naouri,
  Oubritenga, Oudalan, Passore, Poni, Sanguie, Sanmatenga, Seno,
  Sissili, Soum, Sourou, Tapoa, Yatenga, Zoundweogo
  note: a new electoral code was approved by the National Assembly in
  January 1997; the number of administrative provinces was increased
  from 30 to 45 (Bale, Bam, Banwa, Bazega, Bougouriba, Boulgou,
  Boulkiemde, Comoe, Ganzourgou, Gnagna, Gourma, Houet, Ioba, Kadiogo,
  Kenedougou, Komandjari, Kompienga, Kossi, Koupelogo, Kouritenga,
  Kourweogo, Leraba, Loroum, Mouhoun, Nahouri, Namentenga, Nayala,
  Naumbiel, Oubritenga, Oudalan, Passore, Poni, Samentenga, Sanguie,
  Seno, Sissili, Soum, Sourou, Tapoa, Tuy, Yagha, Yatenga, Ziro,
  Zondomo, Zoundweogo)

Independence: 5 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 4 August (1983)

Constitution: 2 June 1991

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law

Suffrage: universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Captain Blaise COMPAORE (since 15 October
  1987)
  head of government: Prime Minister Kadre Desire OUEDRAOGO (since 6
  February 1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  the number of terms which a president may serve is not limited;
  election last held 15 November 1998 (next to be held NA 2005); prime
  minister appointed by the president with the consent of the
  legislature
  election results: Blaise COMPAORE reelected president with 88%
  percent of the vote, with 56% of voter turnout

Legislative branch: bicameral; consists of a National Assembly or
  Assemblee des Deputes Populaires (ADP) (111 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and the purely
  consultative Chamber of Representations or Chambre des Representants
  (120 seats; members are appointed to serve three-year terms)
  elections: National Assembly election last held 11 May 1997 (next to
  be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--CDP
  101, PDP 6, RDA 2, ADF 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Appeals Court

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy and
  Nongma OUEDRAOGO, president]; Burkinabe Environmentalist Party or

Political pressure groups and leaders: watchdog/political action
  groups throughout the country in both organizations and communities;
  Burkinabe Movement for Human Rights or HBDHP; Burkinabe General
  Confederation of Labor or CGTB; National Confederation of Burkinabe
  Workers or CNTB; National Organization of Free Unions or ONSL; Group
  of 14 February

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU,
  MINURCA, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WADB, WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Gaetan Rimwangulya OUEDRAOGO
  chancery: 2340 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Sharon P. WILKINSON
  embassy: Avenue Raoul Follerau, Ouagadougou
  mailing address: 01 B. P. 35, Ouagadougou

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  green with a yellow five-pointed star in the center; uses the
  popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: One of the poorest countries in the world,
  landlocked Burkina Faso has a high population density, few natural
  resources, and a fragile soil. About 85% of the population is
  engaged in (mainly subsistence) agriculture which is highly
  vulnerable to variations in rainfall. Industry remains dominated by
  unprofitable government-controlled corporations. Following the
  African franc currency devaluation in January 1994 the government
  updated its development program in conjunction with international
  agencies, and exports and economic growth have increased.
  Maintenance of its macroeconomic progress in 1999-2000 depends on
  continued low inflation, reduction in the trade deficit, and reforms
  designed to encourage private investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$11.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 35%
  industry: 25%
  services: 40% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.679 million (persons 10 years old and over,
  according to a sample survey taken in 1991)
  note: a large part of the male labor force migrates annually to
  neighboring countries for seasonal employment

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 85%, industry, commerce,
  services, government (1998)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $277 million
  expenditures: $492 million, including capital expenditures of $233
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: cotton lint, beverages, agricultural processing,
  soap, cigarettes, textiles, gold

Industrial production growth rate: 4.2% (1995)

Electricity--production: 220 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 63.64%
  hydro: 36.36%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 220 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: peanuts, shea nuts, sesame, cotton,
  sorghum, millet, corn, rice; livestock

Exports: $400 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: cotton, animal products, gold

Exports--partners: Cote d'Ivoire, France, Italy, Mali

Imports: $700 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery, food products, petroleum

Imports--partners: Cote d'Ivoire, France, Togo, Nigeria

Debt--external: $715 million (December 1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $484.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (December 1998), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 21,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: all services only fair
  domestic: microwave radio relay, open wire, and radiotelephone
  communication stations
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 17, shortwave 1 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 49,000 (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 622 km (517 km from Ouagadougou to the Cote d'Ivoire border
  and 105 km from Ouagadougou to Kaya)
  narrow gauge: 622 km 1.000-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
  total: 12,506 km
  paved: 2,001 km
  unpaved: 10,505 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 33 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 31
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 13
  under 914 m: 16 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
  National Police, People's Militia

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,399,724 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,230,713 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $66 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Burma
-----





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Andaman Sea and the
  Bay of Bengal, between Bangladesh and Thailand

Geographic coordinates: 22 00 N, 98 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 678,500 sq km
  land: 657,740 sq km
  water: 20,760 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,876 km
  border countries: Bangladesh 193 km, China 2,185 km, India 1,463 km,
  Laos 235 km, Thailand 1,800 km

Coastline: 1,930 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; cloudy, rainy, hot, humid summers
  (southwest monsoon, June to September); less cloudy, scant rainfall,
  mild temperatures, lower humidity during winter (northeast monsoon,
  December to April)

Terrain: central lowlands ringed by steep, rugged highlands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Andaman Sea 0 m
  highest point: Hkakabo Razi 5,881 m

Natural resources: petroleum, timber, tin, antimony, zinc,
  copper, tungsten, lead, coal, some marble, limestone, precious
  stones, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 15%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 49%
  other: 34% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10,680 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes and cyclones; flooding
  and landslides common during rainy season (June to September);
  periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation; industrial pollution
  of air, soil, and water; inadequate sanitation and water treatment
  contribute to disease

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location near major Indian Ocean
  shipping lanes



People



Population: 48,081,302 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 36% (male 8,883,099; female 8,542,087)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 14,343,888; female 14,293,233)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 906,517; female 1,112,478) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.61% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 28.48 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.39 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 76.25 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 54.74 years
  male: 53.24 years
  female: 56.32 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.63 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Burmese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Burmese

Ethnic groups: Burman 68%, Shan 9%, Karen 7%, Rakhine 4%, Chinese
  3%, Mon 2%, Indian 2%, other 5%

Religions: Buddhist 89%, Christian 4% (Baptist 3%, Roman Catholic
  1%), Muslim 4%, animist beliefs 1%, other 2%

Languages: Burmese, minority ethnic groups have their own
  languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 83.1%
  male: 88.7%
  female: 77.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Union of Burma
  conventional short form: Burma
  local long form: Pyidaungzu Myanma Naingngandaw (translated by the
  US Government as Union of Myanma and by the Burmese as Union of
  Myanmar)
  local short form: Myanma Naingngandaw
  former: Socialist Republic of the Union of Burma

Data code: BM

Government type: military regime

Capital: Rangoon (regime refers to the capital as Yangon)

Administrative divisions: 7 divisions* (yin-mya, singular--yin)
  and 7 states (pyine-mya, singular--pyine); Chin State, Ayeyarwady*,
  Bago*, Kachin State, Kayin State, Kayah State, Magway*, Mandalay*,
  Mon State, Rakhine State, Sagaing*, Shan State, Tanintharyi*, Yangon*

Independence: 4 January 1948 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 January (1948)

Constitution: 3 January 1974 (suspended since 18 September 1988);
  national convention started on 9 January 1993 to draft a new
  constitution; chapter headings and three of 15 sections have been
  approved

Legal system: does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Prime Minister and Chairman of the State Peace and
  Development Council Gen. THAN SHWE (since 23 April 1992); note--the
  prime minister is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: Prime Minister and Chairman of the State Peace
  and Development Council Gen. THAN SHWE (since 23 April 1992);
  note--the prime minister is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: State Peace and Development Council (SPDC); military junta,
  so named 15 November 1997, which initially assumed power 18
  September 1988 under the name State Law and Order Restoration
  Council; the SPDC oversees the cabinet
  elections: none; the prime minister assumed power upon resignation
  of the former prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Pyithu
  Hluttaw (485 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 27 May 1990, but Assembly never convened
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA%; seats by party--NLD
  396, NUP 10, other 79

Judicial branch: limited; remnants of the British-era legal
  system in place, but there is no guarantee of a fair public trial;
  the judiciary is not independent of the executive

Political parties and leaders: National Unity Party or NUP
  SHWE, chairman, AUNG SAN SUU KYI, general secretary]; Union
  Solidarity and Development Association or USDA (proregime, a social
  eight minor legal parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Coalition
  individuals legitimately elected to the People's Assembly but not
  recognized by the military regime; the group fled to a border area
  and joined with insurgents in December 1990 to form a parallel
  government; Kachin Independence Army or KIA; United Wa State Army or
  UWSA; Karen National Union or KNU; several Shan factions; All Burma
  Student Democratic Front or ABSDF

International organization participation: AsDB, ASEAN, CCC, CP,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU,
  NAM, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador TIN WINN
  chancery: 2300 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Kent M.
  WIEDEMANN
  embassy: 581 Merchant Street, Rangoon (GPO 521)
  mailing address: Box B, APO AP 96546

Flag description: red with a blue rectangle in the upper
  hoist-side corner bearing, all in white, 14 five-pointed stars
  encircling a cogwheel containing a stalk of rice; the 14 stars
  represent the 14 administrative divisions



Economy



Economy--overview: Burma has a mixed economy with private activity
  dominant in agriculture, light industry, and transport, and with
  substantial state-controlled activity, mainly in energy, heavy
  industry, and the rice trade. Government policy in the last 10
  years, 1989-98, has aimed at revitalizing the economy after three
  decades of tight central planning. Thus, private activity has
  markedly increased; foreign investment has been encouraged, so far
  with moderate success; and efforts continue to increase the
  efficiency of state enterprises. Published estimates of Burma's
  foreign trade are greatly understated because of the volume of
  black-market trade. A major ongoing problem is the failure to
  achieve monetary and fiscal stability. Although Burma remains a poor
  Asian country, its rich resources furnish the potential for
  substantial long-term increases in income, exports, and living
  standards. The short-term outlook is for continued sluggish growth
  because of internal unrest, minimal foreign investment, and the
  large trade deficit.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$56.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 59%
  industry: 11%
  services: 30% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 50% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 18.8 million (FY95/96 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65.2%, industry 14.3%,
  trade 10.1%, government 6.3%, other 4.1% (FY88/89 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $7.9 billion
  expenditures: $12.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.7
  billion (FY96/97)

Industries: agricultural processing; textiles and footwear; wood
  and wood products; copper, tin, tungsten, iron; construction
  materials; pharmaceuticals; fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 9.2% (FY95/96 est.)

Electricity--production: 3.75 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 61.33%
  hydro: 38.67%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3.75 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: paddy rice, corn, oilseed, sugarcane,
  pulses; hardwood

Exports: $940 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: pulses and beans, teak, rice, rubber,
  hardwood

Exports--partners: India 17%, Singapore 14%, China 11%, Thailand
  9%, Japan 4% (1997)

Imports: $2.2 billion (1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transport equipment, construction
  materials, food products

Imports--partners: Singapore 30%, Japan 17%, China 10%, Thailand
  10%, Malaysia 7% (1997)

Debt--external: $4.3 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $156.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 kyat (K) = 100 pyas

Exchange rates: kyats (K) per US$1--6.1163 (January 1999), 6.3432
  (1998), 6.2418 (1997), 5.9176 (1996), 5.6670 (1995), 5.9749 (1994);
  unofficial--310-350 (1998)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 122,195 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: meets minimum requirements for local and
  intercity service for business and government; international service
  is good
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 3 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1998 est.)

Televisions: 88,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,740 km
  narrow gauge: 3,740 km 1.000-m gauge (1997)

Highways:
  total: 28,200 km
  paved: 3,440 km
  unpaved: 24,760 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 12,800 km; 3,200 km navigable by large commercial
  vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 1,343 km; natural gas 330 km

Ports and harbors: Bassein, Bhamo, Chauk, Mandalay, Moulmein,
  Myitkyina, Rangoon, Akyab (Sittwe), Tavoy

Merchant marine:
  total: 41 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 464,478 GRT/695,923 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 14, cargo 20, container 2, oil tanker 3,
  passenger-cargo 2
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 2 countries:
  Japan owns 2 ships, US 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 80 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 11
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 69
  over 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
  914 to 1,523 m: 23
  under 914 m: 32 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 12,475,987
  females age 15-49: 12,224,947 (1999 est.)
  note: both sexes liable for military service

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 6,660,309
  females age 15-49: 6,510,730 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 496,912
  females: 477,803 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3.904 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.1% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: sporadic conflict with Thailand over
  alignment of border

Illicit drugs: world's largest producer of illicit opium
  (cultivation in 1998--130,300 hectares, a 16% decline from 1997;
  potential production--1,750 metric tons, down 26% due to drought and
  the first eradication effort since the current government took power
  in 1987) and a minor producer of cannabis for the international drug
  trade; surrender of drug warlord KHUN SA's Mong Tai Army in January
  1996 was hailed by Rangoon as a major counternarcotics success, but
  lack of serious government commitment and resources continues to
  hinder the overall antidrug effort; growing role in the production
  of methamphetamines for regional consumption



======================================================================




@Burundi
-------





Introduction



Background: Since the end of the Belgian trusteeship in 1962,
  Burundi has suffered from ethnic uprisings, coups, and other
  societal dislocations. In a series of waves since October 1993,
  hundreds of thousands of refugees have fled the ethnic violence
  between the Hutu and Tutsi factions in Burundi and have crossed into
  Rwanda, Tanzania, and Zaire (now called the Democratic Republic of
  the Congo or DROC). Since October 1996, an estimated 120,000
  Burundian Hutu refugees from the DROC have been compelled to return
  to Burundi because of insecurity in the region. Continuing ethnic
  violence with the Tutsi has caused additional Hutu to flee to
  Tanzania, thus raising their numbers in the United Nations Office of
  the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR) camps in that country to
  about 260,000. Burundian troops have joined armies from Rwanda and
  Uganda and Congolese Tutsi in trying to overthrow DROC President
  KABILA and restore security to their borders with the Democratic
  Republic of the Congo.



Geography



Location: Central Africa, east of Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 3 30 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 27,830 sq km
  land: 25,650 sq km
  water: 2,180 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 974 km
  border countries: Democratic Republic of the Congo 233 km, Rwanda
  290 km, Tanzania 451 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: equatorial; high plateau with considerable altitude
  variation (772 m to 2,760 m); average annual temperature varies with
  altitude from 23 to 17 degrees centigrade but is generally moderate
  as the average altitude is about 1,700 m; average annual rainfall is
  about 150 cm; wet seasons from February to May and September to
  November, and dry seasons from June to August and December to January

Terrain: hilly and mountainous, dropping to a plateau in east,
  some plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lake Tanganyika 772 m
  highest point: Mount Heha 2,670 m

Natural resources: nickel, uranium, rare earth oxides, peat,
  cobalt, copper, platinum (not yet exploited), vanadium

Land use:
  arable land: 44%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 36%
  forests and woodland: 3%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 140 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding, landslides

Environment--current issues: soil erosion as a result of
  overgrazing and the expansion of agriculture into marginal lands;
  deforestation (little forested land remains because of uncontrolled
  cutting of trees for fuel); habitat loss threatens wildlife
  populations

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: landlocked; straddles crest of the Nile-Congo
  watershed



People



Population: 5,735,937 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 47% (male 1,349,995; female 1,345,201)
  15-64 years: 50% (male 1,392,880; female 1,479,835)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 69,748; female 98,278) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.54% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.27 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 17.23 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 11.33 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 99.36 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 45.44 years
  male: 43.54 years
  female: 47.41 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.33 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Burundian(s)
  adjective: Burundi

Ethnic groups: Hutu (Bantu) 85%, Tutsi (Hamitic) 14%, Twa (Pygmy)
  1%, Europeans 3,000, South Asians 2,000

Religions: Christian 67% (Roman Catholic 62%, Protestant 5%),
  indigenous beliefs 32%, Muslim 1%

Languages: Kirundi (official), French (official), Swahili (along
  Lake Tanganyika and in the Bujumbura area)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 35.3%
  male: 49.3%
  female: 22.5% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Burundi
  conventional short form: Burundi
  local long form: Republika y'u Burundi
  local short form: Burundi

Data code: BY

Government type: republic

Capital: Bujumbura

Administrative divisions: 15 provinces; Bubanza, Bujumbura,
  Bururi, Cankuzo, Cibitoke, Gitega, Karuzi, Kayanza, Kirundo,
  Makamba, Muramvya, Muyinga, Ngozi, Rutana, Ruyigi
  note: there may be a new province named Mwaro

Independence: 1 July 1962 (from UN trusteeship under Belgian
  administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 July (1962)

Constitution: 13 March 1992; provided for establishment of a
  plural political system; supplanted on 6 June 1998 by a Transitional
  Constitution which enlarged the National Assembly and created two
  vice presidents

Legal system: based on German and Belgian civil codes and
  customary law; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Pierre BUYOYA (interim president since 27
  September 1996 and officially sworn in on 11 June 1998) is chief of
  state and head of government and is assisted by First Vice President
  Frederic BAMVUGINYUMVIRA (since NA) and Second Vice President
  Mathias SINAMENYA (since NA); note--former President NTIBANTUNGANYA
  was overthrown in a coup on 25 July 1996
  head of government: President Pierre BUYOYA is both chief of state
  and head of government; assisted by First Vice President Frederic
  BAMVUGINYUMVIRA (since NA) and Second Vice President Mathias
  SINAMENYA (since NA)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by president
  elections: NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (81 seats; note--new Transitional Constitution calls for
  121 seats; members are elected by popular vote on a proportional
  basis to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 29 June 1993 (next was scheduled to be held in
  1998, but suspended by presidential decree in 1996)
  election results: percent of vote by party--FRODEBU 71%, UPRONA
  21.4%; seats by party--FRODEBU 65, UPRONA 16; other parties won too
  small shares of the vote to win seats in the assembly

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme

Political parties and leaders: Unity for National Progress or
  note: opposition parties, legalized in March 1992, include Burundi
  African Alliance for the Salvation or ABASA; Rally for Democracy and
  BAGAZA]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  CEEAC, CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU,
  NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas NDIKUMANA
  chancery: Suite 212, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Morris N. HUGHES, Jr.
  embassy: Avenue des Etats-Unis, Bujumbura
  mailing address: B. P. 1720, Bujumbura

Flag description: divided by a white diagonal cross into red
  panels (top and bottom) and green panels (hoist side and outer side)
  with a white disk superimposed at the center bearing three red
  six-pointed stars outlined in green arranged in a triangular design
  (one star above, two stars below)



Economy



Economy--overview: Burundi is a landlocked, resource-poor country
  with a poorly developed manufacturing sector. The economy is
  predominately agricultural with roughly 90% of the population
  dependent on subsistence agriculture. Its economic health depends on
  the coffee crop, which accounts for 80% of foreign exchange
  earnings. The ability to pay for imports therefore rests largely on
  the vagaries of the climate and the international coffee market.
  Since October 1993 the nation has suffered from massive ethnic-based
  violence which has resulted in the death of perhaps 250,000 persons
  and the displacement of about 800,000 others. Foods, medicines, and
  electricity remain in short supply.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$4.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$740 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 58%
  industry: 18%
  services: 24% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 36.2% (1990 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 17% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.9 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 93%, government 4%,
  industry and commerce 1.5%, services 1.5% (1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $165 million, including capital expenditures of $42.6
  million (1998 est.)

Industries: light consumer goods such as blankets, shoes, soap;
  assembly of imported components; public works construction; food
  processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 122 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 1.64%
  hydro: 98.36%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 152 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 30 million kWh (1996)
  note: imports some electricity from Democratic Republic of the Congo

Agriculture--products: coffee, cotton, tea, corn, sorghum, sweet
  potatoes, bananas, manioc (tapioca); beef, milk, hides

Exports: $49 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: coffee, tea, cotton, hides

Exports--partners: UK, Germany, Benelux, Switzerland (1997)

Imports: $102 million f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: capital goods, petroleum products,
  foodstuffs, consumer goods

Imports--partners: Benelux, France, Germany, Japan (1997)

Debt--external: $1.1 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $286.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Burundi franc (FBu) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Burundi francs (FBu) per US$1--508 (January 1999),
  477.77 (1998), 352.35 (1997), 302.75 (1996), 249.76 (1995), 252.66
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 7,200 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: primitive system
  domestic: sparse system of open wire, radiotelephone communications,
  and low-capacity microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 4,500 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 14,480 km
  paved: 1,028 km
  unpaved: 13,452 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: Lake Tanganyika

Ports and harbors: Bujumbura

Airports: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (includes naval and air units),
  paramilitary Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 16 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,260,909 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 658,115 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 73,271 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $25 million (1993)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.6% (1993)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Cambodia
--------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand,
  between Thailand, Vietnam, and Laos

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 181,040 sq km
  land: 176,520 sq km
  water: 4,520 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Oklahoma

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,572 km
  border countries: Laos 541 km, Thailand 803 km, Vietnam 1,228 km

Coastline: 443 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy, monsoon season (May to November); dry
  season (December to April); little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly low, flat plains; mountains in southwest and north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Gulf of Thailand 0 m
  highest point: Phnum Aoral 1,810 m

Natural resources: timber, gemstones, some iron ore, manganese,
  phosphates, hydropower potential

Land use:
  arable land: 13%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 11%
  forests and woodland: 66%
  other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 920 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: monsoonal rains (June to November); flooding;
  occasional droughts

Environment--current issues: illegal logging activities throughout
  the country and strip mining for gems in the western region along
  the border with Thailand are resulting in habitat loss and declining
  biodiversity (in particular, destruction of mangrove swamps
  threatens natural fisheries); soil erosion; in rural areas, a
  majority of the population does not have access to potable water;
  toxic waste delivery from Taiwan sparked unrest in Kampong Saom
  (Sihanoukville) in December 1998

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Marine Life Conservation, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Geography--note: a land of paddies and forests dominated by the
  Mekong River and Tonle Sap



People



Population: 11,626,520 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 2,667,768; female 2,587,590)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 2,821,772; female 3,197,604)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 143,016; female 208,770) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.49% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.05 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.2 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.88 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 105.06 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 48.24 years
  male: 46.81 years
  female: 49.75 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.81 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Cambodian(s)
  adjective: Cambodian

Ethnic groups: Khmer 90%, Vietnamese 5%, Chinese 1%, other 4%

Religions: Theravada Buddhism 95%, other 5%

Languages: Khmer (official), French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 35%
  male: 48%
  female: 22% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Cambodia
  conventional short form: Cambodia
  local long form: Preahreacheanachakr Kampuchea
  local short form: Kampuchea

Data code: CB

Government type: multiparty liberal democracy under a
  constitutional monarchy established in September 1993

Capital: Phnom Penh

Administrative divisions: 20 provinces (khett, singular and
  plural) and 3 municipalities* (krong, singular and plural); Banteay
  Mean Cheay, Batdambang, Kampong Cham, Kampong Chhnang, Kampong Spoe,
  Kampong Thum, Kampot, Kandal, Kaoh Kong, Keb*, Krachen, Mondol Kiri,
  Otdar Mean Cheay, Phnum Penh*, Pouthisat, Preah Seihanu*
  (Sihanoukville), Preah Vihear, Prey Veng, Rotanah Kiri, Siem Reab,
  Stoeng Treng, Svay Rieng, Takev
  note: there may be a new municipality called Pailin

Independence: 9 November 1953 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 9 November (1953)

Constitution: promulgated 21 September 1993

Legal system: primarily a civil law mixture of French-influenced
  codes from the United Nations Transitional Authority in Cambodia
  (UNTAC) period, royal decrees, and acts of the legislature, with
  influences of customary law and remnants of communist legal theory;
  increasing influence of common law in recent years

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King Norodom SIHANOUK (reinstated 24 September 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister HUN SEN (since 30 November 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch after a vote of confidence by the National Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (122 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 26 July 1998 (next to be held NA 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--CPP 41%, FUNCINPEC 32%,
  SRP 14%, other 13%; seats by party--CPP 64, FUNCINPEC 43, SRP 15
  note: pursuant to the coalition agreement signed in November 1998, a
  Senate is being created and the legislature will thus become
  bicameral

Judicial branch: Supreme Council of the Magistracy, provided for
  in the constitution, was formed in December 1997; a Supreme Court
  and lower courts exercise judicial authority

Political parties and leaders: National United Front for an
  Independent, Neutral, Peaceful, and Cooperative Cambodia or

International organization participation: ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN
  (observer), CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
  IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, NAM, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador VAR HUOTH
  chancery: 4500 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kenneth M. QUINN
  embassy: 27 EO Street 240, Phnom Penh
  mailing address: Box P, APO AP 96546

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red
  (double width), and blue with a white three-towered temple
  representing Angkor Wat outlined in black in the center of the red
  band



Economy



Economy--overview: After four years of solid macroeconomic
  performance, Cambodia's economy slowed dramatically in 1997-98 due
  to the regional economic crisis, civil violence, and political
  infighting. Foreign investment fell off, and tourism has declined
  from 1996 levels. Also, in 1998 the main harvest was hit by drought.
  The long-term development of the economy after decades of war
  remains a daunting challenge. Human resource levels in the
  population are low, particularly in the poverty-ridden countryside.
  The almost total lack of basic infrastructure in the countryside
  will continue to hinder development. Recurring political instability
  and corruption within government discourage foreign investment and
  delay foreign aid. Even so, growth may resume in 1999 at, say, 2%.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 51%
  industry: 15%
  services: 34% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 15% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.5 million to 3 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 80% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $261 million
  expenditures: $496 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995 est.)

Industries: rice milling, fishing, wood and wood products,
  rubber, cement, gem mining, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 195 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 61.54%
  hydro: 38.46%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 195 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, rubber, corn, vegetables

Exports: $736 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: timber, garments, rubber, soybeans, sesame

Exports--partners: Singapore, Japan, Thailand, Hong Kong,
  Indonesia, Malaysia, US

Imports: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: cigarettes, gold, construction materials,
  petroleum products, machinery, motor vehicles

Imports--partners: Singapore, Vietnam, Japan, Australia, Hong
  Kong, Indonesia, Thailand

Debt--external: $2.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $569.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 new riel (CR) = 100 sen

Exchange rates: riels (CR) per US$1--3,772.0 (January 1999),
  3,744.4 (1998), 2,946.3 (1997), 2,624.1 (1996), 2,450.8 (1995),
  2,545.3 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 7,000 (1981 est.)

Telephone system: adequate landline and/or cellular service in
  Phnom Penh and other provincial cities; rural areas have little
  telephone service
  domestic: NA
  international: adequate but expensive landline and cellular service
  available to all countries from Phnom Penh and major provincial
  cities; satellite earth station--1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 3, shortwave 3 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 government-operated station and
  four commercial stations broadcasting to Phnom Penh and major
  provincial cities via relay (1998)

Televisions: 800,000 (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 603 km
  narrow gauge: 603 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 35,769 km
  paved: 4,165 km
  unpaved: 31,604 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 3,700 km navigable all year to craft drawing 0.6 m;
  282 km navigable to craft drawing 1.8 m

Ports and harbors: Kampong Saom (Sihanoukville), Kampot, Krong
  Kaoh Kong, Phnom Penh

Merchant marine:
  total: 141 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 598,867 GRT/841,240 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 1, bulk 16, cargo 108, container 4,
  livestock carrier 2, multifunctional large-load carrier 1, oil
  tankers 1, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 8 countries:
  Aruba 1, Cyprus 7, Egypt 1, South Korea 1, Malta 1, Panama 1, Russia
  5, Singapore 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 20 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 7
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 13
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 10 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Cambodian Armed Forces (RCAF)--created in
  1993 by the merger of the Cambodian People's Armed Forces and the
  two noncommunist resistance armies
  note: there are also resistance forces comprised of the Khmer Rouge
  (also known as the National United Army or NUA) and a separate
  royalist resistance movement

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,562,112 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,428,523 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 119,839 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $85.3 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.4% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: offshore islands and sections of the
  boundary with Vietnam are in dispute; maritime boundary with Vietnam
  not defined; parts of border with Thailand are indefinite; maritime
  boundary with Thailand not clearly defined

Illicit drugs: transshipment site for Golden Triangle heroin;
  possible money laundering; narcotics-related corruption reportedly
  involving some in the government, military, and police; possible
  small-scale opium, heroin, and amphetamine production; large
  producer of cannabis for the international market



======================================================================




@Cameroon
--------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Biafra, between
  Equatorial Guinea and Nigeria

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 N, 12 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 475,440 sq km
  land: 469,440 sq km
  water: 6,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,591 km
  border countries: Central African Republic 797 km, Chad 1,094 km,
  Republic of the Congo 523 km, Equatorial Guinea 189 km, Gabon 298
  km, Nigeria 1,690 km

Coastline: 402 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 50 nm

Climate: varies with terrain, from tropical along coast to
  semiarid and hot in north

Terrain: diverse, with coastal plain in southwest, dissected
  plateau in center, mountains in west, plains in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Fako 4,095 m

Natural resources: petroleum, bauxite, iron ore, timber,
  hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 13%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 78%
  other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 210 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recent volcanic activity with release of
  poisonous gases

Environment--current issues: water-borne diseases are prevalent;
  deforestation; overgrazing; desertification; poaching; overfishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: sometimes referred to as the hinge of Africa



People



Population: 15,456,092 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 46% (male 3,562,553; female 3,528,778)
  15-64 years: 51% (male 3,907,946; female 3,943,035)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 231,521; female 282,259) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.79% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.84 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.95 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population; note--there
  may be some migration but figures are not available

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 75.69 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 51.32 years
  male: 49.75 years
  female: 52.94 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.8 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Cameroonian(s)
  adjective: Cameroonian

Ethnic groups: Cameroon Highlanders 31%, Equatorial Bantu 19%,
  Kirdi 11%, Fulani 10%, Northwestern Bantu 8%, Eastern Nigritic 7%,
  other African 13%, non-African less than 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 51%, Christian 33%, Muslim 16%

Languages: 24 major African language groups, English (official),
  French (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 63.4%
  male: 75%
  female: 52.1% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Cameroon
  conventional short form: Cameroon
  former: French Cameroon

Data code: CM

Government type: unitary republic; multiparty presidential regime
  (opposition parties legalized in 1990)

Capital: Yaounde

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces; Adamaoua, Centre, Est,
  Extreme-Nord, Littoral, Nord, Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Ouest

Independence: 1 January 1960 (from UN trusteeship under French
  administration)

National holiday: National Day, 20 May (1972)

Constitution: 20 May 1972

Legal system: based on French civil law system, with common law
  influence; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Paul BIYA (since 6 November 1982)
  head of government: Prime Minister Peter Mafany MUSONGE (since 19
  September 1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 12 October 1997 (next to be held NA October
  2004); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: President Paul BIYA reelected; percent of
  vote--Paul BIYA 93%; note--supporters of the opposition candidates
  boycotted the elections, making a comparison of vote shares
  relatively meaningless

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (180 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve five-year terms; note--the president can either lengthen or
  shorten the term of the legislature)
  elections: last held 11 May 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--CDPM
  109, SDF 43, UNDP 13, UDC 5, UPC-K 1, MDR 1, MLJC 1; note--7
  contested seats will be filled in an election at a time to be set by
  the Supreme Court
  note: the constitution calls for an upper chamber for the
  legislature, to be called Senate, which the government proposed to
  establish in 1998

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: Cameroon People's Democratic
  Movement or CPDM (government-controlled and the only party until
  major opposition parties: Cameroonian Democratic Union or UDC
  Frederick KODOG]; Union of Cameroonian Democratic Forces or UFOC

Political pressure groups and leaders: Alliance for Change or
  general]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
  C, CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, PCA, UDEAC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNITAR, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jerome MENDOUGA
  chancery: 2349 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John M. YATES
  embassy: Rue Nachtigal, Yaounde
  mailing address: B. P. 817, Yaounde; pouch: American Embassy,
  Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-2520

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), red, and yellow with a yellow five-pointed star centered in
  the red band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: Because of its oil resources and favorable
  agricultural conditions, Cameroon has one of the best-endowed
  primary commodity economies in sub-Saharan Africa. Still, it faces
  many of the serious problems facing other underdeveloped countries,
  such as a top-heavy civil service and a generally unfavorable
  climate for business enterprise. Since 1990, the government has
  embarked on various IMF and World Bank programs designed to spur
  business investment, increase efficiency in agriculture, improve
  trade, and recapitalize the nation's banks. The government, however,
  has failed to press forward vigorously with these programs. The
  latest enhanced structural adjustment agreement was signed in
  October 1997; the parties hope this will prove more successful, yet
  government mismanagement and corruption remain problems. Inflation
  has been brought back under control. Progress toward privatization
  of remaining state industry may support economic growth in 1999-2000.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$29.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 42%
  industry: 22%
  services: 36% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 40% (1984 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 30% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.23 billion
  expenditures: $2.23 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: petroleum production and refining, food processing,
  light consumer goods, textiles, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 2.73 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 2.93%
  hydro: 97.07%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 2.73 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, cocoa, cotton, rubber, bananas,
  oilseed, grains, root starches; livestock; timber

Exports: $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: crude oil and petroleum products, lumber,
  cocoa beans, aluminum, coffee, cotton

Exports--partners: Italy 25%, Spain 20%, France 16%, Netherlands
  7% (1997 est.)

Imports: $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machines and electrical equipment, transport
  equipment, fuel, food

Imports--partners: France 25%, Nigeria 8%, US 8%, Germany 6% (1997
  est.)

Debt--external: $8.7 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $606.1 million (1995); note?France signed
  two loan agreements totaling $55 million in September 1997, and the
  Paris Club agreed in October 1997 to reduce the official debt by 50%
  and to reschedule it on favorable terms with a consolidation of
  payments due through 2000

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--575 (January 1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 36,737 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: available only to business and government
  domestic: cable, microwave radio relay, and tropospheric scatter
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 11, FM 8, shortwave 3 (1998)

Radios: 6 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1998)

Televisions: 15,000 (1998)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,104 km
  narrow gauge: 1,104 km 1.000-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
  total: 34,300 km
  paved: 4,288 km
  unpaved: 30,012 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 2,090 km; of decreasing importance

Ports and harbors: Bonaberi, Douala, Garoua, Kribi, Tiko

Airports: 52 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 11
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 41
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 21
  under 914 m: 12 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Infantry), Air
  Force, National Gendarmerie, Presidential Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,388,643 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,716,285 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 165,670 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $155 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: delimitation of international boundaries
  in the vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border
  incidents in the past, is completed and awaits ratification by
  Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria; dispute with Nigeria over land
  and maritime boundaries around the Bakasi Peninsula and Lake Chad is
  currently before the International Court of Justice



======================================================================




@Canada
------





Introduction



Background: A land of vast distances and rich natural resources,
  from 1867 on Canada has enjoyed de facto independence while
  retaining, even to the present day, certain formal ties to the
  British crown. Economically and technologically the nation has
  developed in parallel with the US, its neighbor to the south across
  an unfortified border. Its paramount political problem continues to
  be the relationship of the province of Quebec, with its
  French-speaking residents and unique culture, to the remainder of
  the country.



Geography



Location: Northern North America, bordering the North Atlantic
  Ocean and North Pacific Ocean, north of the conterminous US

Geographic coordinates: 60 00 N, 95 00 W

Map references: North America

Area:
  total: 9,976,140 sq km
  land: 9,220,970 sq km
  water: 755,170 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 8,893 km
  border countries: US 8,893 km (includes 2,477 km with Alaska)

Coastline: 243,791 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from temperate in south to subarctic and arctic
  in north

Terrain: mostly plains with mountains in west and lowlands in
  southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Logan 5,950 m

Natural resources: nickel, zinc, copper, gold, lead, molybdenum,
  potash, silver, fish, timber, wildlife, coal, petroleum, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 54%
  other: 38% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 7,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: continuous permafrost in north is a serious
  obstacle to development; cyclonic storms form east of the Rocky
  Mountains, a result of the mixing of air masses from the Arctic,
  Pacific, and North American interior, and produce most of the
  country's rain and snow

Environment--current issues: air pollution and resulting acid rain
  severely affecting lakes and damaging forests; metal smelting,
  coal-burning utilities, and vehicle emissions impacting on
  agricultural and forest productivity; ocean waters becoming
  contaminated due to agricultural, industrial, mining, and forestry
  activities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 85,
  Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: second-largest country in world (after Russia);
  strategic location between Russia and US via north polar route;
  nearly 90% of the population is concentrated within 160 km of the
  US/Canada border



People



Population: 31,006,347 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 3,105,944; female 2,960,171)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 10,587,553; female 10,461,455)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 1,652,044; female 2,239,180) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.06% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.86 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.26 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 5.96 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.47 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 79.37 years
  male: 76.12 years
  female: 82.79 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.65 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Canadian(s)
  adjective: Canadian

Ethnic groups: British Isles origin 40%, French origin 27%, other
  European 20%, Amerindian 1.5%, other, mostly Asian 11.5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 45%, United Church 12%, Anglican 8%,
  other 35% (1991)

Languages: English (official), French (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97% (1986 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Canada

Data code: CA

Government type: federation with parliamentary democracy

Capital: Ottawa

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces and 3 territories*;
  Alberta, British Columbia, Manitoba, New Brunswick, Newfoundland,
  Northwest Territories*, Nova Scotia, Nunavut*, Ontario, Prince
  Edward Island, Quebec, Saskatchewan, Yukon Territory*

Independence: 1 July 1867 (from UK)

National holiday: Canada Day, 1 July (1867)

Constitution: 17 April 1982 (Constitution Act); originally, the
  machinery of the government was set up in the British North America
  Act of 1867; charter of rights and unwritten customs

Legal system: based on English common law, except in Quebec,
  where civil law system based on French law prevails; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Romeo Le BLANC (since 8 February
  1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jean CHRETIEN (since 4 November
  1993)
  cabinet: Federal Ministry chosen by the prime minister from among
  the members of his own party sitting in Parliament
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch on the advice of the prime minister for a
  five-year term; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  majority party in the House of Commons is automatically designated
  by the governor general to become prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlement consists of
  the Senate or Senat (a body whose members are appointed to serve
  until reaching 75 years of age by the governor general and selected
  on the advice of the prime minister; its normal limit is 104
  senators) and the House of Commons or Chambre des Communes (301
  seats; members elected by direct popular vote to serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: House of Commons--last held 2 June 1997 (next to be held
  by NA June 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Liberal Party 38%, Reform
  Party 19%, Tories 19%, Bloc Quebecois 11%, New Democratic Party 11%,
  other 2%; seats by party--Liberal Party 155, Reform Party 60, Bloc
  Quebecois 44, New Democratic Party 21, Progressive Conservative
  Party 20, independents 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the prime
  minister through the governor general

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Party [Jean CHRETIEN];

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, APEC, AsDB,
  Australia Group, BIS, C, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE (observer), CP,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, ESA (cooperating state), FAO, G- 7, G-10,
  IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, MINURCA, MIPONUH, MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS,
  OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Raymond A. J. CHRETIEN
  chancery: 501 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20001
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Buffalo, Chicago, Dallas,
  Detroit, Los Angeles, Minneapolis, New York, and Seattle
  consulate(s): Miami, Princeton, San Francisco, and San Jose

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Gordon D. GIFFIN
  embassy: 100 Wellington Street, K1P 5T1, Ottawa
  mailing address: P. O. Box 5000, Ogdensburg, NY 13669-0430
  consulate(s) general: Calgary, Halifax, Montreal, Quebec, Toronto,
  and Vancouver

Flag description: three vertical bands of red (hoist side), white
  (double width, square), and red with a red maple leaf centered in
  the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: As an affluent, high-tech industrial society,
  Canada today closely resembles the US in its market-oriented
  economic system, pattern of production, and high living standards.
  Since World War II, the impressive growth of the manufacturing,
  mining, and service sectors has transformed the nation from a
  largely rural economy into one primarily industrial and urban. Real
  rates of growth have averaged nearly 3.0% since 1993. Unemployment
  is falling and government budget surpluses are being partially
  devoted to reducing the large public sector debt. The 1989 US-Canada
  Free Trade Agreement (FTA) and 1994 North American Free Trade
  Agreement (NAFTA) (which included Mexico) have touched off a
  dramatic increase in trade and economic integration with the US.
  With its great natural resources, skilled labor force, and modern
  capital plant Canada can anticipate solid economic prospects in the
  future. The continuing constitutional impasse between English- and
  French-speaking areas is raising the possibility of a split in the
  federation, making foreign investors somewhat edgy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$688.3 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 31%
  services: 66% (1998)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.8%
  highest 10%: 23.8% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.9% (1998)

Labor force: 15.8 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: services 75%, manufacturing 16%,
  construction 5%, agriculture 3%, other 1% (1997)

Unemployment rate: 7.8% (December 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $121.3 billion
  expenditures: $112.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.7
  billion (1998)

Industries: processed and unprocessed minerals, food products,
  wood and paper products, transportation equipment, chemicals, fish
  products, petroleum and natural gas

Industrial production growth rate: 0.8% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 549.162 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 20.34%
  hydro: 63.59%
  nuclear: 16.05%
  other: 0.02% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 511.586 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 45.28 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 7.705 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, oilseed, tobacco, fruits,
  vegetables; dairy products; forest products; fish

Exports: $210.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: motor vehicles and parts, newsprint, wood
  pulp, timber, crude petroleum, machinery, natural gas, aluminum,
  telecommunications equipment

Exports--partners: US 81%, Japan 4%, UK, Germany, South Korea,
  Netherlands, China (1997)

Imports: $202.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, crude oil,
  chemicals, motor vehicles and parts, durable consumer goods

Imports--partners: US 76%, Japan 3%, UK, Germany, France, Mexico,
  Taiwan, South Korea (1997)

Debt--external: $253 billion (1996)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $2.1 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Canadian dollar (Can$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Canadian dollars (Can$) per US$1--1.5192 (January
  1999), 1.4835 (1998), 1.3846 (1997), 1.3635 (1996), 1.3724 (1995),
  1.3656 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 15.3 million (1990)

Telephone system: excellent service provided by modern technology
  domestic: domestic satellite system with about 300 earth stations
  international: 5 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth
  stations--5 Intelsat (4 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean) and 2
  Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 334, FM 35, shortwave 7 (one of the
  shortwave stations, Radio Canada International, has six
  transmitters, 48 frequencies, and broadcasts in seven languages; the
  transmissions are relayed by repeaters in Europe and Asia) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 80 (in addition, there are many
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 11.53 million (1983 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 67,773 km; note--there are two major transcontinental freight
  railway systems: Canadian National (privatized November 1995) and
  Canadian Pacific Railway; passenger service provided by
  government-operated firm VIA, which has no trackage of its own
  standard gauge: 67,773 km 1.435-m gauge (183 km electrified) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 912,200 km
  paved: 246,400 km (including 16,600 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 665,800 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 3,000 km, including Saint Lawrence Seaway

Pipelines: crude and refined oil 23,564 km; natural gas 74,980 km

Ports and harbors: Becancour (Quebec), Churchill, Halifax,
  Hamilton, Montreal, New Westminster, Prince Rupert, Quebec, Saint
  John (New Brunswick), St. John's (Newfoundland), Sept Isles, Sydney,
  Trois-Rivieres, Thunder Bay, Toronto, Vancouver, Windsor

Merchant marine:
  total: 109 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,489,110
  GRT/2,205,274 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 1, bulk 56, cargo 11, chemical tanker
  5, combination bulk 2, oil tanker 16, passenger 3, passenger-cargo
  1, railcar carrier 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 7, short-sea passenger
  4, specialized tanker 1
  note: does not include ships used exclusively in the Great Lakes
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 1,395 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 515
  over 3,047 m: 16
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 16
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 154
  914 to 1,523 m: 238
  under 914 m: 91 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 880
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 73
  914 to 1,523 m: 353
  under 914 m: 454 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 16 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Canadian Armed Forces (includes Land Forces
  Command or LC, Maritime Command or MC, Air Command or AC,
  Communications Command or CC, Training Command or TC), Royal
  Canadian Mounted Police (RCMP)

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 8,243,859 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 7,061,937 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 210,884 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $7.1 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.2% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary disputes with the US
  (Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal
  Island)

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic drug
  market; use of hydroponics technology permits growers to plant large
  quantities of high-quality marijuana indoors; growing role as a
  transit point for heroin and cocaine entering the US market



======================================================================




@Cape Verde
----------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, group of islands in the North Atlantic
  Ocean, west of Senegal

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 24 00 W

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 4,030 sq km
  land: 4,030 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 965 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; warm, dry summer; precipitation meager and
  very erratic

Terrain: steep, rugged, rocky, volcanic

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mt. Fogo 2,829 m (a volcano on Fogo Island)

Natural resources: salt, basalt rock, pozzuolana (a siliceous
  volcanic ash used to produce hydraulic cement), limestone, kaolin,
  fish

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 83% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged droughts; harmattan wind can obscure
  visibility; volcanically and seismically active

Environment--current issues: overgrazing of livestock and improper
  land use such as the cultivation of crops on steep slopes has led to
  soil erosion; demand for wood used as fuel has resulted in
  deforestation; desertification; environmental damage has threatened
  several species of birds and reptiles; overfishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location 500 km from west coast of
  Africa near major north-south sea routes; important communications
  station; important sea and air refueling site



People



Population: 405,748 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 92,721; female 91,083)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 92,658; female 104,264)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 9,936; female 15,086) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.44% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 33.49 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.78 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -12.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.89 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.66 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 45.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.96 years
  male: 67.66 years
  female: 74.36 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.95 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Cape Verdean(s)
  adjective: Cape Verdean

Ethnic groups: Creole (mulatto) 71%, African 28%, European 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic (infused with indigenous beliefs);
  Protestant (mostly Church of the Nazarene)

Languages: Portuguese, Crioulo (a blend of creole Portuguese and
  West African words)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 71.6%
  male: 81.4%
  female: 63.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Cape Verde
  conventional short form: Cape Verde
  local long form: Republica de Cabo Verde
  local short form: Cabo Verde

Data code: CV

Government type: republic

Capital: Praia

Administrative divisions: 14 districts (concelhos,
  singular--concelho); Boa Vista, Brava, Fogo, Maio, Paul, Praia, Porto
  Novo, Ribeira Grande, Sal, Santa Catarina, Santa Cruz, Sao Nicolau,
  Sao Vicente, Tarrafal
  note: there may be a new administrative structure of 16 districts
  (Boa Vista, Brava, Maio, Mosteiros, Paul, Praia, Porto Novo, Ribeira
  Grande, Sal, Santa Catarina, Santa Cruz, Sao Domingos, Sao Nicolau,
  Sao Filipe, Sao Vicente, Tarrafal)

Independence: 5 July 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 5 July (1975)

Constitution: new constitution came into force 25 September 1992

Legal system: derived from the legal system of Portugal

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro (since 22
  March 1991)
  head of government: Prime Minister Carlos Alberto Wahnon de Carvalho
  VEIGA (since 13 January 1991)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister from among the members of the
  National Assembly
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 18 February 1996 (next to be held NA February
  2001); prime minister nominated by the National Assembly and
  appointed by the president
  election results: Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro elected president;
  percent of vote--Antonio MASCARENHAS Monteiro (independent) 80.1%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assembleia
  Nacional (72 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 17 December 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--MPD 59%, PAICV 28%, PCD
  6%; seats by party--MPD 50, PAICV 21, PCD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Tribunal of Justice or Supremo Tribunal
  de Justia

Political parties and leaders: Movement for Democracy or MPD
  Eurico MONTEIRO, president]; Party of Work and Solidarity or PTS

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU,
  NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ferdinand Amilcar Spencer LOPES
  chancery: 3415 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Boston

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Lawrence Neal BENEDICT
  embassy: Rua Abilio Macedo 81, Praia
  mailing address: C. P. 201, Praia

Flag description: three horizontal bands of light blue (top,
  double width), white (with a horizontal red stripe in the middle
  third), and light blue; a circle of 10 yellow five-pointed stars is
  centered on the hoist end of the red stripe and extends into the
  upper and lower blue bands



Economy



Economy--overview: Cape Verde's low per capita GDP reflects a poor
  natural resource base, including serious water shortages exacerbated
  by cycles of long-term drought. The economy is service-oriented,
  with commerce, transport, and public services accounting for almost
  70% of GDP. Although nearly 70% of the population lives in rural
  areas, the share of agriculture in GDP in 1995 was only 8%, of which
  fishing accounts for 1.5%. About 90% of food must be imported. The
  fishing potential, mostly lobster and tuna, is not fully exploited.
  Cape Verde annually runs a high trade deficit, financed by foreign
  aid and remittances from emigrants; remittances constitute a
  supplement to GDP of more than 20%. Economic reforms, launched by
  the new democratic government in 1991, are aimed at developing the
  private sector and attracting foreign investment to diversify the
  economy. Prospects for 1999 depend heavily on the maintenance of aid
  flows, remittances, and the momentum of the government's development
  program.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$581 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,450 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 8%
  industry: 18%
  services: 74% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.3% (1998)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA %

Budget:
  revenues: $188 million
  expenditures: $228 million, including capital expenditures of $116
  million (1996)

Industries: food and beverages, fish processing, shoes and
  garments, salt mining, ship repair,

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 40 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 40 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, corn, beans, sweet potatoes,
  sugarcane, coffee, peanuts; fish

Exports: $43 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: shoes, garments, fish, bananas, hides,

Exports--partners: Portugal, Germany, Spain, France, UK, Malaysia

Imports: $215 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, consumer goods, industrial
  products, transport equipment, fuels

Imports--partners: Portugal 25%, Netherlands, France, UK, Spain, US

Debt--external: $220 million (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $111.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Cape Verdean escudo (CVEsc) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Cape Verdean escudos (CVEsc) per US$1--96.400
  (November 1998), 99.41 (1998), 93.177 (1997), 82.591 (1996), 76.853
  (1995), 81.891 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 22,900 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: interisland microwave radio relay system with both analog
  and digital exchanges; work is in progress on a submarine
  fiber-optic cable system which was scheduled for completion in 1998
  international: 2 coaxial submarine cables; HF radiotelephone to
  Senegal and Guinea-Bissau; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat
  (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 6, shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997 est.)

Televisions: 7,000 (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,100 km
  paved: 858 km
  unpaved: 242 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Mindelo, Praia, Tarrafal

Merchant marine:
  total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 9,620 GRT/13,920 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 3, chemical tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 6
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Armed Forces (AF) (includes all armed force
  elements, both ground and naval)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 84,018 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 47,672 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3.8 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: used as a transshipment point for illicit drugs
  moving from Latin America and Africa destined for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Cayman Islands
--------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island group in Caribbean Sea, nearly
  one-half of the way from Cuba to Honduras

Geographic coordinates: 19 30 N, 80 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 260 sq km
  land: 260 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 160 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; warm, rainy summers (May to October)
  and cool, relatively dry winters (November to April)

Terrain: low-lying limestone base surrounded by coral reefs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: The Bluff 43 m

Natural resources: fish, climate and beaches that foster tourism

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 8%
  forests and woodland: 23%
  other: 69% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes (July to November)

Environment--current issues: no natural fresh water resources;
  drinking water supplies must be met by rainwater catchment

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: important location between Cuba and Central
  America



People



Population: 39,335 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 4.19% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.66 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.98 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 33.2 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: major destination for Cubans trying to migrate to the US

Infant mortality rate: 8.4 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.1 years
  male: 75.37 years
  female: 78.81 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.31 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Caymanian(s)
  adjective: Caymanian

Ethnic groups: mixed 40%, white 20%, black 20%, expatriates of
  various ethnic groups 20%

Religions: United Church (Presbyterian and Congregational),
  Anglican, Baptist, Roman Catholic, Church of God, other Protestant
  denominations

Languages: English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 98%
  male: 98%
  female: 98% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Cayman Islands

Data code: CJ

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: George Town

Administrative divisions: 8 districts; Creek, Eastern, Midland,
  South Town, Spot Bay, Stake Bay, West End, Western

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Constitution Day (first Monday in July)

Constitution: 1959, revised 1972 and 1992

Legal system: British common law and local statutes

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  head of government: Governor and President of the Executive Council
  John Wynne OWEN (since 15 September 1995)
  cabinet: Executive Council (three members appointed by the governor,
  four members elected by the Legislative Assembly)
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor is
  appointed by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (18 seats,
  three official members and 15 elected by popular vote; members serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 November 1996 (next to be held NA November
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--National Team coalition
  9, independents 6

Judicial branch: Grand Court; Cayman Islands Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: no formal political parties

International organization participation: Caricom (observer),
  CDB, Interpol (subbureau), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Caymanian coat of arms on a white disk
  centered on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms includes a
  pineapple and turtle above a shield with three stars (representing
  the three islands) and a scroll at the bottom bearing the motto HE
  HATH FOUNDED IT UPON THE SEAS



Economy



Economy--overview: With no direct taxation, the islands are a
  thriving offshore financial center. More than 40,000 companies were
  registered in the Cayman Islands as of 1997, including almost 600
  banks and trust companies; banking assets exceed $500 billion. A
  stock exchange was opened in 1997. Tourism is also a mainstay,
  accounting for about 70% of GDP and 75% of foreign currency
  earnings. The tourist industry is aimed at the luxury market and
  caters mainly to visitors from North America. Total tourist arrivals
  exceeded 1.2 million visitors in 1997. About 90% of the islands'
  food and consumer goods must be imported. The Caymanians enjoy one
  of the highest outputs per capita and one of the highest standards
  of living in the world.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$930 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.5% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$24,500 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1.4%
  industry: 3.2%
  services: 95.4% (1994 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.7% (1997)

Labor force: 19,820 (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: service workers 18.7%, clerical 18.6%,
  construction 12.5%, finance and investment 6.7%, directors and
  business managers 5.9% (1979)

Unemployment rate: 5.1% (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $265.2 million
  expenditures: $248.9 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: tourism, banking, insurance and finance,
  construction, construction materials, furniture

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 290 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 290 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: vegetables, fruit; livestock, turtle farming

Exports: $2.65 million (1996)

Exports--commodities: turtle products, manufactured consumer goods

Exports--partners: mostly US

Imports: $379.4 million (1996)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods

Imports--partners: US, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, Netherlands
  Antilles, Japan

Debt--external: $70 million (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Caymanian dollar (CI$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Caymanian dollars (CI$) per US$1--0.83 (3 November
  1995), 0.85 (22 November 1993)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 21,584 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: 1 submarine coaxial cable; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 4 (the four stations have a
  total of six frequencies), shortwave 0 (1998)

Radios: 28,200 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: 6,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 406 km
  paved: 304 km
  unpaved: 102 km

Ports and harbors: Cayman Brac, George Town

Merchant marine:
  total: 76 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,264,113 GRT/1,970,959
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 13, cargo 10, chemical tanker 11, container 4,
  liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 7, refrigerated cargo 22,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 11
  countries among which are: Greece 15, US 5, UK 5, Cyprus 2, Denmark
  2, Norway 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Cayman Islands Police Force (RCIPF)

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: vulnerable to drug money laundering and drug
  transshipment



======================================================================




@Central African Republic
------------------------





Introduction



Background: In 1996, the country experienced three mutinies by
  dissident elements of the armed forces, which demanded back pay as
  well as political and military reforms. Subsequent violence between
  the government and rebel military groups over pay issues, living
  conditions, and lack of opposition party representation in the
  government, destroyed many businesses in the capital, reduced tax
  revenues, and exacerbated the government's problems in meeting
  expenses. African peacekeepers restored order in 1997; in April 1998
  the United Nations Mission in the Central African Republic (MINURCA)
  assumed responsibility for peacekeeping operations.



Geography



Location: Central Africa, north of Democratic Republic of the
  Congo

Geographic coordinates: 7 00 N, 21 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 622,980 sq km
  land: 622,980 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,203 km
  border countries: Cameroon 797 km, Chad 1,197 km, Democratic
  Republic of the Congo 1,577 km, Republic of the Congo 467 km, Sudan
  1,165 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; hot, dry winters; mild to hot, wet summers

Terrain: vast, flat to rolling, monotonous plateau; scattered
  hills in northeast and southwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Oubangui River 335 m
  highest point: Mont Ngaoui 1,420 m

Natural resources: diamonds, uranium, timber, gold, oil

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 75%
  other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan winds affect northern
  areas; floods are common

Environment--current issues: tap water is not potable; poaching
  has diminished its reputation as one of the last great wildlife
  refuges; desertification; deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked; almost the precise center of Africa



People



Population: 3,444,951 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 757,422; female 749,289)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 885,087; female 927,282)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 56,309; female 69,562) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 38.28 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.46 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.45 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 103.42 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 47.19 years
  male: 45.35 years
  female: 49.09 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.03 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Central African(s)
  adjective: Central African

Ethnic groups: Baya 34%, Banda 27%, Sara 10%, Mandjia 21%, Mboum
  4%, M'Baka 4%, Europeans 6,500 (including 3,600 French)

Religions: indigenous beliefs 24%, Protestant 25%, Roman Catholic
  25%, Muslim 15%, other 11%
  note: animistic beliefs and practices strongly influence the
  Christian majority

Languages: French (official), Sangho (lingua franca and national
  language), Arabic, Hunsa, Swahili

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 60%
  male: 68.5%
  female: 52.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Central African Republic
  conventional short form: none
  local long form: Republique Centrafricaine
  local short form: none
  former: Central African Empire
  abbreviation: CAR

Data code: CT

Government type: republic

Capital: Bangui

Administrative divisions: 14 prefectures (prefectures,
  singular--prefecture), 2 economic prefectures* (prefectures
  economiques, singular--prefecture economique), and 1 commune**;
  Bamingui-Bangoran, Bangui**, Basse-Kotto, Gribingui*, Haute-Kotto,
  Haute-Sangha, Haut-Mbomou, Kemo-Gribingui, Lobaye, Mbomou,
  Nana-Mambere, Ombella-Mpoko, Ouaka, Ouham, Ouham-Pende, Sangha*,
  Vakaga

Independence: 13 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 1 December (1958) (proclamation
  of the republic)

Constitution: passed by referendum 29 December 1994; adopted 7
  January 1995

Legal system: based on French law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ange-Felix PATASSE (since 22 October 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Anicet Georges DOLOGUELE (since
  January 1999)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 19 September 1993 (next to be held NA 1999);
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Ange-Felix PATASSE elected president; percent of
  vote--PATASSE 52.45%, Abel GOUMBA 45.62%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (109 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms; note--there were 85 seats in the National Assembly
  before the 1998 election)
  elections: last held 22-23 November and NA December 1998 (next to be
  held NA 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--MLPC 43%, RDC 18%, MDD
  9%, FPP 6%, PSD 5%, ADP 4%, PUN 3%, FODEM 2%, PLD 2%, UPR 1%, FC 1%,
  independents 6%; seats by party--MLPC 47, RDC 20, MDD 10, FPP 7, PSD
  5, ADP 4, PUN 3, FODEM 2, PLD 2, UPR 1, FC 1, independents 7;
  note--results of election are being contested
  note: the National Assembly is advised by the Economic and Regional
  Council or Conseil Economique et Regional; when they sit together
  they are called the Congress or Congres

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme, judges appointed
  by the president; Constitutional Court, judges appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy and
  of the president, Ange-Felix PATASSE]; Movement for Democracy and

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
  CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC
  (observer), OPCW, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Henri KOBA
  chancery: 1618 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Robert C. PERRY
  embassy: Avenue David Dacko, Bangui
  mailing address: B. P. 924, Bangui

Flag description: four equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  white, green, and yellow with a vertical red band in center; there
  is a yellow five-pointed star on the hoist side of the blue band



Economy



Economy--overview: Subsistence agriculture, together with
  forestry, remains the backbone of the economy of the Central African
  Republic (CAR), with more than 70% of the population living in
  outlying areas. The agricultural sector generates half of GDP.
  Timber has accounted for about 16% of export earnings and the
  diamond industry for nearly 54%. Important constraints to economic
  development include the CAR's landlocked position, a poor
  transportation system, a largely unskilled work force, and a legacy
  of misdirected macroeconomic policies. The 50% devaluation of the
  currencies of 14 Francophone African nations on 12 January 1994 had
  mixed effects on the CAR's economy. Diamond, timber, coffee, and
  cotton exports increased, leading an estimated rise of GDP of 7% in
  1994 and nearly 5% in 1995. Military rebellions and social unrest in
  1996 were accompanied by widespread destruction of property and a
  drop in GDP of 2%. Ongoing violence between the government and rebel
  military groups over pay issues, living conditions, and political
  representation has destroyed many businesses in the capital and
  reduced tax revenues for the government. The IMF approved an
  Extended Structure Adjustment Facility in 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,640 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 53%
  industry: 21%
  services: 26% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.6% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 6% (1993)

Budget:
  revenues: $638 million
  expenditures: $1.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $888
  million (1994 est.)

Industries: diamond mining, sawmills, breweries, textiles,
  footwear, assembly of bicycles and motorcycles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 100 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 20%
  hydro: 80%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 100 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, coffee, tobacco, manioc (tapioca),
  yams, millet, corn, bananas; timber

Exports: $182 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: diamonds, timber, cotton, coffee, tobacco

Exports--partners: Belgium-Luxembourg 36%, Cote d'Ivoire 5%, Spain
  4%, Egypt 3%, France

Imports: $155 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: food, textiles, petroleum products,
  machinery, electrical equipment, motor vehicles, chemicals,
  pharmaceuticals, consumer goods, industrial products

Imports--partners: France 30%, Cote d'Ivoire 18%, Cameroon 11%,
  Germany 4%, Japan

Debt--external: $930 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $172.2 million (1995); note?traditional
  budget subsidies from France

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (December 1998), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 16,867 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: fair system
  domestic: network consists principally of microwave radio relay and
  low-capacity, low-powered radiotelephone communication
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 3 (including Africa No. 1 and
  R. France Internationale stations located in Bangui), shortwave 1
  (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: 7,500 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 23,810 km
  paved: 429 km
  unpaved: 23,381 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 800 km; traditional trade carried on by means of
  shallow-draft dugouts; Oubangui is the most important river

Ports and harbors: Bangui, Nola

Airports: 52 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 49
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 23
  under 914 m: 15 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Central African Armed Forces (includes
  Republican Guard and Air Force), Presidential Guard, National
  Gendarmerie, Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 782,678 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 409,044 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $29 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Chad
----





Introduction



Background: In 1960, Chad gained full independence from France.
  In December 1990, after Chad had endured three decades of ethnic
  warfare as well as invasions by Libya, former northern guerrilla
  leader Idriss DEBY seized control of the government. His
  transitional government eventually suppressed or came to terms with
  most political-military groups, settled the territorial dispute with
  Libya on terms favorable to Chad, drafted a democratic constitution
  which was ratified by popular referendum in 1996, held multiparty
  national presidential elections in 1996 (DEBY won with 69% of the
  vote), and held multiparty elections for the National Assembly in
  1997 (DEBY's Patriotic Salvation Movement won a majority of the
  seats). But by the end of 1998, DEBY was beset with numerous
  problems including heavy casualties in the Democratic Republic of
  the Congo where Chadian troops had been deployed to support
  embattled President KABILA, a new rebellion in northern Chad, and
  further delays in the Doba Basin oil project in the south.



Geography



Location: Central Africa, south of Libya

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 19 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1.284 million sq km
  land: 1,259,200 sq km
  water: 24,800 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than three times the size of
  California

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,968 km
  border countries: Cameroon 1,094 km, Central African Republic 1,197
  km, Libya 1,055 km, Niger 1,175 km, Nigeria 87 km, Sudan 1,360 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical in south, desert in north

Terrain: broad, arid plains in center, desert in north, mountains
  in northwest, lowlands in south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Djourab Depression 160 m
  highest point: Emi Koussi 3,415 m

Natural resources: petroleum (unexploited but exploration under
  way), uranium, natron, kaolin, fish (Lake Chad)

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 36%
  forests and woodland: 26%
  other: 35% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 140 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan winds occur in north;
  periodic droughts; locust plagues

Environment--current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
  improper waste disposal in rural areas contributes to soil and water
  pollution; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Geography--note: landlocked; Lake Chad is the most significant
  water body in the Sahel



People



Population: 7,557,436 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 1,675,394; female 1,667,717)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 1,953,251; female 2,034,883)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 99,783; female 126,408) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.65% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 43.06 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.57 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 115.27 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 48.56 years
  male: 46.13 years
  female: 51.09 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.69 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Chadian(s)
  adjective: Chadian

Ethnic groups: Muslims (Arabs, Toubou, Hadjerai, Fulbe, Kotoko,
  Kanembou, Baguirmi, Boulala, Zaghawa, and Maba), non-Muslims (Sara,
  Ngambaye, Mbaye, Goulaye, Moundang, Moussei, Massa), nonindigenous
  150,000 (of whom 1,000 are French)

Religions: Muslim 50%, Christian 25%, indigenous beliefs (mostly
  animism) 25%

Languages: French (official), Arabic (official), Sara and Sango
  (in south), more than 100 different languages and dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write French or Arabic
  total population: 48.1%
  male: 62.1%
  female: 34.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Chad
  conventional short form: Chad
  local long form: Republique du Tchad
  local short form: Tchad

Data code: CD

Government type: republic

Capital: N'Djamena

Administrative divisions: 14 prefectures (prefectures,
  singular--prefecture); Batha, Biltine, Borkou-Ennedi-Tibesti,
  Chari-Baguirmi, Guera, Kanem, Lac, Logone Occidental, Logone
  Oriental, Mayo-Kebbi, Moyen-Chari, Ouaddai, Salamat, Tandjile

Independence: 11 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 11 August (1960)

Constitution: 31 March 1995, passed by referendum

Legal system: based on French civil law system and Chadian
  customary law; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Lt. Gen. Idriss DEBY (since 4 December
  1990)
  head of government: Prime Minister Nassour Guelengdouksia OUAIDOU
  (since 16 May 1997)
  cabinet: Council of State appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote to serve five-year
  terms; if no candidate receives at least 50% of the total vote, the
  two candidates receiving the most votes must stand for a second
  round of voting; last held 2 June and 11 July 1996 (next to be held
  NA 2001); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: in the first round of voting none of the 15
  candidates received the required 50% of the total vote; percent of
  vote, first round--Lt. Gen. Idress DEBY 47.8%; percent of vote,
  second round--Lt. Gen. DEBY 69.1%, Wadal Abdelkader KAMOUGUE 30.9%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (125 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms); replaces
  the Higher Transitional Council or the Conseil Superieur de
  Transition
  elections: National Assembly--last held in two rounds on 5 January
  and 23 February 1997, (next to be held NA 2001); in the first round
  of voting some candidates won clear victories by receiving 50% or
  more of the vote; where that did not happen, the two highest scoring
  candidates stood for a second round of voting
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--MPS
  65, URD 29, UNDR 15, RDP 3, others 13

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeal; Criminal Courts;
  Magistrate Courts

Political parties and leaders: Patriotic Salvation Movement or
  the party in power and the party of the president); National Union
  mid-1996 Chad had about 60 political parties, of which these are the
  most prominent in the new National Assembly

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
  CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, MINURCA, NAM,
  OAU, OIC, OPCW, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Hassaballah Abdelhadi Ahmat SOUBIANE
  chancery: 2002 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador David C. HALSTED
  embassy: Avenue Felix Eboue, N'Djamena
  mailing address: B. P. 413, N'Djamena

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist
  side), yellow, and red; similar to the flag of Romania; also similar
  to the flag of Andorra, which has a national coat of arms featuring
  a quartered shield centered in the yellow band; design was based on
  the flag of France



Economy



Economy--overview: Landlocked Chad's economic development suffers
  from it's geographic remoteness, drought, lack of infrastructure,
  and political turmoil. About 85% of the population depends on
  agriculture, including the herding of livestock. Of Africa's
  Francophone countries, Chad benefited least from the 50% devaluation
  of their currencies in January 1994. Financial aid from the World
  Bank, the African Development Fund, and other sources is directed
  largely at the improvement of agriculture, especially livestock
  production. Lack of financing and low oil prices, however, are
  stalling the development of an oil field in the Doba Basin and the
  construction of a proposed oil pipeline through Cameroon.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 39%
  industry: 15%
  services: 46% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 15% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 85% (subsistence farming,
  herding, and fishing)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $198 million
  expenditures: $218 million, including capital expenditures of $146
  million (1998 est.)

Industries: cotton textiles, meat packing, beer brewing, natron
  (sodium carbonate), soap, cigarettes, construction materials

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1995)

Electricity--production: 90 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 90 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, sorghum, millet, peanuts, rice,
  potatoes, manioc (tapioca); cattle, sheep, goats, camels

Exports: $220 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: cotton, cattle, textiles

Exports--partners: Portugal 30%, Germany 14%, Thailand, Costa
  Rica, South Africa, France (1997)

Imports: $252 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transportation equipment,
  industrial goods, petroleum products, foodstuffs, textiles

Imports--partners: France 41%, Nigeria 10%, Cameroon 7%, India 6%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $875 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $238.3 million (1995); note?$125 million
  committed by Taiwan (August 1997); $30 million committed by African
  Development Bank

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine Francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (December 1998), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 5,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: primitive system
  domestic: fair system of radiotelephone communication stations
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 3 (one of the
  shortwave stations has three frequencies) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (broadcasts 1800 to 2100 hours,
  four days per week) (1997)

Televisions: 7,000 (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 33,400 km
  paved: 267 km
  unpaved: 33,133 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,000 km navigable

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 52 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 8
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 44
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
  914 to 1,523 m: 22
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Armed Forces (includes Ground Force, Air
  Force, and Gendarmerie), Republican Guard, Rapid Intervention Force,
  Police

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,689,112 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 875,541 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 70,464 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $39 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.5% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: delimitation of international boundaries
  in the vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border
  incidents in the past, is completed and awaits ratification by
  Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria



======================================================================




@Chile
-----





Geography



Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic
  Ocean and South Pacific Ocean, between Argentina and Peru

Geographic coordinates: 30 00 S, 71 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 756,950 sq km
  land: 748,800 sq km
  water: 8,150 sq km
  note: includes Easter Island (Isla de Pascua) and Isla Sala y Gomez

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than twice the size of Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 6,171 km
  border countries: Argentina 5,150 km, Bolivia 861 km, Peru 160 km

Coastline: 6,435 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; desert in north; cool and damp in south

Terrain: low coastal mountains; fertile central valley; rugged
  Andes in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Cerro Aconcagua 6,962 m

Natural resources: copper, timber, iron ore, nitrates, precious
  metals, molybdenum

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 18%
  forests and woodland: 22%
  other: 55% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,650 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe earthquakes; active volcanism; tsunamis

Environment--current issues: air pollution from industrial and
  vehicle emissions; water pollution from raw sewage; deforestation
  contributing to loss of biodiversity; soil erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location relative to sea lanes between
  Atlantic and Pacific Oceans (Strait of Magellan, Beagle Channel,
  Drake Passage); Atacama Desert is one of world's driest regions



People



Population: 14,973,843 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 28% (male 2,137,255; female 2,044,605)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 4,845,523; female 4,885,328)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 440,010; female 621,122) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.23% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 17.81 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.53 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.02 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.46 years
  male: 72.33 years
  female: 78.75 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.25 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Chilean(s)
  adjective: Chilean

Ethnic groups: white and white-Amerindian 95%, Amerindian 3%,
  other 2%

Religions: Roman Catholic 89%, Protestant 11%, Jewish less than 1%

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 95.2%
  male: 95.4%
  female: 95% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Chile
  conventional short form: Chile
  local long form: Republica de Chile
  local short form: Chile

Data code: CI

Government type: republic

Capital: Santiago

Administrative divisions: 13 regions (regiones, singular--region);
  Aisen del General Carlos Ibanez del Campo, Antofagasta, Araucania,
  Atacama, Bio-Bio, Coquimbo, Libertador General Bernardo O'Higgins,
  Los Lagos, Magallanes y de la Antartica Chilena, Maule, Region
  Metropolitana, Tarapaca, Valparaiso
  note: the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica

Independence: 18 September 1810 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 September (1810)

Constitution: 11 September 1980, effective 11 March 1981; amended
  30 July 1989

Legal system: based on Code of 1857 derived from Spanish law and
  subsequent codes influenced by French and Austrian law; judicial
  review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court; does not accept
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (since 11 March
  1994); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (since 11
  March 1994); note--the president is both the chief of state and head
  of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 11 December 1993 (next to be held NA December
  1999)
  election results: Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle elected president; percent
  of vote--Eduardo FREI Ruiz-Tagle (PDC) 58%, Arturo ALESSANDRI 24.4%,
  other 17.6%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso
  Nacional consists of the Senate or Senado (48 seats, 38 elected by
  popular vote; members serve eight-year terms--one-half elected every
  four years) and the Chamber of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (120
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 11 December 1997 (next to be held NA
  December 2001); Chamber of Deputies--last held 11 December 1997 (next
  to be held NA December 2001)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA%; seats by
  party--CPD (PDC 14, PS 4, PPD 2), UPP 17 (RN 7, UDI 10), Chile 2000
  (UCCP) 1, independent 10; Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by
  party--CPD 50.55% (PDC 22.98%, PS 11.10%, PPD 12.55%, PRSD 3.13%),
  UPP 36.23% (RN 16.78%, UDI 14.43%); seats by party--CPD 70 (PDC 39,
  PPD 16, PRSD 4, PS 11), UPP 46 (RN 24, UDI 21, Party of the South
  1), right-wing independents 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges are
  appointed by the president and ratified by the Senate from lists of
  candidates provided by the court itself; the president of the
  Supreme Court is elected by the 21-member court

Political parties and leaders: Coalition of Parties for Democracy
  or CPD consists mainly of: Christian Democratic Party or PDC
  Javier ERRAZURIZ]

Political pressure groups and leaders: revitalized university
  student federations at all major universities; United Labor Central
  or CUT includes trade unionists from the country's five largest
  labor confederations; Roman Catholic Church

International organization participation: APEC, CCC, ECLAC, FAO,
  G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, Mercosur (associate), NAM, OAS, OPANAL,
  OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOGIP,
  UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Genaro Luis ARRIAGADA Herrera
  chancery: 1732 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John O'LEARY
  embassy: Avenida Andres Bello 2800, Santiago
  mailing address: APO AA 34033

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and
  red; there is a blue square the same height as the white band at the
  hoist-side end of the white band; the square bears a white
  five-pointed star in the center; design was based on the US flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Chile has a prosperous, essentially free market
  economy. Civilian governments--which took over from the military in
  March 1990--have continued to reduce the government's role in the
  economy while shifting the emphasis of public spending toward social
  programs. Growth in real GDP averaged more than 7.0% in 1991-1997
  but fell to about half of that average in 1998 because of spillover
  from the global financial crisis. Inflation has been on a downward
  trend and hit a 60-year low in 1998. Chile's currency and foreign
  reserves also are strong, as sustained foreign capital
  inflows--including significant direct investment--have more than
  offset current account deficits and public debt buy-backs. President
  FREI, who took office in March 1994, has placed improving Chile's
  education system and developing foreign export markets at the top of
  his economic agenda. The Chilean economy remains largely dependent
  on a few sectors--particularly copper mining, fishing, and forestry.
  Success in meeting the government's goal of sustained annual
  economic growth of 5% depends largely on world prices for these
  commodities, continued foreign investor confidence, and the
  government's ability to maintain a conservative fiscal stance. In
  1996, Chile became an associate member of Mercosur and concluded a
  free trade agreement with Canada.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$184.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$12,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 33%
  services: 61% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 20.5% (1994 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.4%
  highest 10%: 46.1% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.7% (1998)

Labor force: 5.8 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 38.3% (includes government
  12%), industry and commerce 33.8%, agriculture, forestry, and
  fishing 19.2%, mining 2.3%, construction 6.4% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 6.4% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $17 billion
  expenditures: $17 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: copper, other minerals, foodstuffs, fish processing,
  iron and steel, wood and wood products, transport equipment, cement,
  textiles

Industrial production growth rate: -1.1% (1998)

Electricity--production: 35.81 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 41.89%
  hydro: 58.11%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 35.81 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, corn, grapes, beans, sugar beets,
  potatoes, fruit; beef, poultry, wool; timber; fish

Exports: $14.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: copper 37%, other metals and minerals 8.2%,
  wood products 7.1%, fish and fishmeal 9.8%, fruits 8.4% (1994)

Exports--partners: EU 25%, US 15%, Asia 34%, Latin America 20%
  (1995 est.)

Imports: $17.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: capital goods 25.2%, spare parts 24.8%, raw
  materials 15.4%, petroleum 10%, foodstuffs 5.7% (1994)

Imports--partners: EU 18%, US 25%, Asia 16%, Latin America 26%
  (1995 est.)

Debt--external: $31.5 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $50.3 million (1996 est.)

Currency: 1 Chilean peso (Ch$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Chilean pesos (Ch$) per US$1--475.68 (January
  1999), 460.29 (1998), 419.30 (1997), 412.27 (1996), 396.78 (1995),
  420.08 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.5 million (1994 est.)

Telephone system: modern system based on extensive microwave
  radio relay facilities
  domestic: extensive microwave radio relay links; domestic satellite
  system with 3 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 180 (eight inactive), FM 64,
  shortwave 17 (one inactive) (1998)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 63 (in addition, there are 121
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 2.85 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 6,782 km
  broad gauge: 3,743 km 1.676-m gauge (1,653 km electrified)
  narrow gauge: 116 km 1.067-m gauge; 2,923 km 1.000-m gauge (40 km
  electrified) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 79,800 km
  paved: 11,012 km
  unpaved: 68,788 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 725 km

Pipelines: crude oil 755 km; petroleum products 785 km; natural
  gas 320 km

Ports and harbors: Antofagasta, Arica, Chanaral, Coquimbo,
  Iquique, Puerto Montt, Punta Arenas, San Antonio, San Vicente,
  Talcahuano, Valparaiso

Merchant marine:
  total: 42 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 527,201 GRT/787,719 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 11, cargo 10, chemical tanker 5, container 2,
  liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 4, passenger 3, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 4, vehicle carrier 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 378 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 58
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 19
  914 to 1,523 m: 19
  under 914 m: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 320
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
  914 to 1,523 m: 73
  under 914 m: 229 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army of the Nation, National Navy (includes
  Naval Air, Coast Guard, and Marines), Air Force of the Nation,
  Carabineros of Chile (National Police), Investigations Police

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,968,176 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,943,206 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 132,202 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.12 billion (1998);
  note--includes earnings from CODELCO Company and costs of pensions;
  does not include funding for the National Police (Carabineros) and
  Investigations Police

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.79% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: short section of the southwestern
  boundary with Argentina is indefinite--process to resolve boundary
  issues is underway; Bolivia has wanted a sovereign corridor to the
  South Pacific Ocean since the Atacama area was lost to Chile in
  1884; dispute with Bolivia over Rio Lauca water rights; territorial
  claim in Antarctica (Chilean Antarctic Territory) partially overlaps
  Argentine and British claims

Illicit drugs: a growing transshipment country for cocaine
  destined for the US and Europe; economic prosperity has made Chile
  more attractive to traffickers seeking to launder drug profits;
  imported precursors pass on to Bolivia



======================================================================




@China
-----





Introduction



Background: For most of its 3,500 years of history, China led the
  world in agriculture, crafts, and science, then fell behind in the
  19th century when the Industrial Revolution gave the West clear
  superiority in military and economic affairs. In the first half of
  the 20th century, China continued to suffer from major famines,
  civil unrest, military defeat, and foreign occupation. After World
  War II, the Communists under MAO Zedong established a dictatorship
  that, while ensuring China's autonomy, imposed strict controls over
  all aspects of life and cost the lives of tens of millions of
  people. After 1978, his successor DENG Xiaoping decentralized
  economic decision making; output quadrupled in the next 20 years.
  Political controls remain tight at the same time economic controls
  have been weakening. Present issues are: incorporating Hong Kong
  into the Chinese system; closing down inefficient state-owned
  enterprises; modernizing the military; fighting corruption; and
  providing support to tens of millions of displaced workers.



Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the East China Sea, Korea Bay,
  Yellow Sea, and South China Sea, between North Korea and Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 9,596,960 sq km
  land: 9,326,410 sq km
  water: 270,550 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 22,143.34 km
  border countries: Afghanistan 76 km, Bhutan 470 km, Burma 2,185 km,
  Hong Kong 30 km, India 3,380 km, Kazakhstan 1,533 km, North Korea
  1,416 km, Kyrgyzstan 858 km, Laos 423 km, Macau 0.34 km, Mongolia
  4,673 km, Nepal 1,236 km, Pakistan 523 km, Russia (northeast) 3,605
  km, Russia (northwest) 40 km, Tajikistan 414 km, Vietnam 1,281 km

Coastline: 14,500 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: extremely diverse; tropical in south to subarctic in
  north

Terrain: mostly mountains, high plateaus, deserts in west;
  plains, deltas, and hills in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Turpan Pendi -154 m
  highest point: Mount Everest 8,848 m

Natural resources: coal, iron ore, petroleum, natural gas,
  mercury, tin, tungsten, antimony, manganese, molybdenum, vanadium,
  magnetite, aluminum, lead, zinc, uranium, hydropower potential
  (world's largest)

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 43%
  forests and woodland: 14%
  other: 33% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 498,720 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent typhoons (about five per year along
  southern and eastern coasts); damaging floods; tsunamis;
  earthquakes; droughts

Environment--current issues: air pollution (greenhouse gases,
  sulfur dioxide particulates) from reliance on coal, produces acid
  rain; water shortages, particularly in the north; water pollution
  from untreated wastes; deforestation; estimated loss of one-fifth of
  agricultural land since 1949 to soil erosion and economic
  development; desertification; trade in endangered species

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban

Geography--note: world's fourth-largest country (after Russia,
  Canada, and US)



People



Population: 1,246,871,951 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 26% (male 169,206,275; female 149,115,216)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 435,047,915; female 408,663,265)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 39,824,361; female 45,014,919) (1999
  est.)

Population growth rate: 0.77% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 15.1 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.98 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.41 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.15 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.13 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 43.31 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.92 years
  male: 68.57 years
  female: 71.48 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.8 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Chinese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Chinese

Ethnic groups: Han Chinese 91.9%, Zhuang, Uygur, Hui, Yi,
  Tibetan, Miao, Manchu, Mongol, Buyi, Korean, and other nationalities
  8.1%

Religions: Daoism (Taoism), Buddhism, Muslim 2%-3%, Christian 1%
  (est.)
  note: officially atheist, but traditionally pragmatic and eclectic

Languages: Standard Chinese or Mandarin (Putonghua, based on the
  Beijing dialect), Yue (Cantonese), Wu (Shanghaiese), Minbei
  (Fuzhou), Minnan (Hokkien-Taiwanese), Xiang, Gan, Hakka dialects,
  minority languages (see Ethnic divisions entry)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 81.5%
  male: 89.9%
  female: 72.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: People's Republic of China
  conventional short form: China
  local long form: Zhonghua Renmin Gongheguo
  local short form: Zhong Guo
  abbreviation: PRC

Data code: CH

Government type: Communist state

Capital: Beijing

Administrative divisions: 23 provinces (sheng, singular and
  plural), 5 autonomous regions* (zizhiqu, singular and plural), and 4
  municipalities** (shi, singular and plural); Anhui, Beijing**,
  Chongqing**, Fujian, Gansu, Guangdong, Guangxi*, Guizhou, Hainan,
  Hebei, Heilongjiang, Henan, Hubei, Hunan, Jiangsu, Jiangxi, Jilin,
  Liaoning, Nei Mongol*, Ningxia*, Qinghai, Shaanxi, Shandong,
  Shanghai**, Shanxi, Sichuan, Tianjin**, Xinjiang*, Xizang* (Tibet),
  Yunnan, Zhejiang
  note: China considers Taiwan its 23rd province; see separate entry
  for the special administrative region of Hong Kong

Independence: 221 BC (unification under the Qin or Ch'in Dynasty
  221 BC; Qing or Ch'ing Dynasty replaced by the Republic on 12
  February 1912; People's Republic established 1 October 1949)

National holiday: National Day, 1 October (1949)

Constitution: most recent promulgation 4 December 1982

Legal system: a complex amalgam of custom and statute, largely
  criminal law; rudimentary civil code in effect since 1 January 1987;
  new legal codes in effect since 1 January 1980; continuing efforts
  are being made to improve civil, administrative, criminal, and
  commercial law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President JIANG Zemin (since 27 March 1993) and Vice
  President HU Jintao (since 16 March 1998)
  head of government: Premier ZHU Rongji (since 18 March 1998); Vice
  Premiers QIAN Qichen (since 29 March 1993), LI Lanqing (29 March
  1993), WU Bangguo (since 17 March 1995), and WEN Jiabao (since 18
  March 1998)
  cabinet: State Council appointed by the National People's Congress
  (NPC)
  elections: president and vice president elected by the National
  People's Congress for five-year terms; elections last held 16-18
  March 1998 (next to be held NA March 2003); premier nominated by the
  president, confirmed by the National People's Congress
  election results: JIANG Zemin reelected president by the Ninth
  National People's Congress with a total of 2,882 votes (36 delegates
  voted against him, 29 abstained, and 32 did not vote); HU Jintao
  elected vice president by the Ninth National People's Congress with
  a total of 2,841 votes (67 delegates voted against him, 39
  abstained, and 32 did not vote)

Legislative branch: unicameral National People's Congress or
  Quanguo Renmin Daibiao Dahui (2,979 seats; members elected by
  municipal, regional, and provincial people's congresses to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held NA December-NA February 1998 (next to be held
  late 2002-NA March 2003)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--NA

Judicial branch: Supreme People's Court, judges appointed by the
  National People's Congress

Political parties and leaders: Chinese Communist Party or CCP
  registered small parties controlled by CCP

Political pressure groups and leaders: no meaningful political
  opposition groups exist

International organization participation: AfDB, APEC, AsDB, BIS,
  CCC, CDB (non-regional), ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MINURSO, NAM
  (observer), OPCW, PCA, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNOMSIL, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador LI Zhaoxing
  chancery: 2300 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James R. SASSER
  embassy: Xiu Shui Bei Jie 3, 100600 Beijing
  mailing address: PSC 461, Box 50, FPO AP 96521-0002
  consulate(s) general: Chengdu, Guangzhou, Shanghai, Shenyang

Flag description: red with a large yellow five-pointed star and
  four smaller yellow five-pointed stars (arranged in a vertical arc
  toward the middle of the flag) in the upper hoist-side corner



Economy



Economy--overview: Beginning in late 1978 the Chinese leadership
  has been trying to move the economy from a sluggish Soviet-style
  centrally planned economy to a more market-oriented economy but
  still within a rigid political framework of Communist Party control.
  To this end the authorities switched to a system of household
  responsibility in agriculture in place of the old collectivization,
  increased the authority of local officials and plant managers in
  industry, permitted a wide variety of small-scale enterprise in
  services and light manufacturing, and opened the economy to
  increased foreign trade and investment. The result has been a
  quadrupling of GDP since 1978. Agricultural output doubled in the
  1980s, and industry also posted major gains, especially in coastal
  areas near Hong Kong and opposite Taiwan, where foreign investment
  helped spur output of both domestic and export goods. On the darker
  side, the leadership has often experienced in its hybrid system the
  worst results of socialism (bureaucracy, lassitude, corruption) and
  of capitalism (windfall gains and stepped-up inflation). Beijing
  thus has periodically backtracked, retightening central controls at
  intervals. In late 1993 China's leadership approved additional
  long-term reforms aimed at giving still more play to market-oriented
  institutions and at strengthening the center's control over the
  financial system; state enterprises would continue to dominate many
  key industries in what was now termed "a socialist market economy".
  In 1995-97 inflation dropped sharply, reflecting tighter monetary
  policies and stronger measures to control food prices. At the same
  time, the government struggled to (a) collect revenues due from
  provinces, businesses, and individuals; (b) reduce corruption and
  other economic crimes; and (c) keep afloat the large state-owned
  enterprises, most of which had not participated in the vigorous
  expansion of the economy and many of which had been losing the
  ability to pay full wages and pensions. From 60 to 100 million
  surplus rural workers are adrift between the villages and the
  cities, many subsisting through part-time low-paying jobs. Popular
  resistance, changes in central policy, and loss of authority by
  rural cadres have weakened China's population control program, which
  is essential to maintaining growth in living standards. Another
  long-term threat to continued rapid economic growth is the
  deterioration in the environment, notably air pollution, soil
  erosion, and the steady fall of the water table especially in the
  north. China continues to lose arable land because of erosion and
  economic development. The next few years may witness increasing
  tensions between a highly centralized political system and an
  increasingly decentralized economic system. Economic growth probably
  will slow to more moderate levels in 1999-2000.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$4.42 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 7.8% (1998 est.) (official figures may
  substantially overstate growth)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 49%
  services: 32% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.2%
  highest 10%: 30.9% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 696 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 50%, industry 24%,
  services 26% (1997)

Unemployment rate: officially 3% in urban areas; probably 8%-10%;
  substantial unemployment and underemployment in rural areas (1998
  est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: iron and steel, coal, machine building, armaments,
  textiles and apparel, petroleum, cement, chemical fertilizers,
  footwear, toys, food processing, autos, consumer electronics,
  telecommunications

Industrial production growth rate: 8.8% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.16 trillion kWh (1998)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 93%
  hydro: 6%
  nuclear: 1%
  other: 0% (1996 est.)

Electricity--consumption: 994.921 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 6.025 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 755 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, wheat, potatoes, sorghum, peanuts,
  tea, millet, barley, cotton, oilseed; pork; fish

Exports: $183.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: electrical machinery and equipment,
  machinery and mechanical appliances, woven apparel, knit apparel,
  footwear, toys and sporting goods (1998)

Exports--partners: Hong Kong 21%, US 21%, Japan 14%, Germany,
  South Korea, Netherlands, UK, Singapore, Taiwan (1997)

Imports: $140.17 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: electrical machinery and equipment,
  machinery and mechanical appliances, plastics, iron and steel,
  scientific and photograph equipment, paper and paper board (1998)

Imports--partners: Japan 20%, US 12%, Taiwan 12%, South Korea 11%,
  Germany, Hong Kong, Singapore, Russia (1997)

Debt--external: $159 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $6.222 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 yuan (Y) = 10 jiao

Exchange rates: yuan (Y) per US$1--8.28 (February 1999), 8.2779
  (December 1998), 8.2790 (1998), 8.2898 (1997), 8.3142 (1996), 8.3514
  (1995), 8.6187 (1994)
  note: beginning 1 January 1994, the People's Bank of China quotes
  the midpoint rate against the US dollar based on the previous day's
  prevailing rate in the interbank foreign exchange market

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 105 million (1998 est.)

Telephone system: domestic and international services are
  increasingly available for private use; unevenly distributed
  domestic system serves principal cities, industrial centers, and all
  townships
  domestic: interprovincial fiber-optic trunk lines and cellular
  telephone systems have been installed; a domestic satellite system
  with 55 earth stations is in place
  international: satellite earth stations--5 Intelsat (4 Pacific Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region) and 1
  Inmarsat (Pacific and Indian Ocean Regions); several international
  fiber-optic links to Japan, South Korea, Hong Kong, Russia, and
  Germany

Radio broadcast stations: AM 569, FM NA, shortwave 173

Radios: 216.5 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 209 (China Central Television,
  government-owned; in addition there are 31 provincial TV stations
  and nearly 3,000 city TV stations) (1997)

Televisions: 300 million



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 64,900 km (including 5,400 km of provincial "local" rails)
  standard gauge: 61,300 km 1.435-m gauge (12,000 km electrified;
  20,000 km double track)
  narrow gauge: 3,600 km 0.750-m gauge local industrial lines (1998
  est.)
  note: a new total of 68,000 km has been estimated for early 1999

Highways:
  total: 1.21 million km
  paved: 271,300 km (with at least 24,474 km of motorways)
  unpaved: 938,700 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 109,800 km navigable (1997)

Pipelines: crude oil 9,070 km; petroleum products 560 km; natural
  gas 9,383 km (1998)

Ports and harbors: Dalian, Fuzhou, Guangzhou, Haikou, Huangpu,
  Lianyungang, Nanjing, Nantong, Ningbo, Qingdao, Qinhuangdao,
  Shanghai, Shantou, Tianjin, Xiamen, Xingang, Yantai, Zhanjiang

Merchant marine:
  total: 1,759 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 16,828,349
  GRT/24,801,291 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 2, bulk 330, cargo 855, chemical tanker
  21, combination bulk 10, combination ore/oil 1, container 121,
  liquefied gas tanker 20, multifunction large-load carrier 6, oil
  tanker 245, passenger 8, passenger-cargo 47, refrigerated cargo 25,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 24, short-sea passenger 43, vehicle carrier 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 206 (1996 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 192
  over 3,047 m: 18
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 65
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 90
  914 to 1,523 m: 13
  under 914 m: 6 (1996 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 14
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 1 (1996 est.)



Military



Military branches: People's Liberation Army (PLA), which includes
  the Ground Forces, Navy (includes Marines and Naval Aviation), Air
  Force, Second Artillery Corps (the strategic missile force),
  People's Armed Police (internal security troops, nominally
  subordinate to Ministry of Public Security, but included by the
  Chinese as part of the "armed forces" and considered to be an
  adjunct to the PLA in wartime)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 361,267,706 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 198,398,601 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 10,273,696 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $12.608 billion (FY99);
  note-Western analysts believe that China's real defense spending is
  several times higher than the official figure because several
  significant items are funded elsewhere

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: boundary with India in dispute; dispute
  over at least two small sections of the boundary with Russia remain
  to be settled, despite 1997 boundary agreement; most of the boundary
  with Tajikistan in dispute; 33-km section of boundary with North
  Korea in the Paektu-san (mountain) area is indefinite; involved in a
  complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with Malaysia, Philippines,
  Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly Brunei; maritime boundary dispute with
  Vietnam in the Gulf of Tonkin; Paracel Islands occupied by China,
  but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan; claims Japanese-administered
  Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu Tai), as does Taiwan; sections
  of land border with Vietnam are indefinite

Illicit drugs: major transshipment point for heroin produced in
  the Golden Triangle; growing domestic drug abuse problem



======================================================================




@Christmas Island
----------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, island in the Indian Ocean, south of
  Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 10 30 S, 105 40 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 135 sq km
  land: 135 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 138.9 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 12 nm
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; heat and humidity moderated by trade winds

Terrain: steep cliffs along coast rise abruptly to central plateau

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Murray Hill 361 m

Natural resources: phosphate

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island
  can be a maritime hazard

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: located along major sea lanes of Indian Ocean



People



Population: 2,373 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 7.77% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA
  male: NA
  female: NA

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Christmas Islander(s)
  adjective: Christmas Island

Ethnic groups: Chinese 61%, Malay 25%, European 11%, other 3%, no
  indigenous population

Religions: Buddhist 55%, Christian 15%, Muslim 10%, other 20%
  (1991)

Languages: English



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of Christmas Island
  conventional short form: Christmas Island

Data code: KT

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Australian Department of the Environment, Sport and
  Territories

Government type: NA

Capital: The Settlement

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

National holiday: NA

Constitution: Christmas Island Act of 1958

Legal system: under the authority of the governor general of
  Australia and Australian law

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by the Australian governor general
  head of government: Administrator (acting) Graham NICHOLLS (since NA)
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
  by the governor general of Australia and represents the monarch and
  Australia

Legislative branch: unicameral Christmas Island Shire Council (9
  seats; members elected by popular vote to serve one-year terms)
  elections: last held NA December 1998 (next to be held NA December
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of
  Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Phosphate mining had been the only significant
  economic activity, but in December 1987 the Australian Government
  closed the mine. In 1990, the mine was reopened by private
  operators. Australian-based Casinos Austria International Ltd. built
  a $45 million casino on Christmas Island.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: tourism 400 people, mining 100 people

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: tourism, phosphate extraction (near depletion)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: NA

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: phosphate

Exports--partners: Australia, NZ

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: consumer goods

Imports--partners: principally Australia

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1--1.5853 (January
  1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995),
  1.3667 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA
  note: external telephone and telex services are provided by Intelsat
  satellite

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 500 (1992)

Television broadcast stations: NA (1997)

Televisions: 350 (1992)



Transportation



Railways: 24 km to serve phosphate mines

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Flying Fish Cove

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Australia



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Clipperton Island
-----------------





Geography



Location: Middle America, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, 1,120
  km southwest of Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 10 17 N, 109 13 W

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 7 sq km
  land: 7 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 12 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 11.1 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, humid, average temperature 20-32 degrees C,
  rains May-October

Terrain: coral atoll

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Rocher Clipperton 29 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (all coral)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: subject to tornadoes

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: reef about 8 km in circumference



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Clipperton Island
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ile Clipperton
  former: sometimes called Ile de la Passion

Data code: IP

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by France
  from French Polynesia by a high commissioner of the Republic

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (dependent territory of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (dependent territory
  of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Although 115 species of fish have been
  identified in the territorial waters of Clipperton Island, the only
  economic activity is a tuna fishing station.



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Cocos (Keeling) Islands
-----------------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, group of islands in the Indian
  Ocean, south of Indonesia, about one-half of the way from Australia
  to Sri Lanka

Geographic coordinates: 12 30 S, 96 50 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 14 sq km
  land: 14 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes the two main islands of West Island and Home Island

Area--comparative: about 24 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2.6 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: pleasant, modified by the southeast trade wind for about
  nine months of the year; moderate rainfall

Terrain: flat, low-lying coral atolls

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones may occur in the early months of the
  year

Environment--current issues: fresh water resources are limited to
  rainwater accumulations in natural underground reservoirs

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: two coral atolls thickly covered with coconut
  palms and other vegetation



People



Population: 636 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA (July 1998 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.21% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA
  male: NA
  female: NA

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Cocos Islander(s)
  adjective: Cocos Islander

Ethnic groups: Europeans, Cocos Malays

Religions: Sunni Muslim 57%, Christian 22%, other 21% (1981 est.)

Languages: English, Malay



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of Cocos (Keeling) Islands
  conventional short form: Cocos (Keeling) Islands

Data code: CK

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Australian Department of the Environment, Sport and
  Territories

Government type: NA

Capital: West Island

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

National holiday: NA

Constitution: Cocos (Keeling) Islands Act of 1955

Legal system: based upon the laws of Australia and local laws

Suffrage: NA

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by the Australian governor general
  head of government: Administrator (acting) Maureen ELLIS (since NA)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
  by the governor general of Australia and represents the monarch and
  Australia

Legislative branch: unicameral Cocos (Keeling) Islands Shire
  Council (NA seats)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of
  Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Grown throughout the islands, coconuts are the
  sole cash crop. Copra and fresh coconuts are the major export
  earners. Small local gardens and fishing contribute to the food
  supply, but additional food and most other necessities must be
  imported from Australia.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: the Cocos Islands Cooperative Society
  Ltd. employs construction workers, stevedores, and lighterage worker
  operations; tourism employs others

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: copra products and tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: vegetables, bananas, pawpaws, coconuts

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: copra

Exports--partners: Australia

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs

Imports--partners: Australia

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1--1.5853 (January
  1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995),
  1.3667 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: telephone, telex, and facsimile communications with
  Australia and elsewhere via satellite; 1 satellite earth station of
  NA type

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 300 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: none; lagoon anchorage only

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Australia



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Colombia
--------





Introduction



Background: Colombia gained its independence from Spain in 1819.
  Earlier than most countries in the area, it established traditions
  of civilian government with regular, free elections. In recent
  years, however, assassinations, widespread guerrilla activities, and
  drug trafficking have severely disrupted normal public and private
  activities.



Geography



Location: Northern South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea,
  between Panama and Venezuela, and bordering the North Pacific Ocean,
  between Ecuador and Panama

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 72 00 W

Map references: South America, Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 1,138,910 sq km
  land: 1,038,700 sq km
  water: 100,210 sq km
  note: includes Isla de Malpelo, Roncador Cay, Serrana Bank, and
  Serranilla Bank

Area--comparative: slightly less than three times the size of
  Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 7,408 km
  border countries: Brazil 1,643 km, Ecuador 590 km, Panama 225 km,
  Peru 2,900 km, Venezuela 2,050 km

Coastline: 3,208 km (Caribbean Sea 1,760 km, North Pacific Ocean
  1,448 km)

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical along coast and eastern plains; cooler in
  highlands

Terrain: flat coastal lowlands, central highlands, high Andes
  Mountains, eastern lowland plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Nevado del Huila 5,750 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, iron ore,
  nickel, gold, copper, emeralds

Land use:
  arable land: 4%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 39%
  forests and woodland: 48%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: highlands subject to volcanic eruptions;
  occasional earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil damage from
  overuse of pesticides; air pollution, especially in Bogota, from
  vehicle emissions

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Desertification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping

Geography--note: only South American country with coastlines on
  both North Pacific Ocean and Caribbean Sea



People



Population: 39,309,422 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 6,556,566; female 6,402,115)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 11,966,306; female 12,593,685)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 807,282; female 983,468) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.85% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 24.45 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.59 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.48 years
  male: 66.54 years
  female: 74.54 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.87 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Colombian(s)
  adjective: Colombian

Ethnic groups: mestizo 58%, white 20%, mulatto 14%, black 4%,
  mixed black-Amerindian 3%, Amerindian 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 91.3%
  male: 91.2%
  female: 91.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Colombia
  conventional short form: Colombia
  local long form: Republica de Colombia
  local short form: Colombia

Data code: CO

Government type: republic; executive branch dominates government
  structure

Capital: Bogota

Administrative divisions: 32 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento) and 1 capital district* (distrito capital);
  Amazonas, Antioquia, Arauca, Atlantico, Bolivar, Boyaca, Caldas,
  Caqueta, Casanare, Cauca, Cesar, Choco, Cordoba, Cundinamarca,
  Guainia, Guaviare, Huila, La Guajira, Magdalena, Meta, Narino, Norte
  de Santander, Putumayo, Quindio, Risaralda, San Andres y
  Providencia, Distrito Capital de Santa Fe de Bogota*, Santander,
  Sucre, Tolima, Valle del Cauca, Vaupes, Vichada

Independence: 20 July 1810 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 20 July (1810)

Constitution: 5 July 1991

Legal system: based on Spanish law; a new criminal code modeled
  after US procedures was enacted in 1992-93; judicial review of
  executive and legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
  with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Andres PASTRANA (since 7 August 1998);
  Vice President Gustavo BELL (since 7 August 1998); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Andres PASTRANA (since 7 August 1998);
  Vice President Gustavo BELL (since 7 August 1998); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 31 May 1998 (next to be held NA May 2002); vice
  president elected by popular vote for a four-year term in a new
  procedure that replaces the traditional designation of vice
  presidents by newly elected presidents; election last held 31 May
  1998 (next to be held NA May 2002)
  election results: no candidate received more than 50% of the total
  vote, therefore, a run-off election to select a president from the
  two leading candidates was held 21 June 1998; Andres PASTRANA
  elected president; percent of vote--NA; Gustavo BELL elected vice
  president; percent of vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress or Congreso consists of
  the Senate or Senado (102 seats; members are elected by popular vote
  to serve four-year terms) and the House of Representatives or Camara
  de Representantes (161 seats; members are elected by popular vote to
  serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held NA March 1998 (next to be held NA March
  2002); House of Representatives--last held NA March 1998 (next to be
  held NA March 2002)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--PL 50%, PC 24%,
  smaller parties (many aligned with conservatives) 26%; seats by
  party--PL 51, PC 24, smaller parties 27; House of
  Representatives--percent of vote by party--PL 52%, PC 17%, other 31%;
  seats by party--NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justical), highest court of criminal law, judges are selected from
  the nominees of the Higher Council of Justice for eight-year terms;
  Council of State, highest court of administrative law, judges are
  selected from the nominees of the Higher Council of Justice for
  eight-year terms; Constitutional Court, guards integrity and
  supremacy of the constitution, rules on constitutionality of laws,
  amendments to the constitution, and international treaties

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Party or PL [Horaero
  AD/M-19 is a coalition of small leftist parties and dissident
  legal political party formed by Revolutionary Armed Forces of

Political pressure groups and leaders: two largest insurgent
  groups active in Colombia--Revolutionary Armed Forces of Colombia or
  FARC; and National Liberation Army or ELN

International organization participation: BCIE, CAN, Caricom
  (observer), CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G- 3, G-11, G-24, G-77, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO
  (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Luis Alberto MORENO Mejia
  chancery: 2118 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and
  Washington, DC
  consulate(s): Atlanta and Tampa

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Curtis Warren KAMMAN
  embassy: Calle 22D-BIS, numbers 47-51, Apartado Aereo 3831
  mailing address: APO AA 34038

Flag description: three horizontal bands of yellow (top,
  double-width), blue, and red; similar to the flag of Ecuador, which
  is longer and bears the Ecuadorian coat of arms superimposed in the
  center



Economy



Economy--overview: Colombia ended 1998 in recession with 0.2% GDP
  growth due to a combination of low world oil prices, reduced export
  demand, guerrilla violence, and diminished investment flows. The
  Central Bank resorted to interest rate hikes and tight monetary
  policy to defend the peso against pressure from Colombia's worsening
  trade and fiscal deficits. President PASTRANA'S well-respected
  financial team is working to deal with the myriad economic problems
  the country faces, including the highest unemployment level in
  decades and a fiscal deficit of close to 5% of GDP in 1998. The
  government implemented austerity measures, declared emergency
  measures to guard against a potential banking crisis resulting from
  the country's economic slowdown, and is seeking international
  assistance to fund a peace plan with the guerrillas. Guerrilla
  violence and low world oil prices will likely continue to undermine
  the economy in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$254.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.2% (1998)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 26%
  services: 55% (1996)

Population below poverty line: 17.7% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1%
  highest 10%: 46.9% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 16.7% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 16.8 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 46%, agriculture 30%,
  industry 24% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 15.7% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $26 billion (1996 est.)
  expenditures: $30 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: textiles, food processing, oil, clothing and
  footwear, beverages, chemicals, cement; gold, coal, emeralds

Industrial production growth rate: -1.2% (1996)

Electricity--production: 53.725 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 19.26%
  hydro: 80.74%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 53.857 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 132 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, cut flowers, bananas, rice,
  tobacco, corn, sugarcane, cocoa beans, oilseed, vegetables; forest
  products; shrimp

Exports: $11.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum, coffee, coal, gold, bananas, cut
  flowers

Exports--partners: US 38%, EU 23%, Andean Community 18%, Japan 3%
  (1997)

Imports: $14.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: industrial equipment, transportation
  equipment, consumer goods, chemicals, paper products, fuels

Imports--partners: US 42%, EU 23%, Andean Community 14%, Japan 4%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $18 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $40.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Colombian peso (Col$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Colombian pesos (Col$) per US$1--1,562.0 (February
  1999), 1,426.04 (1998), 1,140.96 (1997), 1,036.69 (1996), 912.83
  (1995), 844.84 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.89 million (1986 est.)

Telephone system: modern system in many respects
  domestic: nationwide microwave radio relay system; domestic
  satellite system with 11 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 463, FM 35, shortwave 45 (1998 est.)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 60 (includes seven low-power
  stations) (1997)

Televisions: 5.5 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,380 km
  standard gauge: 150 km 1.435-m gauge (connects Cerrejon coal mines
  to maritime port at Bahia de Portete)
  narrow gauge: 3,230 km 0.914-m gauge (1,830 km in use) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 115,564 km
  paved: 13,868 km
  unpaved: 101,696 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 14,300 km, navigable by river boats

Pipelines: crude oil 3,585 km; petroleum products 1,350 km;
  natural gas 830 km; natural gas liquids 125 km

Ports and harbors: Bahia de Portete, Barranquilla, Buenaventura,
  Cartagena, Leticia, Puerto Bolivar, San Andres, Santa Marta, Tumaco,
  Turbo

Merchant marine:
  total: 14 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 64,7575 GRT/84,518 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 5, container 1, multifunction
  large-load carrier 2, oil tanker 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1,120 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 89
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 36
  914 to 1,523 m: 35
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1,031
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 63
  914 to 1,523 m: 339
  under 914 m: 628 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (Ejercito Nacional), Navy (Armada
  Nacional, includes Marines and Coast Guard), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea
  Colombiana), National Police (Policia Nacional)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 10,418,211 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 6,980,700 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 360,820 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $4 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary dispute with Venezuela
  in the Gulf of Venezuela; territorial disputes with Nicaragua over
  Archipelago de San Andres y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of coca, opium poppies, and
  cannabis; cultivation of coca in 1997--79,500 hectares, an 18%
  increase over 1996; potential production of cocaine in 1997--125
  metric tons, a 14% increase over 1996; cultivation of opium in
  1997--6,600 hectares, a 5% increase over 1996; potential production
  of opium in 1997--66 metric tons, a 5% increase over 1996; the
  world's largest processor of coca derivatives into cocaine; supplier
  of cocaine to the US and other international drug markets; active
  aerial eradication program seeks to virtually eliminate coca and
  opium crops



======================================================================




@Comoros
-------





Introduction



Background: Comoros has had difficulty in achieving political
  stability, having endured 18 coups or attempted coups since
  receiving independence from France in 1975. Most recently, in August
  1997, the islands of Anjouan and Moheli declared their independence
  from Comoros. An attempt in September 1997 by the government to
  reestablish control over the rebellious islands by force failed, and
  presently the Organization of African Unity is brokering
  negotiations to effect a reconciliation.



Geography



Location: Southern Africa, group of islands in the Mozambique
  Channel, about two-thirds of the way between northern Madagascar and
  northern Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 12 10 S, 44 15 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 2,170 sq km
  land: 2,170 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than 12 times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 340 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; rainy season (November to May)

Terrain: volcanic islands, interiors vary from steep mountains to
  low hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Le Kartala 2,360 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 35%
  permanent crops: 10%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 18%
  other: 30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones possible during rainy season (December
  to April); Le Kartala on Grand Comore is an active volcano

Environment--current issues: soil degradation and erosion results
  from crop cultivation on slopes without proper terracing;
  deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: important location at northern end of Mozambique
  Channel



People



Population: 562,723 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 120,397; female 119,945)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 150,851; female 154,990)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 7,878; female 8,662) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.11% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 40.29 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.23 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.91 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 81.63 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 60.85 years
  male: 58.39 years
  female: 63.38 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.43 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Comoran(s)
  adjective: Comoran

Ethnic groups: Antalote, Cafre, Makoa, Oimatsaha, Sakalava

Religions: Sunni Muslim 86%, Roman Catholic 14%

Languages: Arabic (official), French (official), Comoran (a blend
  of Swahili and Arabic)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 57.3%
  male: 64.2%
  female: 50.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federal Islamic Republic of the Comoros
  conventional short form: Comoros
  local long form: Republique Federale Islamique des Comores
  local short form: Comores

Data code: CN

Government type: independent republic

Capital: Moroni

Administrative divisions: three islands; Grande Comore
  (Njazidja), Anjouan (Nzwani), and Moheli (Mwali)
  note: there are also four municipalities named Domoni, Fomboni,
  Moroni, and Moutsamoudou

Independence: 6 July 1975 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 July (1975)

Constitution: 20 October 1996

Legal system: French and Muslim law in a new consolidated code

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Interim President TADJIDDINE Ben Said Massounde
  (since 6 November 1998); note--President Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim died
  in office 6 November 1998 and was succeeded by Interim President
  MASSOUNDE
  head of government: Prime Minister Abbas DJOUSSOUF (since 22
  November 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote to a five-year term;
  election last held 16 March 1996 (next to be held NA); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim elected president; percent
  of vote--64%
  note: the Comoran constitution stipulates that upon the death of the
  president, a new president is to be elected within 90 days; however,
  Interim President TADJIDDINE has stated that a new election cannot
  be held until Anjouan is reunited with the rest of the country

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the Senate
  (15 seats; members selected by regional councils for six-year terms)
  and a Federal Assembly or Assemblee Federale (43 seats; members
  elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Federal Assembly--last held 1 and 8 December 1996 (next to
  be held NA)
  election results: Federal Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--RND 39, RND candidate running as independent 1, FNJ 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supremes, two members are
  appointed by the president, two members are elected by the Federal
  Assembly, one by the Council of each island, and former presidents
  of the republic

Political parties and leaders: Rassemblement National pour le
  NA]
  note: under a new constitution ratified in October 1996, a two-party
  system was established; former President Mohamed TAKI Abdulkarim
  called for all parties to dissolve and join him in creating the RND;
  the constitution stipulates that only parties that win six seats in
  the Federal Assembly (two from each island) are permitted to be in
  opposition, but if no party accomplishes that the second most
  successful party will be in opposition; in the elections of December
  1996 the FNJ appeared to qualify as opposition

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, AFESD,
  AL, CCC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS
  (associate), ILO, IMF, InOC, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU,
  NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Ahmed DJABIR (ambassador to
  the US and Canada and permanent representative to the UN)
  chancery: (temporary) care of the Permanent Mission of the Federal
  and Islamic Republic of the Comoros to the United Nations, 336 East
  45th Street, 2nd Floor, New York, NY 10017

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Comoros; the ambassador to Mauritius is accredited to
  Comoros

Flag description: green with a white crescent in the center of
  the field, its points facing downward; there are four white
  five-pointed stars placed in a line between the points of the
  crescent; the crescent, stars, and color green are traditional
  symbols of Islam; the four stars represent the four main islands of
  the archipelago--Mwali, Njazidja, Nzwani, and Mayotte (a territorial
  collectivity of France, but claimed by Comoros); the design, the
  most recent of several, is described in the constitution approved by
  referendum on 7 June 1992



Economy



Economy--overview: One of the world's poorest countries, Comoros
  is made up of three islands that have inadequate transportation
  links, a young and rapidly increasing population, and few natural
  resources. The low educational level of the labor force contributes
  to a subsistence level of economic activity, high unemployment, and
  a heavy dependence on foreign grants and technical assistance.
  Agriculture, including fishing, hunting, and forestry, is the
  leading sector of the economy. It contributes 40% to GDP, employs
  80% of the labor force, and provides most of the exports. The
  country is not self-sufficient in food production; rice, the main
  staple, accounts for the bulk of imports. The government is
  struggling to upgrade education and technical training, to privatize
  commercial and industrial enterprises, to improve health services,
  to diversify exports, to promote tourism, and to reduce the high
  population growth rate. Continued foreign support is essential if
  the goal of 4% annual GDP growth is to be maintained.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$400 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.5% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$700 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 40%
  industry: 14%
  services: 46% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (1997)

Labor force: 144,500 (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 80%, government 3%

Unemployment rate: 20% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $48 million
  expenditures: $53 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: tourism, perfume distillation, textiles, furniture,
  jewelry, construction materials, soft drinks

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 86.67%
  hydro: 13.33%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: vanilla, cloves, perfume essences, copra,
  coconuts, bananas, cassava (tapioca)

Exports: $11.4 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: vanilla, ylang-ylang, cloves, perfume oil,
  copra

Exports--partners: France 43%, US 43%, Germany 7% (1996)

Imports: $70 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: rice and other foodstuffs, consumer goods;
  petroleum products, cement, transport equipment

Imports--partners: France 59%, South Africa 15%, Kenya 6% (1996)

Debt--external: $219 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $43.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Comoran franc (CF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Comoran francs (CF) per US$1--420.01 (December
  1998), 442.46 (1998), 437.75 (1997), 383.66 (1996), 374.36 (1995),
  416.40 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 4,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: sparse system of microwave radio relay and HF
  radiotelephone communication stations
  domestic: HF radiotelephone communications and microwave radio relay
  international: HF radiotelephone communications to Madagascar and
  Reunion

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 81,000 (1994)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1998)

Televisions: 200 (1994



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 880 km
  paved: 673 km
  unpaved: 207 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Fomboni, Moroni, Moutsamoudou

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Comoran Security Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 132,969 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 79,224 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3 million (1994 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims French-administered Mayotte; the
  islands of Anjouan (Nzwani) and Moheli (Mwali) have moved to secede
  from Comoros



======================================================================




@Congo, Democratic Republic of the
---------------------------------





Geography



Location: Central Africa, northeast of Angola

Geographic coordinates: 0 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 2,345,410 sq km
  land: 2,267,600 sq km
  water: 77,810 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than one-fourth the size of the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 10,271 km
  border countries: Angola 2,511 km, Burundi 233 km, Central African
  Republic 1,577 km, Republic of the Congo 2,410 km, Rwanda 217 km,
  Sudan 628 km, Uganda 765 km, Zambia 1,930 km

Coastline: 37 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: boundaries with neighbors
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot and humid in equatorial river basin;
  cooler and drier in southern highlands; cooler and wetter in eastern
  highlands; north of Equator--wet season April to October, dry season
  December to February; south of Equator--wet season November to March,
  dry season April to October

Terrain: vast central basin is a low-lying plateau; mountains in
  east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pic Marguerite on Mont Ngaliema (Mount Stanley) 5,110
  m

Natural resources: cobalt, copper, cadmium, petroleum, industrial
  and gem diamonds, gold, silver, zinc, manganese, tin, germanium,
  uranium, radium, bauxite, iron ore, coal, hydropower potential,
  timber

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 77%
  other: 13% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts in south; volcanic activity

Environment--current issues: poaching threatens wildlife
  populations; water pollution; deforestation; refugees who arrived in
  mid-1994 were responsible for significant deforestation, soil
  erosion, and wildlife poaching in the eastern part of the country
  (most of those refugees were repatriated in November and December
  1996)

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification

Geography--note: straddles Equator; very narrow strip of land that
  controls the lower Congo river and is only outlet to South Atlantic
  Ocean; dense tropical rain forest in central river basin and eastern
  highlands



People



Population: 50,481,305 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 12,200,532; female 12,136,372)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 12,135,901; female 12,692,057)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 564,084; female 752,359) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.96% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 46.37 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.99 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: in 1994, about a million refugees fled into Zaire (now called
  the Democratic Republic of the Congo or DROC), to escape the
  fighting between the Hutus and the Tutsis in Rwanda and Burundi; the
  outbreak of widespread fighting in the DROC between rebels and
  government forces in October 1996 spurred about 875,000 refugees to
  return to Rwanda in late 1996 and early 1997; additionally,the DROC
  is host to 200,000 Angolan, 110,000 Burundi, 100,000 Sudanese, and
  15,000 Ugandan refugees; renewed fighting in the DROC in August 1998
  resulted in more internal displacement and refugee outflows

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 99.45 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 49.44 years
  male: 47.28 years
  female: 51.67 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.45 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Congolese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Congolese or Congo

Ethnic groups: over 200 African ethnic groups of which the
  majority are Bantu; the four largest tribes--Mongo, Luba, Kongo (all
  Bantu), and the Mangbetu-Azande (Hamitic) make up about 45% of the
  population

Religions: Roman Catholic 50%, Protestant 20%, Kimbanguist 10%,
  Muslim 10%, other syncretic sects and traditional beliefs 10%

Languages: French (official), Lingala (a lingua franca trade
  language), Kingwana (a dialect of Kiswahili or Swahili), Kikongo,
  Tshiluba

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write French, Lingala,
  Kingwana, or Tshiluba
  total population: 77.3%
  male: 86.6%
  female: 67.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Democratic Republic of the Congo
  conventional short form: none
  local long form: Republique Democratique du Congo
  local short form: none
  former: Belgian Congo, Congo/Leopoldville, Congo/Kinshasa, Zaire
  abbreviation: DROC

Data code: CG

Government type: dictatorship; presumably undergoing a transition
  to representative government

Capital: Kinshasa

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces (provinces,
  singular--province) and one city* (ville); Bandundu, Bas-Congo,
  Equateur, Kasai-Occidental, Kasai-Oriental, Katanga, Kinshasa*,
  Maniema, Nord-Kivu, Orientale, Sud-Kivu

Independence: 30 June 1960 (from Belgium)

National holiday: anniversary of independence from Belgium, 30
  June (1960)

Constitution: 24 June 1967, amended August 1974, revised 15
  February 1978, amended April 1990; transitional constitution
  promulgated in April 1994; following successful rebellion the new
  government announced on 29 May 1997 a program of constitutional
  reform and, in November 1998, a draft constitution was approved by
  President KABILA and awaits ratification by national referendum

Legal system: based on Belgian civil law system and tribal law;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Laurent Desire KABILA (since 17 May 1997); note--the
  president is both chief of state and head of government
  head of government: Laurent Desire KABILA (since 17 May 1997);
  note--the president is both chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: National Executive Council, appointed by the president
  elections: before Laurent Desire KABILA seized power, the president
  was elected by popular vote for a seven-year term; election last
  held 29 July 1984 (next was to be held in May 1997); formerly, the
  prime minister was elected by the High Council of the Republic;
  note--the term of the former government expired in 1991, elections
  were not held, and former president MOBUTU continued in office until
  his government was militarily defeated by KABILA on 17 May 1997
  election results: MOBUTU Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga
  reelected president in 1984 without opposition
  note: Marshal MOBUTU Sese Seko Kuku Ngbendu wa Za Banga was
  president from 24 November 1965 until forced into exile on 16 May
  1997 when his government was overturned militarily by Laurent Desire
  KABILA, who immediately assumed governing authority; in his 29 May
  1997 inaugural address, President KABILA announced a two-year time
  table for political reform leading to elections by April 1999;
  subsequently, in December 1998, President KABILA announced that
  elections would be postponed until all foreign military forces
  attempting his overthrow had withdrawn from the country

Legislative branch: legislative activity has been suspended
  pending the establishment of KABILA's promised constitutional
  reforms and the elections to be held by April 1999 (now postponed
  indefinitely)
  elections: the country's first multi-party presidential and
  legislative elections had been scheduled for May 1997 but were not
  held; instead KABILA overthrew the MOBUTU government and seized
  control of the country

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: sole legal party until January
  parties include Union for Democracy and Social Progress or UDPS
  note: President KABILA, who has banned political party activity
  indefinitely, currently leads the Alliance of Democratic Forces for
  the Liberation of Congo-Zaire or AFDL

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  CEEAC, CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, PCA, SADC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Faida MITIFU
  chancery: 1800 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William Lacy SWING
  embassy: 310 Avenue des Aviateurs, Kinshasa
  mailing address: Unit 31550, APO AE 09828

Flag description: light blue with a large yellow five-pointed
  star in the center and a columnar arrangement of six small yellow
  five-pointed stars along the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy of the Democratic Republic of the
  Congo--a nation endowed with vast potential wealth--has declined
  significantly since the mid-1980s. The new government instituted a
  tight fiscal policy that initially curbed inflation and currency
  depreciation, but these small gains were quickly reversed when the
  foreign-backed rebellion in the eastern part of the country began in
  August 1998. The war has dramatically reduced government revenue,
  and increased external debt. Foreign businesses have curtailed
  operations due to uncertainty about the outcome of the conflict and
  because of increased government harassment and restrictions. Poor
  infrastructure, an uncertain legal framework, corruption, and lack
  of transparency in government economic policy remain a brake on
  investment and growth. A number of IMF and World Bank missions have
  met with the new government to help it develop a coherent economic
  plan but associated reforms are on hold.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$34.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -3.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$710 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 59%
  industry: 15%
  services: 26% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 147% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 14.51 million (1993 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry 16%,
  services 19% (1991 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $269 million
  expenditures: $244 million, including capital expenditures of $24
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: mining, mineral processing, consumer products
  (including textiles, footwear, cigarettes, processed foods and
  beverages), cement, diamonds

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 6.4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 6.25%
  hydro: 93.75%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.265 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 195 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 60 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, sugar, palm oil, rubber, tea,
  quinine, cassava (tapioca), palm oil, bananas, root crops, corn,
  fruits; wood products

Exports: $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: diamonds, copper, coffee, cobalt, crude oil

Exports--partners: Benelux 43%, US 22%, South Africa 8%, France,
  Germany, Italy, UK, Japan (1997)

Imports: $819 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, foodstuffs, mining and other
  machinery, transport equipment, fuels

Imports--partners: South Africa 21%, Benelux 14%, China 8%,
  Netherlands, US, France, Germany, Italy, Japan, UK (1997)

Debt--external: $15 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $195.3 million (1995)

Currency: Congolese franc (CF)

Exchange rates: Congolese francs (CF) per US$1--2.5 (January
  1999); new zaires (Z) per US$1--115,000 (January 1998), 83,764
  (October 1996), 7,024 (1995), 1,194 (1994)
  note: on 30 June 1998 the Congolese franc (CF) was introduced,
  replacing the new zaire; 1 Congolese franc (CF)=100,000 new zaires

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 34,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: barely adequate wire and microwave radio relay service in
  and between urban areas; domestic satellite system with 14 earth
  stations
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.87 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18 (1997)

Televisions: 55,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 5,138 km (1995); note--severely reduced route-distance in use
  because of damage to facilities by civil strife
  narrow gauge: 3,987 km 1.067-m gauge (858 km electrified); 125 km
  1.000-m gauge; 1,026 km 0.600-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 145,000 km
  paved: 2,500 km
  unpaved: 142,500 km (1993 est.)

Waterways: 15,000 km including the Congo, its tributaries, and
  unconnected lakes

Pipelines: petroleum products 390 km

Ports and harbors: Banana, Boma, Bukavu, Bumba, Goma, Kalemie,
  Kindu, Kinshasa, Kisangani, Matadi, Mbandaka

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 233 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 23
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 210
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 21
  914 to 1,523 m: 95
  under 914 m: 94 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Presidential Security
  Group, Gendarmerie

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 10,874,744 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 5,536,277 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $250 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.6% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: the Democratic Republic of the Congo is
  in the grip of a civil war that has drawn in military forces from
  neighboring states, with Uganda and Rwanda supporting the rebel
  movement which occupies much of the eastern portion of the state;
  most of the Congo River boundary with the Republic of the Congo is
  indefinite (no agreement has been reached on the division of the
  river or its islands, except in the Pool Malebo/Stanley Pool area)

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis, mostly for domestic
  consumption



======================================================================




@Congo, Republic of the
----------------------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean,
  between Angola and Gabon

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 S, 15 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 342,000 sq km
  land: 341,500 sq km
  water: 500 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,504 km
  border countries: Angola 201 km, Cameroon 523 km, Central African
  Republic 467 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo 2,410 km, Gabon
  1,903 km

Coastline: 169 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (March to June); dry season (June
  to October); constantly high temperatures and humidity; particularly
  enervating climate astride the Equator

Terrain: coastal plain, southern basin, central plateau, northern
  basin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Berongou 903 m

Natural resources: petroleum, timber, potash, lead, zinc,
  uranium, copper, phosphates, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 29%
  forests and woodland: 62%
  other: 9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: seasonal flooding

Environment--current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions;
  water pollution from the dumping of raw sewage; tap water is not
  potable; deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: about 70% of the population lives in Brazzaville,
  Pointe-Noire, or along the railroad between them



People



Population: 2,716,814 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 42% (male 579,940; female 573,847)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 718,820; female 751,911)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 36,987; female 55,309) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.16% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 37.96 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.33 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 100.58 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 47.14 years
  male: 45.42 years
  female: 48.92 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.89 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Congolese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Congolese or Congo

Ethnic groups: Kongo 48%, Sangha 20%, M'Bochi 12%, Teke 17%,
  Europeans NA%; note--Europeans estimated at 8,500, mostly French,
  before the 1997 civil war; may be half of that in 1998, following
  the widespread destruction of foreign businesses in 1997

Religions: Christian 50%, animist 48%, Muslim 2%

Languages: French (official), Lingala and Monokutuba (lingua
  franca trade languages), many local languages and dialects (of which
  Kikongo has the most users)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 74.9%
  male: 83.1%
  female: 67.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of the Congo
  conventional short form: none
  local long form: Republique du Congo
  local short form: none
  former: Congo/Brazzaville, Congo

Data code: CF

Government type: republic

Capital: Brazzaville

Administrative divisions: 9 regions (regions, singular--region)
  and 1 commune*; Bouenza, Brazzaville*, Cuvette, Kouilou, Lekoumou,
  Likouala, Niari, Plateaux, Pool, Sangha

Independence: 15 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Congolese National Day, 15 August (1960)

Constitution: new constitution approved by referendum March 1992
  but is now being redrafted by President SASSOU-NGUESSO

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO (since 25 October
  1997, following the civil war in which he toppled elected president
  Pascal LISSOUBA); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  head of government: normally the prime minister, appointed from the
  majority party by the president; however, since his inauguration,
  President Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO has been both chief of state and head
  of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 16 August 1992 (next was to be held 27 July 1997
  but will be delayed for several years pending the drafting of a new
  constitution)
  election results: Pascal LISSOUBA elected president in 1992; percent
  of vote--Pascal LISSOUBA 61%, Bernard KOLELAS 39%; note--LISSOUBA was
  deposed in 1997, replaced by Denis SASSOU-NGUESSO

Legislative branch: unicameral National Transitional Council (75
  seats, members elected by reconciliation forum of 1,420 delegates;
  note--the National Transitioanl Council replaced the bicameral
  Paarliament in mid-1997
  elections: National Transitional Council--last held NA January 1998
  (next to be held NA 2001); note--at that election the National
  Transitional Council is to be replaced by a bicameral assembly
  election results: National Transitional Council--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: the most important of the many
  SASSOU-NGUESSO, president]; Association for Democracy and
  TCHICAYA, president]; Congolese Movement for Democracy and Integral
  BOKAMBA-YANGOUMA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Union of Congolese
  Socialist Youth or UJSC; Congolese Trade Union Congress or CSC;
  Revolutionary Union of Congolese Women or URFC; General Union of
  Congolese Pupils and Students or UGEEC

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
  CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, MONUA, NAM,
  OAU, OPCW, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: (vacant); Charge d'Affaires ad interim Serge
  MOMBOULI
  chancery: 4891 Colorado Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20011

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador J. Aubrey HOOKS
  embassy: Avenue Amilcar Cabral, Brazzaville
  mailing address: B. P. 1015, Brazzaville
  note: the embassy is temporarily collocated with the US Embassy in
  the Democratic Republic of the Congo (US Embassy Kinshasa, 310
  Avenue des Aviateurs, Kinshasa)

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side by
  a yellow band; the upper triangle (hoist side) is green and the
  lower triangle is red; uses the popular pan-African colors of
  Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is a mixture of village agriculture
  and handicrafts, an industrial sector based largely on oil, support
  services, and a government characterized by budget problems and
  overstaffing. Oil has supplanted forestry as the mainstay of the
  economy, providing a major share of government revenues and exports.
  In the early 1980s, rapidly rising oil revenues enabled the
  government to finance large-scale development projects with GDP
  growth averaging 5% annually, one of the highest rates in Africa.
  Subsequently, falling oil prices cut GDP growth by half. Moreover,
  the government has mortgaged a substantial portion of its oil
  earnings, contributing to the government's shortage of revenues. The
  12 January 1994 devaluation of Franc Zone currencies by 50% resulted
  in inflation of 61% in 1994 but inflation has subsided since.
  Economic reform efforts continued with the support of international
  organizations, notably the World Bank and the IMF. The reform
  program came to a halt in June 1997 when civil war erupted. Denis
  SASSOU-NGUESSO, who returned to power when the war ended in October
  1997, publicly expressed interest in moving forward on economic
  reforms and privatization and in renewing cooperation with
  international financial institutions. However, economic progress was
  badly hurt by slumping oil prices in 1998, which worsened the
  Republic of the Congo's budget deficit. A second blow was the
  resumption of armed conflict in December 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$3.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 10%
  industry: 59%
  services: 31% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $870 million
  expenditures: $970 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: petroleum extraction, cement kilning, lumbering,
  brewing, sugar milling, palm oil, soap, cigarette making

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 438 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.68%
  hydro: 99.32%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 553 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 115 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cassava (tapioca), sugar, rice, corn,
  peanuts, vegetables, coffee, cocoa; forest products

Exports: $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum 50%, lumber, plywood, sugar,
  cocoa, coffee, diamonds

Exports--partners: US 37%, Belgium-Luxembourg 34%, Taiwan, China
  (1997 est.)

Imports: $803 million (f.o.b. 1997)

Imports--commodities: intermediate manufactures, capital
  equipment, construction materials, foodstuffs, petroleum products

Imports--partners: France 22%, Italy 16%, US 9%, UK 6% (1997 est.)

Debt--external: $6 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $159.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--550 (January 1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 18,000 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: services barely adequate for government use;
  key exchanges are in Brazzaville, Pointe-Noire, and Loubomo;
  inter-city lines frequently out-of-order
  domestic: primary network consists of microwave radio relay and
  coaxial cable
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 8,500 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 795 km (includes 285 km private track)
  narrow gauge: 795 km 1.067-m gauge (1995 est.)

Highways:
  total: 12,800 km
  paved: 1,242 km
  unpaved: 11,558 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: the Congo and Ubangi (Oubangui) Rivers provide 1,120
  km of commercially navigable water transport; other rivers are used
  for local traffic only

Pipelines: crude oil 25 km

Ports and harbors: Brazzaville, Impfondo, Ouesso, Oyo,
  Pointe-Noire

Airports: 36 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 32
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 14
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 641,543 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 326,834 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 28,976 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $110 million (1993)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.8% (1993)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: most of the Congo River boundary with the
  Democratic Republic of the Congo is indefinite (no agreement has
  been reached on the division of the river or its islands, except in
  the Stanley Pool/Pool Malebo area)



======================================================================




@Cook Islands
------------





Introduction



Background: Named after Captain Cook, who sighted them in 1770,
  the islands became a British protectorate in 1888. By 1900,
  administrative control was transferred to New Zealand. Residents
  chose self-government with free association with New Zealand in
  1965. The emigration of Cook Islanders to New Zealand in large
  numbers and resulting loss of skilled labor and government deficits
  are continuing problems.



Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean,
  about one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 21 14 S, 159 46 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 240 sq km
  land: 240 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 1.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 120 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds

Terrain: low coral atolls in north; volcanic, hilly islands in
  south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Te Manga 652 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 13%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 78% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (November to March)

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertication, Law of the Sea
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 20,200 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.35 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.75 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.14 years
  male: 69.2 years
  female: 73.1 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.17 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Cook Islander(s)
  adjective: Cook Islander

Ethnic groups: Polynesian (full blood) 81.3%, Polynesian and
  European 7.7%, Polynesian and non-European 7.7%, European 2.4%,
  other 0.9%

Religions: Christian (majority of populace are members of the
  Cook Islands Christian Church)

Languages: English (official), Maori

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Cook Islands

Data code: CW

Dependency status: self-governing in free association with New
  Zealand; Cook Islands is fully responsible for internal affairs; New
  Zealand retains responsibility for external affairs, in consultation
  with the Cook Islands

Government type: self-governing parliamentary democracy

Capital: Avarua

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: none (became self-governing in free association
  with New Zealand on 4 August 1965 and has the right at any time to
  move to full independence by unilateral action)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 4 August

Constitution: 4 August 1965

Legal system: based on New Zealand law and English common law

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Apenera SHORT (since NA); New Zealand High
  Commissioner Jon JONESSEN (since NA January 1998), representative of
  New Zealand
  head of government: Prime Minister Sir Geoffrey A. HENRY (since 1
  February 1989); Deputy Prime Minister Inatio AKARURU (since 1
  February 1989)
  cabinet: Cabinet chosen by the prime minister; collectively
  responsible to Parliament
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the UK representative is
  appointed by the monarch; the New Zealand high commissioner is
  appointed by the New Zealand Government; following legislative
  elections, the leader of the party that wins the most seats usually
  becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (25 seats; members
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 6 March 1994 (next to be held by June 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--Cook
  Islands Party 20, Democratic Party 3, Democratic Alliance Party 2
  note: the House of Arikis (chiefs) advises on traditional matters,
  but has no legislative powers

Judicial branch: High Court

Political parties and leaders: Cook Islands Party [Sir Geoffrey

International organization participation: AsDB, ESCAP
  (associate), FAO, ICAO, ICFTU, IFAD, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  IOC, OPCW, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, WHO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing in free
  association with New Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing in
  free association with New Zealand)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and a large circle of 15 white five-pointed
  stars (one for every island) centered in the outer half of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Like many other South Pacific island nations,
  the Cook Islands' economic development is hindered by the isolation
  of the country from foreign markets, lack of natural resources,
  periodic devastation from natural disasters, and inadequate
  infrastructure. Agriculture provides the economic base with major
  exports made up of copra and citrus fruit. Manufacturing activities
  are limited to fruit-processing, clothing, and handicrafts. Trade
  deficits are made up for by remittances from emigrants and by
  foreign aid, overwhelmingly from New Zealand. In 1996, the
  government declared bankruptcy, citing a $120 million public debt.
  Efforts to exploit tourism potential and expanding the mining and
  fishing industries have not been enough to adequately deal with the
  financial crisis. In an effort to stem further erosion of the
  economy, the government slashed public service salaries by 50%,
  condensed the number of government ministries from 52 to 22, reduced
  the number of civil servants by more than half, began selling
  government assets, and closed all overseas diplomatic posts except
  for the one in New Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$79 million (1994 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,000 (1994 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 17%
  industry: 6%
  services: 77% (FY90/91)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.6% (1994 est.)

Labor force: 6,601 (1993)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 29%, government 27%,
  services 25%, industry 15%, other 4% (1981)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: fruit processing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: copra, citrus, pineapples, tomatoes, beans,
  pawpaws, bananas, yams, taro, coffee

Exports: $4.2 million (f.o.b., 1994 est.)

Exports--commodities: copra, fresh and canned citrus fruit,
  coffee; fish; pearls and pearl shells; clothing

Exports--partners: NZ 80%, Japan, Hong Kong (1993)

Imports: $85 million (c.i.f., 1994)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, textiles, fuels, timber, capital
  goods

Imports--partners: NZ 49%, Italy, Australia (1993)

Debt--external: $160 million (1994)

Economic aid--recipient: $13.1 million (1995); note?New Zealand
  furnishes the greater part

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1--1.8560
  (January 1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5083 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235
  (1995), 1.6844 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 4,180 (1994)

Telephone system:
  domestic: the individual islands are connected by a combination of
  satellite earth stations, microwave systems, and VHF and HF
  radiotelephone; within the islands, service is provided by small
  exchanges connected to subscribers by open wire, cable, and
  fiber-optic cable
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 1

Radios: 13,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in addition, eight low-power
  repeaters provide good coverage on the island of Rarotonga) (1997)

Televisions: 3,500 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 187 km
  paved: 35 km
  unpaved: 152 km (1980 est.)

Ports and harbors: Avarua, Avatiu

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,310 GRT/2,181 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand, in
  consultation with the Cook Islands and at its request



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Coral Sea Islands
-----------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, islands in the Coral Sea, northeast of
  Australia

Geographic coordinates: 18 00 S, 152 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: less than 3 sq km
  land: less than 3 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes numerous small islands and reefs scattered over a sea
  area of about 1 million sq km, with the Willis Islets the most
  important

Area--comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,095 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: sand and coral reefs and islands (or cays)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Cato Island 6 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (mostly grass or scrub cover)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: occasional, tropical cyclones

Environment--current issues: no permanent fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: important nesting area for birds and turtles



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there is a staff of three to four at the meteorological station



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Coral Sea Islands Territory
  conventional short form: Coral Sea Islands

Data code: CR

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories

Legal system: the laws of Australia, where applicable, apply

Executive branch: administered from Canberra by the Department of
  the Environment, Sport and Territories

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of
  Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Communications



Communications--note: there are automatic weather relay stations
  on many of the isles and reefs relaying data to the mainland



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Australia;
  visited regularly by the Royal Australian Navy; Australia has
  control over the activities of visitors



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Costa Rica
----------





Introduction



Background: Costa Rica declared its independence from Spain in
  1821. After a turbulent beginning it inaugurated an era of peaceful
  democracy in 1889, subsequently interrupted only twice, by a
  dictatorial interlude in 1917-19 and an armed uprising in 1948.
  Increasing the role of the private sector while maintaining the
  government's social safety net and keeping under control the budget
  deficit, unemployment, and inflation are key current issues.



Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and
  the North Pacific Ocean, between Nicaragua and Panama

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 84 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 51,100 sq km
  land: 50,660 sq km
  water: 440 sq km
  note: includes Isla del Coco

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 639 km
  border countries: Nicaragua 309 km, Panama 330 km

Coastline: 1,290 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; dry season (December to April); rainy season
  (May to November)

Terrain: coastal plains separated by rugged mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Cerro Chirripo 3,810 m

Natural resources: hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 31%
  other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,200 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional earthquakes, hurricanes along
  Atlantic coast; frequent flooding of lowlands at onset of rainy
  season; active volcanoes

Environment--current issues: deforestation, largely a result of
  the clearing of land for cattle ranching; soil erosion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine Life
  Conservation



People



Population: 3,674,490 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 622,260; female 593,720)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 1,150,900; female 1,121,970)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 85,526; female 100,114) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.89% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.46 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.16 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.89 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 76.04 years
  male: 73.6 years
  female: 78.61 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.76 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Costa Rican(s)
  adjective: Costa Rican

Ethnic groups: white (including mestizo) 96%, black 2%,
  Amerindian 1%, Chinese 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish (official), English spoken around Puerto Limon

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 94.8%
  male: 94.7%
  female: 95% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Costa Rica
  conventional short form: Costa Rica
  local long form: Republica de Costa Rica
  local short form: Costa Rica

Data code: CS

Government type: democratic republic

Capital: San Jose

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia); Alajuela, Cartago, Guanacaste, Heredia, Limon,
  Puntarenas, San Jose

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 9 November 1949

Legal system: based on Spanish civil law system; judicial review
  of legislative acts in the Supreme Court; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ (since 8 May 1998);
  First Vice President Astrid FISCHEL Volio (since 8 May 1998), Second
  Vice President Elizabeth ODIO Benito (since 8 May 1998);
  note--president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ (since 8 May
  1998); First Vice President Astrid FISCHEL Volio (since 8 May 1998),
  Second Vice President Elizabeth ODIO Benito (since 8 May 1998);
  note--president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet selected by the president
  elections: president and vice presidents elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 1 February
  1998 (next to be held NA February 2002)
  election results: Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ elected president; percent
  of vote--Miguel Angel RODRIGUEZ (PUSC) 46.6%, Jose Miguel CORRALES
  (PLN) 44.6%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Asamblea
  Legislativa (57 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 1 February 1998 (next to be held NA February
  2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PUSC 41%, PLN 35%,
  minority parties 24%; seats by party--PUSC 27, PLN 23, minority
  parties 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), justices are
  elected for eight-year terms by the Legislative Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Social Christian Unity Party or
  NA]
  note: mainly a two-party system--PUSC and PLN; numerous small parties
  share less than 25% of population's support

Political pressure groups and leaders: Costa Rican Confederation
  of Democratic Workers or CCTD (Liberation Party affiliate);
  Confederated Union of Workers or CUT (Communist Party affiliate);
  Authentic Confederation of Democratic Workers or CATD (Communist
  Party affiliate); Chamber of Coffee Growers; National Association
  for Economic Development or ANFE; Free Costa Rica Movement or MCRL
  (rightwing militants); National Association of Educators or ANDE;
  Federation of Public Service Workers or FTSP

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  LAES, LAIA (observer), NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UN
  Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jaime DAREMBLUM
  chancery: 2114 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Albuquerque, Atlanta, Chicago, Durham,
  Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia,
  San Antonio, San Diego, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), and
  Tampa
  consulate(s): Austin

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas J. DODD
  embassy: Pavas Road, San Jose
  mailing address: APO AA 34020

Flag description: five horizontal bands of blue (top), white, red
  (double width), white, and blue, with the coat of arms in a white
  disk on the hoist side of the red band



Economy



Economy--overview: Costa Rica's basically stable economy depends
  on tourism, agriculture, and electronics exports. Poverty has been
  substantially reduced over the past 15 years and a strong social
  safety net has been put into place. Economic growth has rebounded
  from -0.9% in 1996 to 3% in 1997 and an estimated 5.5% in 1998.
  Inflation rose to 22.5% in 1995, dropped to 11.1% in 1997, and
  reached an estimated 12% in 1998. Unemployment appears moderate at
  5.6%, but substantial underemployment continues. Furthermore, large
  government deficits--fueled by interest payments on the massive
  internal debt--have undermined efforts to maintain the quality of
  social services. Curbing inflation, reducing the deficit, and
  improving public sector efficiency remain key challenges to the
  government. President RODRIGUEZ has called for an increased economic
  role for the private sector, but political resistance to
  privatization has stalled much of his economic program.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$24 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 15%
  industry: 24%
  services: 61% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.3%
  highest 10%: 34.7% (1996)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 12% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 868,300

Labor force--by occupation: industry and commerce 23.3%,
  government and services 55.1%, agriculture 21.6% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5.6% (1998 est.); much underemployment

Budget:
  revenues: $1.1 billion
  expenditures: $1.34 billion, including capital expenditures of $110
  million (1991 est.)

Industries: food processing, textiles and clothing, construction
  materials, fertilizer, plastic products

Industrial production growth rate: 10.5% (1992)

Electricity--production: 4.785 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 14.11%
  hydro: 75.44%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 10.45% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 4.931 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 44 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 190 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, bananas, sugar, corn, rice, beans,
  potatoes; beef; timber

Exports: $3.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: manufactured products, coffee, bananas,
  textiles, sugar (1997)

Exports--partners: US, Benelux, Germany, Italy, Guatemala, El
  Salvador, Netherlands, UK, France (1997)

Imports: $4.5 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: raw materials, consumer goods, capital
  equipment, petroleum (1997)

Imports--partners: US, Japan, Mexico, Venezuela, Guatemala,
  Germany (1997)

Debt--external: $3.2 billion (October 1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $107.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Costa Rican colon (C) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: Costa Rican colones (C) per US$1--272.58 (January
  1999), 257.23 (1998), 232.60 (1997), 207.69 (1996), 179.73 (1995),
  157.07 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 281,042 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: very good domestic telephone service
  domestic: NA
  international: connected to Central American Microwave System;
  satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 71, FM 0, shortwave 13

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 6 (in addition, there are 11
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 340,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 950 km
  narrow gauge: 950 km 1.067-m gauge (260 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 35,597 km
  paved: 6,051 km
  unpaved: 29,546 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: about 730 km, seasonally navigable

Pipelines: petroleum products 176 km

Ports and harbors: Caldera, Golfito, Moin, Puerto Limon, Puerto
  Quepos, Puntarenas

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 156 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 28
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 18
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 128
  914 to 1,523 m: 29
  under 914 m: 99 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Coast Guard, Air Section, Ministry of Public
  Security Force (Fuerza Publica); note--during 1996, the Ministry of
  Public Security reorganized and eliminated the Civil Guard, Rural
  Assistance Guard, and Frontier Guards as separate entities; they are
  now under the Ministry and operate on a geographic command basis
  performing ground security, law enforcement, counternarcotics, and
  national security (border patrol) functions; the constitution
  prohibits armed forces

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 988,887 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 662,827 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 36,751 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $55 million (1995)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment country for cocaine and heroin from
  South America; illicit production of cannabis on small, scattered
  plots



======================================================================




@Cote d'Ivoire
-------------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Ghana and Liberia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 5 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 322,460 sq km
  land: 318,000 sq km
  water: 4,460 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,110 km
  border countries: Burkina Faso 584 km, Ghana 668 km, Guinea 610 km,
  Liberia 716 km, Mali 532 km

Coastline: 515 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical along coast, semiarid in far north; three
  seasons--warm and dry (November to March), hot and dry (March to
  May), hot and wet (June to October)

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plains; mountains in northwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Gulf of Guinea 0 m
  highest point: Mont Nimba 1,752 m

Natural resources: petroleum, diamonds, manganese, iron ore,
  cobalt, bauxite, copper

Land use:
  arable land: 8%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 41%
  forests and woodland: 22%
  other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 680 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: coast has heavy surf and no natural harbors;
  during the rainy season torrential flooding is possible

Environment--current issues: deforestation (most of the country's
  forests--once the largest in West Africa--have been cleared by the
  timber industry); water pollution from sewage and industrial and
  agricultural effluents

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber
  83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 15,818,068 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 47% (male 3,702,051; female 3,664,672)
  15-64 years: 51% (male 4,154,440; female 3,952,999)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 174,065; female 169,841) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.35% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.76 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.17 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: after Liberia's civil war started in 1990, more than 350,000
  refugees fled to Cote d'Ivoire and, by September 1998, according to
  the UNHCR, about 85,000 remain

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.02 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 94.17 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 46.05 years
  male: 44.48 years
  female: 47.67 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.89 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ivorian(s)
  adjective: Ivorian

Ethnic groups: Baoule 23%, Bete 18%, Senoufou 15%, Malinke 11%,
  Agni, Africans from other countries (mostly Burkinabe and Malians,
  about 3 million), non-Africans 130,000 to 330,000 (French 30,000 and
  Lebanese 100,000 to 300,000)

Religions: Muslim 60%, Christian 22%, indigenous 18% (some of
  these are also numbered among the Christians and Muslims)

Languages: French (official), 60 native dialects with Dioula the
  most widely spoken

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 48.5%
  male: 57%
  female: 40%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Cote d'Ivoire
  conventional short form: Cote d'Ivoire
  local long form: Republique de Cote d'Ivoire
  local short form: Cote d'Ivoire
  former: Ivory Coast

Data code: IV

Government type: republic; multiparty presidential regime
  established 1960

Capital: Yamoussoukro
  note: although Yamoussoukro has been the capital since 1983, Abidjan
  remains the administrative center; the US, like other countries,
  maintains its Embassy in Abidjan

Administrative divisions: 50 departments (departements,
  singular--departement); Abengourou, Abidjan, Aboisso, Adzope,
  Agboville, Agnibilekrou, Bangolo, Beoumi, Biankouma, Bondoukou,
  Bongouanou, Bouafle, Bouake, Bouna, Boundiali, Dabakala, Daloa,
  Danane, Daoukro, Dimbokro, Divo, Duekoue, Ferkessedougou, Gagnoa,
  Grand-Lahou, Guiglo, Issia, Katiola, Korhogo, Lakota, Man, Mankono,
  Mbahiakro, Odienne, Oume, Sakassou, San-Pedro, Sassandra, Seguela,
  Sinfra, Soubre, Tabou, Tanda, Tingrela, Tiassale, Touba, Toumodi,
  Vavoua, Yamoussoukro, Zuenoula
  note: Cote d'Ivoire may have a new administrative structure
  consisting of 58 departments; the following additional departments
  have been reported but not yet confirmed by the US Board on
  Geographic Names (BGN); Adiake', Ale'pe', Dabon, Grand Bassam,
  Jacqueville, Tiebissou, Toulepleu, Bocanda

Independence: 7 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 7 August

Constitution: 3 November 1960; has been amended numerous times,
  last time July 1998

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
  judicial review in the Constitutional Chamber of the Supreme Court;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Henri Konan BEDIE (since 7 December 1993);
  note--succeeded to the presidency following the death of President
  Felix HOUPHOUET-BOIGNY, who had served continuously since November
  1960
  head of government: Prime Minister Daniel Kablan DUNCAN (since 10
  December 1993)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 22 October 1995 (next to be held October 2000);
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Henri Konan BEDIE elected president; percent of
  vote--Henri Konan BEDIE 96%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (175 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: elections last held 27 November 1995 (next to be held NA
  November 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PDCI
  150, RDR 13, FPI 12
  note: a Senate will be created in 2000

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party of the Cote

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, MINURCA, NAM, OAU, OPCW,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Koffi Moise KOUMOUE-KOFFI
  chancery: 2424 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador George MU
  embassy: 5 Rue Jesse Owens, Abidjan
  mailing address: 01 B. P. 1712, Abidjan

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of orange (hoist
  side), white, and green; similar to the flag of Ireland, which is
  longer and has the colors reversed--green (hoist side), white, and
  orange; also similar to the flag of Italy, which is green (hoist
  side), white, and red; design was based on the flag of France



Economy



Economy--overview: Cote d'Ivoire is among the world's largest
  producers and exporters of coffee, cocoa beans, and palm oil.
  Consequently, the economy is highly sensitive to fluctuations in
  international prices for these products and to weather conditions.
  Despite attempts by the government to diversify the economy, it is
  still largely dependent on agriculture and related activities, which
  engage roughly 68% of the population. After several years of lagging
  performance, the Ivorian economy began a comeback in 1994, due to
  the devaluation of the CFA franc and improved prices for cocoa and
  coffee, growth in nontraditional primary exports such as pineapples
  and rubber, limited trade and banking liberalization, offshore oil
  and gas discoveries, and generous external financing and debt
  rescheduling by multilateral lenders and France. The 50% devaluation
  of Franc Zone currencies on 12 January 1994 caused a one-time jump
  in the inflation rate to 26% in 1994, but the rate fell sharply in
  1996-98. Moreover, government adherence to donor-mandated reforms
  led to a jump in growth to 6% annually in 1996-98. Growth may slow
  in 1999-2000 because of the difficulty of meeting the conditions of
  international donors and continued low prices of key exports.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$24.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,680 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 31%
  industry: 20%
  services: 49% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.8%
  highest 10%: 28.5% (1988)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $2.3 billion
  expenditures: $2.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $640
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: foodstuffs, beverages; wood products, oil refining,
  automobile assembly, textiles, fertilizer, construction materials,
  electricity

Industrial production growth rate: 15% (annual rate, first half
  1998)

Electricity--production: 1.88 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 22%
  hydro: 47%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 31% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.88 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, cocoa beans, bananas, palm kernels,
  corn, rice, manioc (tapioca), sweet potatoes, sugar, cotton, rubber;
  timber

Exports: $4.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: cocoa 36%, coffee, tropical woods,
  petroleum, cotton, bananas, pineapples, palm oil, cotton, fish

Exports--partners: Netherlands 17%, France 15%, Germany 7%, US 6%,
  Italy 5% (1997)

Imports: $2.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: food, consumer goods; capital goods, fuel,
  transport equipment

Imports--partners: France 28%, Nigeria 20%, US 6%, Italy 5%,
  Germany 4% (1997)

Debt--external: $16.8 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $1 billion (1996 est.)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: CFA francs (CFAF) per US$1--560.01 (January 1999),
  589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55 (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 200,000 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: well-developed by African standards but
  operating well below capacity
  domestic: open-wire lines and microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean); 2 coaxial submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 71, FM 4, shortwave 13

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 14 (1997)

Televisions: 810,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 660 km
  narrow gauge: 660 km 1.000-meter gauge; 25 km double track (1995
  est.)

Highways:
  total: 50,400 km
  paved: 4,889 km
  unpaved: 45,511 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 980 km navigable rivers, canals, and numerous coastal
  lagoons

Ports and harbors: Abidjan, Aboisso, Dabou, San-Pedro

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 oil tanker (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,200 GRT/1,500 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 36 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 7
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 29
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 12
  under 914 m: 9 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary
  Gendarmerie, Republican Guard (includes Presidential Guard),
  Sapeur-Pompier (Military Fire Group)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,677,627 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,917,433 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 178,860 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $94 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.9% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis, mostly for local
  consumption; minor transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast
  Asian heroin to Europe and occasionally to the US, and for Latin
  American cocaine destined for Europe



======================================================================




@Croatia
-------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea,
  between Bosnia and Herzegovina and Slovenia

Geographic coordinates: 45 10 N, 15 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 56,538 sq km
  land: 56,410 sq km
  water: 128 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,197 km
  border countries: Bosnia and Herzegovina 932 km, Hungary 329 km,
  Serbia and Montenegro 266 km (241 km with Serbia; 25 km with
  Montenegro), Slovenia 670 km

Coastline: 5,790 km (mainland 1,778 km, islands 4,012 km)

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean and continental; continental climate
  predominant with hot summers and cold winters; mild winters, dry
  summers along coast

Terrain: geographically diverse; flat plains along Hungarian
  border, low mountains and highlands near Adriatic coast, coastline,
  and islands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Dinara 1,830 m

Natural resources: oil, some coal, bauxite, low-grade iron ore,
  calcium, natural asphalt, silica, mica, clays, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 21%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 38%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent and destructive earthquakes

Environment--current issues: air pollution (from metallurgical
  plants) and resulting acid rain is damaging the forests; coastal
  pollution from industrial and domestic waste; widespread casualties
  and destruction of infrastructure in border areas affected by civil
  strife

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification

Geography--note: controls most land routes from Western Europe to
  Aegean Sea and Turkish Straits



People



Population: 4,676,865 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 404,761; female 383,088)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 1,591,831; female 1,591,106)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 272,219; female 433,860) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.1% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.34 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 11.14 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.81 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.63 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.84 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74 years
  male: 70.69 years
  female: 77.52 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.52 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Croat(s)
  adjective: Croatian

Ethnic groups: Croat 78%, Serb 12%, Muslim 0.9%, Hungarian 0.5%,
  Slovenian 0.5%, others 8.1% (1991)

Religions: Catholic 76.5%, Orthodox 11.1%, Muslim 1.2%,
  Protestant 0.4%, others and unknown 10.8%

Languages: Serbo-Croatian 96%, other 4% (including Italian,
  Hungarian, Czech, Slovak, and German)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 99%
  female: 95% (1991 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Croatia
  conventional short form: Croatia
  local long form: Republika Hrvatska
  local short form: Hrvatska

Data code: HR

Government type: presidential/parliamentary democracy

Capital: Zagreb

Administrative divisions: 21 counties (zupanije,
  zupanija--singular): Bjelovar-Bilogora, City of Zagreb,
  Dubrovnik-Neretva, Istra, Karlovac, Koprivnica-Krizevci,
  Krapina-Zagorje, Lika-Senj, Medimurje, Osijek-Baranja,
  Pozega-Slavonia, Primorje-Gorski Kotar, Sibenik, Sisak-Moslavina,
  Slavonski Brod-Posavina, Split-Dalmatia, Varazdin,
  Virovitica-Podravina, Vukovar-Srijem, Zadar-Knin, Zagreb
  note: there are two special self-governing districts (kotari,
  kotar--singular) under local Serb control: Glina, Knin

Independence: 25 June 1991 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: Statehood Day, 30 May (1990)

Constitution: adopted on 22 December 1990

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal (16 years of age, if
  employed)

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Franjo TUDJMAN (since 30 May 1990)
  head of government: Prime Minister Zlatko MATESA (since 7 November
  1995); Deputy Prime Ministers Mate GRANIC (since 8 September 1992),
  Ivica KOSTOVIC (since 14 October 1993), Jure RADIC (since NA October
  1994), Borislav SKEGRO (since 3 April 1993), and Ljerka MINTAS-HODAK
  (since November 1995)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 15 June 1997 (next to be held NA 2002); prime
  minister and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
  election results: President Franjo TUDJMAN reelected; percent of
  vote--Franjo TUDJMAN 61%, Zdravko TOMAC 21%, Vlado GOTOVAC 18%

Legislative branch: bicameral Assembly or Sabor consists of the
  House of Counties or Zupanijski Dom (68 seats--63 directly elected by
  popular vote, 5 appointed by the president; members serve four-year
  terms) and House of Representatives or the Zastupnicki Dom (127
  seats; members are directly elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: House of Counties--last held 13 April 1997 (next to be
  held NA 2001); House of Representatives--last held 29 October 1995
  (next to be held NA 1999)
  election results: House of Counties--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--HDZ 42, HDZ/HSS 11, HSS 2, IDS 2, SDP/PGS/HNS 2,
  SDP/HNS 2, HSLS/HSS/HNS 1, HSLS 1; note--in some districts certain
  parties ran as coalitions, while in others they ran alone; House of
  Representatives--percent of vote by party--HDZ 45.23%,
  HSS/IDS/HNS/HKDU/SBHS 18.26%, HSLS 11.55%, SDP 8.93%, HSP 5.01%;
  seats by party--HDZ 75, HSLS 12, HSS 10, SDP 10, IDS 4, HSP 4, HNS 2,
  SNS 2, HND 1, ASH 1, HKDU 1, SBHS 1, independents 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed for eight-year
  terms by the Judicial Council of the Republic, which is elected by
  the House of Representatives; Constitutional Court, judges appointed
  for eight-year terms by the Judicial Council of the Republic, which
  is elected by the House of Representatives

Political parties and leaders: Croatian Democratic Union or HDZ

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: BIS (pending member),
  CCC, CE, CEI, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM (observer), OAS (observer), OPCW,
  OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Miomir ZUZUL
  chancery: 2343 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Cleveland, Los Angeles, New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William D. MONTGOMERY
  embassy: Andrije Hebranga 2, Zagreb
  mailing address: use street address

Flag description: red, white, and blue horizontal bands with
  Croatian coat of arms (red and white checkered)



Economy



Economy--overview: Before the dissolution of Yugoslavia, the
  Republic of Croatia, after Slovenia, was the most prosperous and
  industrialized area, with a per capita output perhaps one-third
  above the Yugoslav average. Croatia faces considerable economic
  problems stemming from: the legacy of longtime communist
  mismanagement of the economy; damage during the internecine fighting
  to bridges, factories, power lines, buildings, and houses; the large
  refugee and displaced population, both Croatian and Bosnian; and the
  disruption of economic ties. Western aid and investment, especially
  in the tourist and oil industries, would help restore the economy.
  The government has been successful in some reform efforts--partially
  macroeconomic stabilization policies--and it has normalized relations
  with its creditors. Yet it still is struggling with privatization of
  large state enterprises and with bank reform. In 1998, Croatia made
  progress in reducing its current account deficit to about 8% of GDP
  from 12% the previous year. Economic growth continues to lag,
  however, and growing levels of inter-enterprise debt plague the
  domestic economy. Four commercial banks were put under government
  control and a major conglomerate is teetering on collapse.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$23.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$5,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 12%
  industry: 24%
  services: 64% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.4% (1998)

Labor force: 1.63 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: industry and mining 31.1%, agriculture
  4.3%, government 19.1% (including education and health), other 45.5%
  (1993)

Unemployment rate: 18.6% (yearend 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $5.3 billion
  expenditures: $6.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $78.5
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: chemicals and plastics, machine tools, fabricated
  metal, electronics, pig iron and rolled steel products, aluminum,
  paper, wood products, construction materials, textiles,
  shipbuilding, petroleum and petroleum refining, food and beverages;
  tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 10.682 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 29.25%
  hydro: 70.75%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 14.632 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 4.95 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflower seed,
  alfalfa, clover, olives, citrus, grapes, vegetables; livestock,
  dairy products

Exports: $4.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 13.6%,
  miscellaneous manufactures 27.6%, chemicals 14.2%, food and live
  animals 12.2%, raw materials 6.1%, fuels and lubricants 9.4%,
  beverages and tobacco 2.7% (1993)

Exports--partners: Germany 22%, Italy 21%, Slovenia 18% (1994)

Imports: $8.4 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 23.1%,
  fuels and lubricants 8.8%, food and live animals 9.0%, chemicals
  14.2%, miscellaneous manufactured articles 16.0%, raw materials
  3.5%, beverages and tobacco 1.4% (1993)

Imports--partners: Germany 21%, Italy 19%, Slovenia 10% (1994)

Debt--external: $8 billion (October 1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Croatian kuna (HRK) = 100 lipas

Exchange rates: Croatian kuna per US$1--6.317 (January 1999),
  6.362 (1998), 6.157 (1997), 5.434 (1996), 5.230 (1995), 5.996 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.216 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: no satellite earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 14, FM 8, shortwave 0

Radios: 1.1 million

Television broadcast stations: 18 (in addition, there are 145
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.52 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,296 km
  standard gauge: 2,296 km 1.435-m gauge (796 km electrified)
  note: some lines remain inoperative or not in use; disrupted by
  territorial dispute (1997)

Highways:
  total: 27,840 km
  paved: 22,690 km (including 330 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 5,150 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 785 km perennially navigable; large sections of Sava
  blocked by downed bridges, silt, and debris

Pipelines: crude oil 670 km; petroleum products 20 km; natural
  gas 310 km (1992); note--under repair following territorial dispute

Ports and harbors: Dubrovnik, Dugi Rat, Omisalj, Ploce, Pula,
  Rijeka, Sibenik, Split, Vukovar (inland waterway port on Danube),
  Zadar

Merchant marine:
  total: 64 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 810,226 GRT/1,227,468
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 15, cargo 26, chemical tanker 2, combination
  bulk 5, container 5, liquefied gas 1, multifunction large-load
  carrier 3, oil tanker 1, passenger 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2,
  short-sea passenger 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 72 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 21
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 51
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 42 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Naval Forces, Air and Air
  Defense Forces, Frontier Guard, Home Guard

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,188,898 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 943,719 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 33,722 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $950 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 5% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Eastern Slavonia, which was held by
  ethnic Serbs during the ethnic conflict, was returned to Croatian
  control by the UN Transitional Administration for Eastern Slavonia
  on 15 January 1998; Croatia and Italy made progress toward resolving
  a bilateral issue dating from World War II over property and ethnic
  minority rights; significant progress has been made with Slovenia
  toward resolving a maritime border dispute over direct access to the
  sea in the Adriatic; Serbia and Montenegro is disputing Croatia's
  claim to the Prevlaka Peninsula in southern Croatia because it
  controls the entrance to Boka Kotorska in Montenegro; Prevlaka is
  currently under observation by the UN military observer mission in
  Prevlaka (UNMOP)

Illicit drugs: transit point along the Balkan route for Southwest
  Asian heroin to Western Europe; a minor transit point for maritime
  shipments of South American cocaine bound for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Cuba
----





Introduction



Background: Fidel CASTRO led a rebel army to victory in 1959, and
  his guiding vision has defined Cuba's Communist revolution while his
  iron will has held the country together for more than four decades.
  CASTRO brought Cuba onto the world stage by inviting Soviet support
  in the 1960s, inciting revolutionary movements throughout Latin
  America and Africa in the 1970s, and sending his army to fight in
  Angola in the 1980s. At home, Havana provided Cubans with high
  levels of healthcare, education, and social security while
  suppressing the Roman Catholic Church and arresting political
  dissidents. Cuba is slowly recovering from severe economic recession
  following the withdrawal of former-Soviet subsidies, worth
  $4billion-$6 billion per year, in 1990.



Geography



Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, south of Florida

Geographic coordinates: 21 30 N, 80 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 110,860 sq km
  land: 110,860 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
  total: 29 km
  border countries: US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay 29 km
  note: Guantanamo Naval Base is leased by the US and thus remains
  part of Cuba

Coastline: 3,735 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds; dry season (November
  to April); rainy season (May to October)

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling plains, with rugged hills and
  mountains in the southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Pico Turquino 2,005 m

Natural resources: cobalt, nickel, iron ore, copper, manganese,
  salt, timber, silica, petroleum

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 7%
  permanent pastures: 27%
  forests and woodland: 24%
  other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: the east coast is subject to hurricanes from
  August to October (in general, the country averages about one
  hurricane every other year); droughts are common

Environment--current issues: pollution of Havana Bay; overhunting
  threatens wildlife populations; deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Marine
  Life Conservation

Geography--note: largest country in Caribbean



People



Population: 11,096,395 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 22% (male 1,236,899; female 1,172,560)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 3,820,255; female 3,801,768)
  65 years and over: 9% (male 496,772; female 568,141) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.4% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.9 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.38 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.52 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.81 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.78 years
  male: 73.41 years
  female: 78.3 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.58 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Cuban(s)
  adjective: Cuban

Ethnic groups: mulatto 51%, white 37%, black 11%, Chinese 1%

Religions: nominally 85% Roman Catholic prior to CASTRO assuming
  power; Protestants, Jehovah's Witnesses, Jews, and Santeria are also
  represented

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 95.7%
  male: 96.2%
  female: 95.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Cuba
  conventional short form: Cuba
  local long form: Republica de Cuba
  local short form: Cuba

Data code: CU

Government type: Communist state

Capital: Havana

Administrative divisions: 14 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia) and 1 special municipality* (municipio
  especial); Camaguey, Ciego de Avila, Cienfuegos, Ciudad de La
  Habana, Granma, Guantanamo, Holguin, Isla de la Juventud*, La
  Habana, Las Tunas, Matanzas, Pinar del Rio, Sancti Spiritus,
  Santiago de Cuba, Villa Clara

Independence: 20 May 1902 (from Spain 10 December 1898;
  administered by the US from 1898 to 1902)

National holiday: Rebellion Day, 26 July (1953); Liberation Day,
  1 January (1959)

Constitution: 24 February 1976

Legal system: based on Spanish and American law, with large
  elements of Communist legal theory; does not accept compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: 16 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President of the Council of State and President of
  the Council of Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (prime minister from
  February 1959 until 24 February 1976, when office was abolished;
  president since 2 December 1976); First Vice President of the
  Council of State and First Vice President of the Council of
  Ministers Gen. Raul CASTRO Ruz (since 2 December 1976); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President of the Council of State and President
  of the Council of Ministers Fidel CASTRO Ruz (prime minister from
  February 1959 until 24 February 1976 when office was abolished;
  president since 2 December 1976); First Vice President of the
  Council of State and First Vice President of the Council of
  Ministers Gen. Raul CASTRO Ruz (since 2 December 1976); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers proposed by the president of the
  Council of State, appointed by the National Assembly
  note: there is also a Council of State whose members are elected by
  the National Assembly
  elections: president and vice president elected by the National
  Assembly; election last held 24 February 1998 (next election
  unscheduled)
  election results: Fidel CASTRO Ruz elected president; percent of
  legislative vote--100%; Raul CASTRO Ruz elected vice president;
  percent of legislative vote--100%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly of People's
  Power or Asemblea Nacional del Poder Popular (601 seats, elected
  directly from slates approved by special candidacy commissions;
  members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 11 January 1998 (next to be held in 2003)
  election results: percent of vote--PCC 94.39%; seats--PCC 601

Judicial branch: People's Supreme Court or Tribunal Supremo
  Popular (president, vice president, and other judges are elected by
  the National Assembly)

Political parties and leaders: only party--Cuban Communist Party

International organization participation: CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77,
  IAEA, ICAO, ICRM, IFAD, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat
  (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAES,
  LAIA, NAM, OAS (excluded from formal participation since 1962),
  OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note--Cuba has an
  Interests Section in the Swiss Embassy, headed by Principal Officer
  Fernando REMIREZ DE ESTENOZ; address: Cuban Interests Section, Swiss
  (202) 797-8518

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; note--the US has an
  Interests Section in the Swiss Embassy, headed by Principal Officer
  Michael G. KOZAK; address: USINT, Swiss Embassy, Calzada between L
  and M Streets, Vedado Seccion, Havana; telephone: 33-3551 through
  3559 and 33-3543 through 3547 (operator assistance required); FAX:
  33-3700; protecting power in Cuba is Switzerland

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of blue (top and
  bottom) alternating with white; a red equilateral triangle based on
  the hoist side bears a white, five-pointed star in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: The state plays the primary role in the economy
  and controls practically all foreign trade. The government has
  undertaken several reforms in recent years to stem excess liquidity,
  increase labor incentives, and alleviate serious shortages of food,
  consumer goods, and services. The liberalized agricultural markets
  introduced in October 1994, at which state and private farmers sell
  above-quota production at unrestricted prices, have broadened legal
  consumption alternatives and reduced black market prices. Government
  efforts to lower subsidies to unprofitable enterprises and to shrink
  the money supply caused the semi-official exchange rate for the
  Cuban peso to move from a peak of 120 to the dollar in the summer of
  1994 to 21 to the dollar by yearend 1998. New taxes introduced in
  1996 helped drive down the number of self-employed workers from
  208,000 in January 1996 to 155,000 by July 1998. Havana announced in
  1995 that GDP declined by 35% during 1989-93, the result of lost
  Soviet aid and domestic inefficiencies. The drop in GDP apparently
  halted in 1994, when Cuba reported 0.7% growth, followed by
  increases of 2.5% in 1995 and 7.8% in 1996. Growth slowed again in
  1997 and 1998 to 2.5% and 1.2% respectively. Export earnings
  declined 22% in 1998, to $1.4 billion, the result of lower sugar
  export volume and lower world prices for nickel and sugar. Import
  expenditures also fell 15% to $3.0 billion, in part due to lower
  world oil prices. Tourism and remittances play a key role in foreign
  currency earnings. Living standards for the average Cuban remain at
  a depressed level compared with 1990.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$17.3 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,560 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7.4%
  industry: 36.5%
  services: 56.1% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 4.5 million economically active population (1996
  est.)
  note: state sector 76%, non-state sector 24% (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services and government 30%, industry
  22%, agriculture 20%, commerce 11%, construction 10%, transportation
  and communications 7% (June 1990)

Unemployment rate: 6.8% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $12.3 billion
  expenditures: $13 billion , including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: sugar, petroleum, food, tobacco, textiles, chemicals,
  paper and wood products, metals (particularly nickel), cement,
  fertilizers, consumer goods, agricultural machinery

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 14.1 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 98.96%
  hydro: 1.04%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 14.1 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, tobacco, citrus, coffee, rice,
  potatoes, beans; livestock

Exports: $1.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: sugar, nickel, tobacco, shellfish, medical
  products, citrus, coffee

Exports--partners: Russia 27%, Canada 18%, Spain 8% (1998 est.)

Imports: $3 billion (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: petroleum, food, machinery, chemicals

Imports--partners: Spain 17%, France 9%, Canada 9% (1998 est.)

Debt--external: $10.1 billion (convertible currency, 1997);
  another $20 billion owed to Russia (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $46 million (1997 est.)

Currency: 1 Cuban peso (Cu$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Cuban pesos (Cu$) per US$1--1.0000
  (nonconvertible, official rate, linked to the US dollar)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 229,000

Telephone system: among the world's least developed telephone
  systems
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intersputnik (Atlantic
  Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 150, FM 5, shortwave 1

Radios: 2.14 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 58 (1997)

Televisions: 2.5 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,807 km
  standard gauge: 4,807 km 1.435-m gauge (147 km electrified)
  note: a large amount of track is in private use by sugar plantations

Highways:
  total: 60,858 km
  paved: 29,820 km (including 638 km of expressway)
  unpaved: 31,038 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 240 km

Ports and harbors: Cienfuegos, Havana, Manzanillo, Mariel,
  Matanzas, Nuevitas, Santiago de Cuba

Merchant marine:
  total: 18 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 89,091 GRT/125,463 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 9, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker
  2, refrigerated cargo 5 (1998 est.)

Airports: 170 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 77
  over 3,047 m: 7
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 11
  under 914 m: 36 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 93
  914 to 1,523 m: 32
  under 914 m: 61 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Revolutionary Armed Forces (FAR) includes
  ground forces, Revolutionary Navy (MGR), Air and Air Defense Force
  (DAAFAR), Territorial Troops Militia (MTT), and Youth Labor Army
  (EJT); the Border Guard (TGF) is controlled by the Interior Ministry

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,068,140
  females age 15-49: 3,014,686 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,900,893
  females age 15-49: 1,862,411 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 76,328
  females: 72,551 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: roughly 4% (1995 est.)

Military--note: Moscow, for decades the key military supporter and
  supplier of Cuba, cut off almost all military aid by 1993



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased
  to US and only mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can
  terminate the lease

Illicit drugs: territory serves as transshipment zone for cocaine
  bound for the US and Europe



======================================================================




@Cyprus
------





Geography



Location: Middle East, island in the Mediterranean Sea, south of
  Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 33 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 9,250 sq km (note--of which 3,355 sq km are in the Turkish
  Cypriot area)
  land: 9,240 sq km
  water: 10 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.6 times the size of Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 648 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate, Mediterranean with hot, dry summers and cool,
  wet winters

Terrain: central plain with mountains to north and south;
  scattered but significant plains along southern coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Olympus 1,952 m

Natural resources: copper, pyrites, asbestos, gypsum, timber,
  salt, marble, clay earth pigment

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 13%
  other: 70% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: moderate earthquake activity

Environment--current issues: water resource problems (no natural
  reservoir catchments, seasonal disparity in rainfall; sea water
  intrusion to island's largest aquifer; increased salination in the
  north); water pollution from sewage and industrial wastes; coastal
  degradation; loss of wildlife habitats from urbanization

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants



People



Population: 754,064 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 92,626; female 88,127)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 249,083; female 244,750)
  65 years and over: 11% (male 34,612; female 44,866) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.67% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.64 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.42 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.44 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.68 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.1 years
  male: 74.91 years
  female: 79.39 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Cypriot(s)
  adjective: Cypriot

Ethnic groups: Greek 78% (99.5% of the Greeks live in the Greek
  Cypriot area; 0.5% of the Greeks live in the Turkish Cypriot area),
  Turkish 18% (1.3% of the Turks live in the Greek Cypriot area; 98.7%
  of the Turks live in the Turkish Cypriot area), other 4% (99.2% of
  the other ethnic groups live in the Greek Cypriot area; 0.8% of the
  other ethnic groups live in the Turkish Cypriot area)

Religions: Greek Orthodox 78%, Muslim 18%, Maronite, Armenian
  Apostolic, and other 4%

Languages: Greek, Turkish, English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 94%
  male: 98%
  female: 91% (1987 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Cyprus
  conventional short form: Cyprus
  note: the Turkish Cypriot area refers to itself as the "Turkish
  Republic of Northern Cyprus" (TRNC)

Data code: CY

Government type: republic
  note: a disaggregation of the two ethnic communities inhabiting the
  island began after the outbreak of communal strife in 1963; this
  separation was further solidified following the Turkish intervention
  in July 1974 following a Greek junta-based coup attempt, which gave
  the Turkish Cypriots de facto control in the north; Greek Cypriots
  control the only internationally recognized government; on 15
  November 1983 Turkish Cypriot "President" Rauf DENKTASH declared
  independence and the formation of a "Turkish Republic of Northern
  Cyprus" (TRNC), which has been recognized only by Turkey; both sides
  publicly call for the resolution of intercommunal differences and
  creation of a new federal system of government

Capital: Nicosia
  note: the Turkish Cypriot area's capital is Lefkosa (Nicosia)

Administrative divisions: 6 districts; Famagusta, Kyrenia,
  Larnaca, Limassol, Nicosia, Paphos; note--Turkish Cypriot area's
  administrative divisions include Kyrenia, all but a small part of
  Famagusta, and small parts of Lefkosa (Nicosia) and Larnaca

Independence: 16 August 1960 (from UK)
  note: Turkish Cypriot area proclaimed self-rule on 13 February 1975
  from Republic of Cyprus

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October; note--Turkish
  Cypriot area celebrates 15 November as Independence Day

Constitution: 16 August 1960; negotiations to create the basis
  for a new or revised constitution to govern the island and to better
  relations between Greek and Turkish Cypriots have been held
  intermittently; in 1975 Turkish Cypriots created their own
  constitution and governing bodies within the "Turkish Federated
  State of Cyprus," which was renamed the "Turkish Republic of
  Northern Cyprus" in 1983; a new constitution for the Turkish Cypriot
  area passed by referendum on 5 May 1985

Legal system: based on common law, with civil law modifications

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Glafcos CLERIDES (since 28 February 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government; post of vice president is currently vacant; under the
  1960 constitution, the post is reserved for a Turkish Cypriot
  head of government: President Glafcos CLERIDES (since 28 February
  1993); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government; post of vice president is currently vacant; under the
  1960 constitution, the post is reserved for a Turkish Cypriot
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed jointly by the president and
  vice president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for five-year terms;
  election last held 15 February 1998 (next to be held NA February
  2003)
  election results: Glafcos CLERIDES elected president; percent of
  vote--Glafcos CLERIDES 50.8%, George IAKOVOU 49.2%
  note: Rauf R. DENKTASH has been "president" of the Turkish Cypriot
  area since 13 February 1975 ("president" elected by popular vote for
  a five-year term); elections last held 15 and 22 April 1995 (next to
  be held NA April 2000); results--Rauf R. DENKTASH 62.5%, Dervis
  EROGLU 37.5%; Dervis EROGLU has been "prime minister" of the Turkish
  Cypriot area since 16 August 1996; there is a Council of Ministers
  (cabinet) in the Turkish Cypriot area

Legislative branch: unicameral--Greek Cypriot area: House of
  Representatives or Vouli Antiprosopon (80 seats; 56 assigned to the
  Greek Cypriots. 24 to Turkish Cypriots; note--only those assigned to
  Greek Cypriots are filled; members are elected by popular vote to
  serve five-year terms); Turkish Cypriot area: Assembly of the
  Republic or Cumhuriyet Meclisi (50 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Greek area: last held 26 May 1996 (next to be held May
  2001); Turkish area: last held 6 December 1998 (next to be held
  December 2003)
  election results: Greek area: House of Representatives--percent of
  vote by party--DISY 34.5%, AKEL (Communist) 33.0%, DIKO 16.4%, EDEK
  8.1%, KED 3.7%, others 4.3%; seats by party--DISY 20, AKEL
  (Communist) 19, DIKO 10, EDEK 5, KED 2; Turkish area: Assembly of
  the Republic--percent of vote by party--UBP 40.3%, DP 22.6%, TKP
  15.4%, CTP 13.4%, UDP 4.6%, YBH 2.5%, BP 1.2%; seats by party--UBP
  24, DP 13, TKP 7, CTP 6

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  Supreme Council of Judicature
  note: there is also a Supreme Court in the Turkish Cypriot area

Political parties and leaders: Greek Cypriot area: Restorative
  PERDHIKIS]; Turkish Cypriot area: National Unity Party or UBP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Pan-Cyprian Labor
  Federation or PEO (Communist controlled); Confederation of Cypriot
  Workers or SEK (pro-West); Federation of Turkish Cypriot Labor
  Unions or Turk-Sen; Confederation of Revolutionary Labor Unions or
  Dev-Is

International organization participation: C, CCC, CE, EBRD, ECE,
  EU (applicant), FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS (associate), IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OPCW, OSCE, PCA,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Erato KOZAKOU-MARCOULLIS
  chancery: 2211 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York
  note: representative of the Turkish Cypriot area in the US is Ahmet
  (202) 887-6198

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kenneth C. BRILL
  embassy: corner of Metochiou and Ploutarchou Streets, Engomi, Nicosia
  mailing address: P. O. Box 4536, FPO AE 09836

Flag description: white with a copper-colored silhouette of the
  island (the name Cyprus is derived from the Greek word for copper)
  above two green crossed olive branches in the center of the flag;
  the branches symbolize the hope for peace and reconciliation between
  the Greek and Turkish communities
  note: the Turkish Cypriot flag has a horizontal red stripe at the
  top and bottom between which is a red crescent and red star on a
  white field



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic affairs are dominated by the division
  of the country into the southern (Greek) area controlled by the
  Cyprus Government and the northern Turkish Cypriot-administered
  area. The Greek Cypriot economy is prosperous but highly susceptible
  to external shocks. Erratic growth rates in the 1990s reflect the
  economy's vulnerability to swings in tourist arrivals, caused by
  political instability on the island and fluctuations in economic
  conditions in Western Europe. Economic policy in the south is
  focused on meeting the criteria for admission to the EU. As in the
  Turkish sector, water shortage is a growing problem, and several
  desalination plants are planned. The Turkish Cypriot economy has
  about one-fifth the population and one-third the per capita GDP of
  the south. Because it is recognized only by Turkey, it has had much
  difficulty arranging foreign financing, and foreign firms have
  hesitated to invest there. The economy remains heavily dependent on
  agriculture and government service, which together employ about half
  of the work force. Moreover, the small, vulnerable economy has
  suffered because the Turkish lira is legal tender. To compensate for
  the economy's weakness, Turkey provides direct and indirect aid to
  nearly every sector, e.g. tourism, education, and industry.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$10 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.3% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$13,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector: Greek Cypriot area: agriculture 4.4%;
  industry 22.4%; services 73.2% (1996); Turkish Cypriot area:
  agriculture 10%; industry 24.6%; services 65.4% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): Greek Cypriot area: 2.3% (1998
  est.); Turkish Cypriot area: 87.5% (1997 est.)

Labor force: Greek Cypriot area: 299,700; Turkish Cypriot area:
  76,500 (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: Greek Cypriot area: services 62%,
  industry 25%, agriculture 13% (1995); Turkish Cypriot area: services
  66%, industry 11%, agriculture 23% (1995)

Unemployment rate: Greek Cypriot area: 3.3% (1998 est.); Turkish
  Cypriot area: 6.4% (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: Greek Cypriot area--$2.9 billion, Turkish Cypriot area--$171
  million
  expenditures: Greek Cypriot area--$3.4 billion, including capital
  expenditures of $345 million, Turkish Cypriot area--$306 million,
  including capital expenditures of $56.8 million (1997 est.)

Industries: food, beverages, textiles, chemicals, metal products,
  tourism, wood products

Industrial production growth rate: Greek Cypriot area: -4%
  (1996); Turkish Cypriot area: 5.1% (1995)

Electricity--production: 2.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 2.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: potatoes, citrus, vegetables, barley,
  grapes, olives, vegetables

Exports: Greek Cypriot area: $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.);
  Turkish Cypriot area: $70.5 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: Greek Cypriot area: citrus, potatoes,
  grapes, wine, cement, clothing and shoes (1996); Turkish Cypriot
  area: citrus, potatoes, textiles (1996)

Exports--partners: Greek Cypriot area: Russia 19.1%, Bulgaria
  16.4%, UK 11.3%, Greece 6.3%, Germany 4.8%; Turkish Cypriot area:
  Turkey 48.2%, UK 21.3%, other EU 13.7% (1997)

Imports: Greek Cypriot area: $3.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.);
  Turkish Cypriot area: $318.4 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: Greek Cypriot area: consumer goods,
  petroleum and lubricants, food and feed grains, machinery (1996);
  Turkish Cypriot area: food, minerals, chemicals, machinery (1996)

Imports--partners: Greek Cypriot area: US 17.8%, UK 11.9%, Italy
  9.7%, Germany 7.5%, Greece 7.6% (1997); Turkish Cypriot area: Turkey
  55.3%, UK 13.8%, other EU 11.6% (1997)

Debt--external: Greek Cypriot area: $1.56 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: Greek Cypriot area?$187 million in grants
  (1990-94); Turkish Cypriot area-- $700 million from Turkey in grants
  and loans (1990-97) that are usually forgiven

Currency: Greek Cypriot area: 1 Cypriot pound (LC) = 100 cents;
  Turkish Cypriot area: 1 Turkish lira (TL) = 100 kurus

Exchange rates: Cypriot pounds per US1$--0.5013 (January 1999),
  0.5170 (1998), 0.5135 (1997), 0.4663 (1996), 0.4522 (1995), 0.4915
  (1994); Turkish liras (TL) per US$1--331,400 (January 1999), 260,724
  (1998), 151,865 (1997), 81,405 (1996), 45,845.1 (1995), 29,608.7
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: Greek Cypriot area: 367,000 (1996 est.); Turkish
  Cypriot area: 80,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: excellent in both the Greek Cypriot and Turkish
  Cypriot areas
  domestic: open wire, fiber-optic cable, and microwave radio relay
  international: tropospheric scatter; 3 coaxial and 5 fiber-optic
  submarine cables; satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic
  Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean), 2 Eutelsat, 2 Intersputnik, and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: Greek Cypriot area: AM 4, FM 36,
  shortwave 1, Turkish Cypriot area: AM 2, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: Greek Cypriot area: 500,000 (1996 est.); Turkish Cypriot
  area: 130,000 (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: Greek Cypriot area: 7 (in
  addition, there are 35 low-power repeaters) (1997); Turkish Cypriot
  area: 3 (in addition, there are 4 repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: Greek Cypriot area: 300,000 (1996 est.); Turkish
  Cypriot area: 90,000 (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: Greek Cypriot area: 10,415 km; Turkish Cypriot area: 2,350 km
  paved: Greek Cypriot area: 5,947 km; Turkish Cypriot area: 1,370 km
  unpaved: Greek Cypriot area: 4,468 km; Turkish Cypriot area: 980 km
  (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Famagusta, Kyrenia, Larnaca, Limassol, Paphos,
  Vasilikos Bay

Merchant marine:
  total: 1,469 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 23,362,067
  GRT/36,945,331 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 2, bulk 430, cargo 530, chemical tanker
  23, combination bulk 42, combination ore/oil 11, container 141,
  liquefied gas tanker 6, oil tanker 152, passenger 7, refrigerated
  cargo 58, roll-on/roll-off cargo 49, short-sea passenger 14,
  specialized tanker 3, vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 37
  countries among which are Greece 611, Germany 129, Russia 49, Latvia
  278, Netherlands 20, Japan 28, Cuba 16, China 15, Hong Kong 13, and
  Poland 15 (1998 est.)

Airports: 15 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Greek Cypriot area: Greek Cypriot National
  Guard (GCNG; includes air and naval elements), Hellenic Forces
  Regiment on Cyprus (ELDYK), Greek Cypriot Police; Turkish Cypriot
  area: Turkish Cypriot Security Force (TCSF), Turkish Forces Regiment
  on Cyprus (KTKA), Turkish mainland army units

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 194,337 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 133,559 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 6,410 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $405 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 5.4% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: 1974 hostilities divided the island into
  two de facto autonomous areas, a Greek Cypriot area controlled by
  the internationally recognized Cypriot Government (59% of the
  island's land area) and a Turkish-Cypriot area (37% of the island),
  that are separated by a UN buffer zone (4% of the island); there are
  two UK sovereign base areas within the Greek Cypriot portion of the
  island

Illicit drugs: transit point for heroin and hashish via air
  routes and container traffic to Europe, especially from Lebanon and
  Turkey; some cocaine transits as well



======================================================================




@Czech Republic
--------------





Introduction



Background: Once part of the Holy Roman Empire and, later, the
  Austro-Hungarian monarchy, Czechoslovakia became an independent
  nation at the end of World War I. Independence ended with the German
  takeover in 1939. After World War II, Czechoslovakia fell within the
  Soviet sphere of influence, and in 1968 an invasion by Warsaw Pact
  troops snuffed out anti-communist demonstrations and riots. With the
  collapse of Soviet authority in 1991, Czechoslovakia regained its
  freedom. On 1 January 1993, the country peacefully split into its
  two ethnic components, the Czech Republic and Slovakia. The Czech
  Republic, largely by aspiring to become a NATO and EU member, has
  moved toward integration in world markets, a development that poses
  both opportunities and risks. But Prague has had a difficult time
  convincing the public that membership in NATO is crucial to Czech
  security. At the same time, support for eventual EU membership is
  waning. Coupled with the country's worsening economic situation,
  Prague's political scene, troubled for the past three years, will
  remain so for the foreseeable future.



Geography



Location: Central Europe, southeast of Germany

Geographic coordinates: 49 45 N, 15 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 78,703 sq km
  land: 78,645 sq km
  water: 58 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,881 km
  border countries: Austria 362 km, Germany 646 km, Poland 658 km,
  Slovakia 215 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters

Terrain: Bohemia in the west consists of rolling plains, hills,
  and plateaus surrounded by low mountains; Moravia in the east
  consists of very hilly country

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Elbe River 115 m
  highest point: Snezka 1,602 m

Natural resources: hard coal, soft coal, kaolin, clay, graphite

Land use:
  arable land: 41%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 11%
  forests and woodland: 34%
  other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 240 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding

Environment--current issues: air and water pollution in areas of
  northwest Bohemia and in northern Moravia around Ostrava present
  health risks; acid rain damaging forests

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Geography--note: landlocked; strategically located astride some of
  oldest and most significant land routes in Europe; Moravian Gate is
  a traditional military corridor between the North European Plain and
  the Danube in central Europe



People



Population: 10,280,513 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 888,292; female 845,662)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 3,569,677; female 3,558,844)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 545,305; female 872,733) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.01% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.84 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.86 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.91 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.62 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.67 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.35 years
  male: 71.01 years
  female: 77.88 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.28 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Czech(s)
  adjective: Czech
  note: 300,000 Slovaks declared themselves Czech citizens in 1994

Ethnic groups: Czech 94.4%, Slovak 3%, Polish 0.6%, German 0.5%,
  Gypsy 0.3%, Hungarian 0.2%, other 1%

Religions: atheist 39.8%, Roman Catholic 39.2%, Protestant 4.6%,
  Orthodox 3%, other 13.4%

Languages: Czech, Slovak

Literacy:
  definition: NA
  total population: 99% (est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Czech Republic
  conventional short form: Czech Republic
  local long form: Ceska Republika
  local short form: Ceska Republika

Data code: EZ

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Prague

Administrative divisions: 73 districts (okresi, singular--okres)
  and 4 municipalities* (mesta, singular--mesto); Benesov, Beroun,
  Blansko, Breclav, Brno*, Brno-Venkov, Bruntal, Ceske Budejovice,
  Ceska Lipa, Cesky Krumlov, Cheb, Chomutov, Chrudim, Decin,
  Domazlice, Frydek-Mistek, Havlickuv Brod, Hodonin, Hradec Kralove,
  Jablonec nad Nisou, Jesenik, Jicin, Jihlava, Jindrichuv Hradec,
  Karlovy Vary, Karvina, Kladno, Klatovy, Kolin, Kromeriz, Kutna Hora,
  Liberec, Litomerice, Louny, Melnik, Mlada Boleslav, Most, Nachod,
  Novy Jicin, Nymburk, Olomouc, Opava, Ostrava*, Pardubice, Pelhrimov,
  Pisek, Plzen*, Plzen-Jih, Plzen-Sever, Prachatice, Praha*,
  Praha-Vychod, Praha Zapad, Prerov, Pribram, Prostejov, Rakovnik,
  Rokycany, Rychnov nad Kneznou, Semily, Sokolov, Strakonice, Sumperk,
  Svitavy, Tabor, Tachov, Teplice, Trebic, Trutnov, Uherske Hradiste,
  Usti nad Labem, Usti nad Orlici, Vsetin, Vyskov, Zdar nad Sazavou,
  Zlin, Znojmo

Independence: 1 January 1993 (from Czechoslovakia)

National holiday: National Liberation Day, 8 May; Founding of the
  Republic, 28 October

Constitution: ratified 16 December 1992; effective 1 January 1993

Legal system: civil law system based on Austro-Hungarian codes;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; legal code modified to
  bring it in line with Organization on Security and Cooperation in
  Europe (OSCE) obligations and to expunge Marxist-Leninist legal
  theory

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Vaclav HAVEL (since 2 February 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Milos ZEMAN (since 17 July 1998);
  Deputy Prime Ministers Vladimir SPIDLA (since 17 July 1998), Pavel
  RYCHETSKY since 17 July 1998), Egon LANSKY (since 17 July 1998),
  Pavel MERTLIK (since 17 July 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of
  the prime minister
  elections: president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
  election last held 20 January 1998 (next to be held NA January
  2003); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Vaclav HAVEL reelected president; Vaclav HAVEL
  received 47 of 81 votes in the Senate and 99 out of 200 votes in the
  Chamber of Deputies (second round of voting)

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlament consists of
  the Senate or Senat (81 seats; members are elected by popular vote
  to serve staggered two-, four-, and six-year terms) and the Chamber
  of Deputies or Snemovna Poslancu (200 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 13-14 and 20-21 November 1998 (next to
  be held NA November 2000--to replace/reelect 20 senators serving
  two-year terms); Chamber of Deputies--last held 19-20 June 1998
  (early elections to be held NA June 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--governing coalition (CSSD 23), opposition (ODS 26, KDU-CSL 16,
  KCSM 4, ODA 7, US 4, DEU 1); Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--governing coalition (CSSD 74), opposition
  (ODS 63, KDU-CSL 20, US 19, KCSM 24)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chairman and deputy chairmen are
  appointed by the president for life; Constitutional Court, chairman
  and deputy chairmen are appointed by the president for life

Political parties and leaders: Civic Democratic Party or ODS
  KROUPA, chairman]; Christian Democratic Union-Czech People's Party

Political pressure groups and leaders: Czech-Moravian Chamber of
  Trade Unions; Civic Movement

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA (observer), IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Aleksandr VONDRA
  chancery: 3900 Spring of Freedom Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John SHATTUCK
  embassy: Trziste 15, 11801 Prague 1
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and
  red with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist side (almost
  identical to the flag of the former Czechoslovakia)



Economy



Economy--overview: Political and financial crises in 1997
  shattered the Czech Republic's image as one of the most stable and
  prosperous of post-Communist states. Delays in enterprise
  restructuring and failure to develop a well-functioning capital
  market played major roles in Czech economic troubles, which
  culminated in a currency crisis in May. The currency was forced out
  of its fluctuation band as investors worried that the current
  account deficit, which reached nearly 8% of GDP in 1996, would
  become unsustainable. After expending $3 billion in vain to support
  the currency, the central bank let it float. The growing current
  account imbalance reflected a surge in domestic demand and poor
  export performance, as wage increases outpaced productivity. The
  government was forced to introduce two austerity packages later in
  the spring which cut government spending by 2.5% of GDP. A tough
  1998 budget continued the painful medicine. These problems were
  compounded in the summer of 1997 by unprecedented flooding which
  inundated much of the eastern part of the country. Czech
  difficulties contrast with earlier achievements of strong GDP
  growth, a balanced budget, and inflation and unemployment that were
  among the lowest in the region. The Czech economy's transition
  problems continue to be too much direct and indirect government
  influence on the privatized economy, the sometimes ineffective
  management of privatized firms, and a shortage of experienced
  financial analysts for the banking system. The country slipped into
  a mild recession in 1998, but hopes to rebound with 1% growth in
  1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$116.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$11,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 33.8%
  services: 61.2% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.6%
  highest 10%: 23.5% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10.7% (1998)

Labor force: 3.655 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 33.1%, agriculture 6.9%,
  construction 9.1%, transport and communications 7.2%, services 43.7%
  (1994)

Unemployment rate: 7% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $16.1 billion
  expenditures: $16.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: fuels, ferrous metallurgy, machinery and equipment,
  coal, motor vehicles, glass, armaments

Industrial production growth rate: 6.7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 60.214 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 76.69%
  hydro: 3.04%
  nuclear: 20.27%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 60.164 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 8.8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 8.75 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops, fruit;
  pigs, cattle, poultry; forest products

Exports: $23.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: manufactured goods 40.5%, machinery and
  transport equipment 37.7%, chemicals 8.8%, raw materials and fuel
  7.8% (1997)

Exports--partners: Germany 35.7%, Slovakia 12.9%, Austria 6.4%,
  Poland 5.7%, Russia 3.4%, Italy 3.3%, France 2.5% (1997)

Imports: $26.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 38.1%,
  manufactured goods 19.3%, raw materials and fuels 12.4%, chemicals
  12.2%, and food 5.2% (1997)

Imports--partners: Germany 26.6%, Slovakia 8.4%, Italy 5.3%,
  Austria 4.4%, FSU 3.4%, UK 3.4%, Poland 3.2% (1997)

Debt--external: $21.6 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $351.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 koruna (Kc) = 100 haleru

Exchange rates: koruny (Kcs) per US$1--30.214 (December 1998),
  32.294 (1998), 31.698 (1997), 27.145 (1996), 26.541 (1995), 28.785
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 3,349,539 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intersputnik (Atlantic and
  Indian Ocean regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 67 (in addition, there are 35
  low-power stations and about 51 low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 9,440 km
  standard gauge: 9,344 km 1.435-m standard gauge (2,743 km
  electrified at three voltages; 1,885 km double track)
  narrow gauge: 96 km 0.760-m narrow gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 55,489 km
  paved: 55,489 km (including 423 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: NA km; the Elbe (Labe) is the principal river

Pipelines: natural gas 5,400 km

Ports and harbors: Decin, Prague, Usti nad Labem

Airports: 69 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 35
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 13 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 34
  914 to 1,523 m: 17
  under 914 m: 17 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Civil
  Defense, Railroad Units

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,684,817 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,046,079 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 73,072 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.1 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Liechtenstein claims restitution for
  1,600 sq km of property in the Czech Republic confiscated from its
  royal family in 1918; the Czech Republic insists that restitution
  does not go back before February 1948, when the communists seized
  power; individual Sudeten German claims for restitution of property
  confiscated in connection with their expulsion after World War II;
  unresolved property issues with Slovakia over redistribution of
  former Czechoslovak federal property

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin and
  hashish and Latin American cocaine to Western Europe; domestic
  consumption--especially of locally produced synthetic drugs--on the
  rise



======================================================================




@Denmark
-------





Introduction



Background: Once the seat of rapacious Viking raiders and later a
  major power in northwestern Europe, Denmark has evolved into a
  modern, prosperous nation that is participating in the political and
  economic integration of Europe. So far, however, they have opted out
  of some aspects of the European Union's Maastricht Treaty including
  the new monetary system launched on 1 January 1999.



Geography



Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea and the North
  Sea, on a peninsula north of Germany

Geographic coordinates: 56 00 N, 10 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 43,094 sq km
  land: 42,394 sq km
  water: 700 sq km
  note: includes the island of Bornholm in the Baltic Sea and the rest
  of metropolitan Denmark, but excludes the Faroe Islands and Greenland

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of
  Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
  total: 68 km
  border countries: Germany 68 km

Coastline: 7,314 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 4 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: temperate; humid and overcast; mild, windy winters and
  cool summers

Terrain: low and flat to gently rolling plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lammefjord -7 m
  highest point: Ejer Bavnehoj 173 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, fish, salt, limestone,
  stone, gravel and sand

Land use:
  arable land: 60%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 10%
  other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding is a threat in some areas of the
  country (e.g., parts of Jutland, along the southern coast of the
  island of Lolland) that are protected from the sea by a system of
  dikes

Environment--current issues: air pollution, principally from
  vehicle and power plant emissions; nitrogen and phosphorus pollution
  of the North Sea; drinking and surface water becoming polluted from
  animal wastes and pesticides

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: controls Danish Straits (Skagerrak and Kattegat)
  linking Baltic and North Seas; about one-quarter of the population
  lives in Copenhagen



People



Population: 5,356,845 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 504,182; female 478,547)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 1,811,445; female 1,765,038)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 331,207; female 466,426) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.38% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.57 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.97 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.22 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.11 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 76.51 years
  male: 73.83 years
  female: 79.33 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.62 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Dane(s)
  adjective: Danish

Ethnic groups: Scandinavian, Eskimo, Faroese, German

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 91%, other Protestant and Roman
  Catholic 2%, other 7% (1988)

Languages: Danish, Faroese, Greenlandic (an Eskimo dialect),
  German (small minority)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1980 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Denmark
  conventional short form: Denmark
  local long form: Kongeriget Danmark
  local short form: Danmark

Data code: DA

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Copenhagen

Administrative divisions: metropolitan Denmark--14 counties
  (amter, singular--amt) and 2 kommunes*; Arhus, Bornholm,
  Fredericksberg*, Frederiksborg, Fyn, Kobenhavn, Kobenhavns*,
  Nordjylland, Ribe, Ringkobing, Roskilde, Sonderjylland, Storstrom,
  Vejle, Vestsjalland, Viborg
  note: see separate entries for the Faroe Islands and Greenland,
  which are part of the Kingdom of Denmark and are self-governing
  administrative divisions

Independence: first organized as a unified state in 10th century;
  in 1849 became a constitutional monarchy

National holiday: Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940)

Constitution: 1849 was the original constitution; there was a
  major overhaul 5 June 1953, allowing for a unicameral legislature
  and a female chief of state

Legal system: civil law system; judicial review of legislative
  acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen MARGRETHE II (since 14 January 1972); Heir
  Apparent Crown Prince FREDERIK, elder son of the monarch (born 26
  May 1968)
  head of government: Prime Minister Poul Nyrup RASMUSSEN (since 25
  January 1993)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Folketing (179
  seats; members are elected by popular vote on the basis of
  proportional representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 11 March 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--progovernment parties: Social Democrats 65, Socialist People's
  Party 13, Radical Liberal Party 7, Unity Party 5; opposition:
  Liberal Party 43, Conservative Party 17, Danish People's Party 13,
  Center Democrats 8, Christian People's Party 4, Progress Party 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  monarch for life

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party [Poul

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, ESA, EU, FAO,
  G- 9, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, MTCR, NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOGIP, UNMOP, UNMOT,
  UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO,
  ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Knud-Erik TYGESEN
  chancery: 3200 Whitehaven Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edward E. ELSON
  embassy: Dag Hammarskjolds Alle 24, 2100 Copenhagen
  mailing address: PSC 73, APO AE 09716

Flag description: red with a white cross that extends to the
  edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the
  hoist side, and that design element of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)
  was subsequently adopted by the other Nordic countries of Finland,
  Iceland, Norway, and Sweden



Economy



Economy--overview: This thoroughly modern market economy features
  high-tech agriculture, up-to-date small-scale and corporate
  industry, extensive government welfare measures, comfortable living
  standards, and high dependence on foreign trade. Denmark is a net
  exporter of food. The center-left coalition government will
  concentrate on reducing the persistently high unemployment rate and
  the budget deficit as well as following the previous government's
  policies of maintaining low inflation and a current account surplus.
  The coalition also vows to maintain a stable currency. The coalition
  has lowered marginal income taxes while maintaining overall tax
  revenues; boosted industrial competitiveness through labor market
  and tax reforms and increased research and development funds; and
  improved welfare services for the neediest while cutting paperwork
  and delays. Denmark chose not to join the 11 other EU members who
  launched the euro on 1 January 1999. Because of the global slowdown,
  GDP growth may fall to 1% in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$124.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$23,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 27%
  services: 69% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.6%
  highest 10%: 20.5% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2,895,950

Labor force--by occupation: private services 40%, government
  services 30%, manufacturing and mining 19%, construction 6%,
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 5% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 6.5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $62.1 billion
  expenditures: $66.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, machinery and equipment, textiles
  and clothing, chemical products, electronics, construction,
  furniture, and other wood products, shipbuilding

Industrial production growth rate: 1.3% (1996)

Electricity--production: 50.608 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 97.6%
  hydro: 0.05%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 2.35% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 35.208 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 19.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 3.8 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, potatoes, rape, sugar beets; beef,
  dairy products; fish

Exports: $48.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and instruments, meat and meat
  products, fuels, dairy products, ships, fish, chemicals

Exports--partners: Germany 21.4%, Sweden 11.6%, UK 9.6%, Norway
  6.2%, France 5.3%, US 4.6%, Netherlands 4.5% (1997)

Imports: $46.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, petroleum,
  chemicals, grain and foodstuffs, textiles, paper

Imports--partners: Germany 21.7%, Sweden 12.7%, Netherlands 7.8%,
  UK 7.6%, France 5.6%, Norway 5.2%, US 5.0%, Japan (1997)

Debt--external: $44 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.6 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1--6.408 (January
  1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1996), 5.602 (1995), 6.361
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 3.2 million (1995 est.); 822,000 cellular telephone
  subscribers

Telephone system: excellent telephone and telegraph services
  domestic: buried and submarine cables and microwave radio relay form
  trunk network, four cellular radio communications systems
  international: 18 submarine fiber-optic cables linking Denmark with
  Norway, Sweden, Russia, Poland, Germany, Netherlands, UK, Faroe
  Islands, Iceland, and Canada; satellite earth stations--6 Intelsat,
  10 Eutelsat, 1 Orion, 1 Inmarsat (Blaavand-Atlantic-East); note--the
  Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, Norway, and Sweden)
  share the Danish earth station and the Eik, Norway, station for
  world-wide Inmarsat access

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 78 (of which 35 are low-power
  stations; in addition, there are 51 low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 3 million (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,323 km (458 km privately owned and operated)
  standard gauge: 3,323 km 1.435-m gauge (440 km electrified; 760 km
  double track) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 71,600 km
  paved: 71,600 km (including 880 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 417 km

Pipelines: crude oil 110 km; petroleum products 578 km; natural
  gas 700 km

Ports and harbors: Alborg, Arhus, Copenhagen, Esbjerg,
  Fredericia, Grena, Koge, Odense, Struer

Merchant marine:
  total: 337 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,130,643
  GRT/6,880,248 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 14, cargo 130, chemical tanker 19, container 73,
  liquefied gas tanker 26, livestock carrier 6, oil tanker 20, railcar
  carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 15, roll-on/roll-off cargo 21,
  short-sea passenger 9, specialized tanker 3
  note: Denmark has created its own internal register, called the
  Danish International Ship register (DIS); DIS ships do not have to
  meet Danish manning regulations, and they amount to a flag of
  convenience within the Danish register (1998 est.)

Airports: 118 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 28
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 13
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 90
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 82 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Danish Army, Royal Danish Navy, Royal
  Danish Air Force, Home Guard

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,316,584 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,129,870 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 32,130 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.5 billion (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.6% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Rockall continental shelf dispute
  involving Iceland, Ireland, and the UK (Ireland and the UK have
  signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area)



======================================================================




@Djibouti
--------





Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Gulf of Aden and the Red
  Sea, between Eritrea and Somalia

Geographic coordinates: 11 30 N, 43 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 22,000 sq km
  land: 21,980 sq km
  water: 20 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
  total: 508 km
  border countries: Eritrea 113 km, Ethiopia 337 km, Somalia 58 km

Coastline: 314 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; torrid, dry

Terrain: coastal plain and plateau separated by central mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lac Assal -155 m
  highest point: Moussa Ali 2,028 m

Natural resources: geothermal areas

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 91% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes; droughts; occasional cyclonic
  disturbances from the Indian Ocean bring heavy rains and flash floods

Environment--current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
  desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location near world's busiest shipping
  lanes and close to Arabian oilfields; terminus of rail traffic into
  Ethiopia; mostly wasteland



People



Population: 447,439 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 96,222; female 96,023)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 128,506; female 114,767)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 6,155; female 5,766) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.51% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.23 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.41 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -11.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.12 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.07 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 100.24 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 51.54 years
  male: 49.48 years
  female: 53.67 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.87 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Djiboutian(s)
  adjective: Djiboutian

Ethnic groups: Somali 60%, Afar 35%, French, Arab, Ethiopian, and
  Italian 5%

Religions: Muslim 94%, Christian 6%

Languages: French (official), Arabic (official), Somali, Afar

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 46.2%
  male: 60.3%
  female: 32.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Djibouti
  conventional short form: Djibouti
  former: French Territory of the Afars and Issas, French Somaliland

Data code: DJ

Government type: republic

Capital: Djibouti

Administrative divisions: 5 districts (cercles, singular--cercle);
  'Ali Sabih, Dikhil, Djibouti, Obock, Tadjoura

Independence: 27 June 1977 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 June (1977)

Constitution: multiparty constitution approved in referendum 4
  September 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system, traditional
  practices, and Islamic law

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President HASSAN GOULED Aptidon (since 24 June
  1977); note--President HASSAN GOULED announced early in the year that
  he would resign in April 1999
  head of government: Prime Minister BARKAT Gourad Hamadou (since 30
  September 1978)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers responsible to the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 7 May 1993 (next to be held 9 April 1999); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: President HASSAN GOULED reelected; percent of
  vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Chambre des
  Deputes (65 seats; members elected by popular vote for five-year
  terms)
  elections: last held 19 December 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--RPP 65; note--RPP (the
  ruling party) dominated

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders:
  Aptidon]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Front for the Restoration
  of Unity and Democracy or FRUD, and affiliates; Movement for Unity
  and Democracy or MUD

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, AFESD,
  AL, AMF, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador ROBLE Olhaye Oudine
  chancery: Suite 515, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Lange SCHERMERHORN
  embassy: Plateau du Serpent, Boulevard Marechal Joffre, Djibouti
  mailing address: B. P. 185, Djibouti

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of light blue (top)
  and light green with a white isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side bearing a red five-pointed star in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is based on service activities
  connected with the country's strategic location and status as a free
  trade zone in northeast Africa. Two-thirds of the inhabitants live
  in the capital city, the remainder being mostly nomadic herders.
  Scanty rainfall limits crop production to fruits and vegetables, and
  most food must be imported. Djibouti provides services as both a
  transit port for the region and an international transshipment and
  refueling center. It has few natural resources and little industry.
  The nation is, therefore, heavily dependent on foreign assistance to
  help support its balance of payments and to finance development
  projects. An unemployment rate of 40% to 50% continues to be a major
  problem. Per capita consumption dropped an estimated 35% over the
  last seven years because of recession, civil war, and a high
  population growth rate (including immigrants and refugees). Also,
  renewed fighting between Ethiopia and Eritrea has disturbed normal
  external channels of commerce. Faced with a multitude of economic
  difficulties, the government has fallen in arrears on long-term
  external debt and has been struggling to meet the stipulations of
  foreign aid donors.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$530 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 20%
  services: 77% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 282,000

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 75%, industry 11%,
  services 14% (1991 est.)

Unemployment rate: 40%-50% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $156 million
  expenditures: $175 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: limited to a few small-scale enterprises, such as
  dairy products and mineral-water bottling

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 175 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 175 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruits, vegetables; goats, sheep, camels

Exports: $39.6 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: hides and skins, coffee (in transit) (1995)

Exports--partners: Ethiopia 45%, Somalia, Yemen, Saudi Arabia
  (1996)

Imports: $200.5 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: foods, beverages, transport equipment,
  chemicals, petroleum products (1995)

Imports--partners: France, Ethiopia, Italy, Saudi Arabia, Thailand
  (1996)

Debt--external: $276 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $106.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Djiboutian franc (DF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Djiboutian francs (DF) per US$1--177.721 (fixed
  rate since 1973)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 7,200 (1986 est.)

Telephone system: telephone facilities in the city of Djibouti
  are adequate as are the microwave radio relay connections to
  outlying areas of the country
  domestic: microwave radio relay network
  international: submarine cable to Jiddah, Suez, Sicily, Marseilles,
  Colombo, and Singapore; satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Indian
  Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; Medarabtel regional microwave radio relay
  telephone network

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 35,000

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are 5
  low-power repeaters) (1998)

Televisions: 17,000 (1998)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 97 km (Djibouti segment of the Addis Ababa-Djibouti railroad)
  narrow gauge: 97 km 1.000-m gauge
  note: in April 1998, Djibouti and Ethiopia announced plans to
  revitalize the century-old railroad that links their capitals

Highways:
  total: 2,890 km
  paved: 364 km
  unpaved: 2,526 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Djibouti

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,369 GRT/3,030 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 11 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Djibouti National Army (includes Navy and Air
  Force)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 105,075 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 61,712 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $22.5 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.5% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Dominica
--------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, about one-half of the way from Puerto Rico to
  Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 15 25 N, 61 20 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 750 sq km
  land: 750 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than four times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 148 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by northeast trade winds; heavy
  rainfall

Terrain: rugged mountains of volcanic origin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Morne Diablatins 1,447 m

Natural resources: timber

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 13%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 67%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: flash floods are a constant threat; destructive
  hurricanes can be expected during the late summer months

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 64,881 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 8,680; female 8,530)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 21,090; female 20,294)
  65 years and over: 9% (male 2,570; female 3,717) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.41% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.92 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.35 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -24.69 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.75 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.01 years
  male: 75.15 years
  female: 81.01 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.89 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Dominican(s)
  adjective: Dominican

Ethnic groups: black, Carib Amerindian

Religions: Roman Catholic 77%, Protestant 15% (Methodist 5%,
  Pentecostal 3%, Seventh-Day Adventist 3%, Baptist 2%, other 2%),
  none 2%, other 6%

Languages: English (official), French patois

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 94%
  male: 94%
  female: 94% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Commonwealth of Dominica
  conventional short form: Dominica

Data code: DO

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Roseau

Administrative divisions: 10 parishes; Saint Andrew, Saint David,
  Saint George, Saint John, Saint Joseph, Saint Luke, Saint Mark,
  Saint Patrick, Saint Paul, Saint Peter

Independence: 3 November 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 November (1978)

Constitution: 3 November 1978

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Vernon Lorden SHAW (since 7 October 1998)
  head of government: Prime Minister Edison C. JAMES (since 12 June
  1995)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the advice of the
  prime minister
  elections: president elected by the House of Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 7 October 1998 (next to be held
  NA October 2003); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Vernon Lorden SHAW elected president; percent of
  legislative vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (30 seats, 9
  appointed senators, 21 elected by popular vote representatives;
  members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 June 1995 (next to be held by October 2000);
  byelections held 13 August 1996
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--UWP
  12, DLP 5, DFP 4

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (located in
  Saint Lucia), one of the six judges must reside in Dominica and
  preside over the Court of Summary Jurisdiction

Political parties and leaders: Dominica Freedom Party or DFP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Dominica Liberation
  Movement or DLM (a small leftist party)

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, C, Caricom,
  CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM (observer), OAS, OECS,
  OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Nicholas J. O. LIVERPOOL (resident in
  Dominica)
  chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Dominica; the Ambassador to Dominica resides in
  Bridgetown (Barbados), but travels frequently to Dominica

Flag description: green, with a centered cross of three equal
  bands--the vertical part is yellow (hoist side), black, and white and
  the horizontal part is yellow (top), black, and white; superimposed
  in the center of the cross is a red disk bearing a sisserou parrot
  encircled by 10 green, five-pointed stars edged in yellow; the 10
  stars represent the 10 administrative divisions (parishes)



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy depends on agriculture and is
  highly vulnerable to climatic conditions, notably tropical storms.
  Agriculture, primarily bananas, accounts for 20% of GDP and employs
  40% of the labor force. Development of the tourist industry remains
  difficult because of the rugged coastline, lack of beaches, and the
  lack of an international airport. Hurricane Luis devastated the
  country's banana crop in September 1995; tropical storms had wiped
  out one-quarter of the crop in 1994 as well. The economy began to
  recover in mid-1998, fueled by increases in construction, soap
  production, and tourist arrivals. The government is attempting to
  develop an offshore financial industry in order to diversify the
  island's production base.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$216 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.8% (1997)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,300 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 20%
  industry: 16%
  services: 64% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.2% (1997)

Labor force: 25,000

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 40%, industry and commerce
  32%, services 28%

Unemployment rate: 15% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $72 million
  expenditures: $79.9 million, including capital expenditures of $11.5
  million (FY97/98)

Industries: soap, coconut oil, tourism, copra, furniture, cement
  blocks, shoes

Industrial production growth rate: -10% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 40 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 50%
  hydro: 50%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 40 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, citrus, mangoes, root crops,
  coconuts; forest and fishery potential not exploited

Exports: $50.4 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: bananas 50%, soap, bay oil, vegetables,
  grapefruit, oranges

Exports--partners: Caricom countries 47%, UK 36%, US 7% (1996 est.)

Imports: $104.2 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, machinery and equipment,
  food, chemicals

Imports--partners: US 41%, Caricom 25%, UK 13%, Netherlands, Canada

Debt--external: $105 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $24.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 14,613 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: fully automatic network
  international: microwave radio relay and SHF radiotelephone links to
  Martinique and Guadeloupe; VHF and UHF radiotelephone links to Saint
  Lucia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 45,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (there is one cable television
  company) (1997)

Televisions: 5,200 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 780 km
  paved: 393 km
  unpaved: 387 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Portsmouth, Roseau

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Commonwealth of Dominica Police Force
  (includes Special Service Unit, Coast Guard)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for narcotics bound for the US
  and Europe; minor cannabis producer; banking industry is vulnerable
  to money laundering



======================================================================




@Dominican Republic
------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, eastern two-thirds of the island of
  Hispaniola, between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean,
  east of Haiti

Geographic coordinates: 19 00 N, 70 40 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 48,730 sq km
  land: 48,380 sq km
  water: 350 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of New
  Hampshire

Land boundaries:
  total: 275 km
  border countries: Haiti 275 km

Coastline: 1,288 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 6 nm

Climate: tropical maritime; little seasonal temperature
  variation; seasonal variation in rainfall

Terrain: rugged highlands and mountains with fertile valleys
  interspersed

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lago Enriquillo -46 m
  highest point: Pico Duarte 3,175 m

Natural resources: nickel, bauxite, gold, silver

Land use:
  arable land: 21%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 43%
  forests and woodland: 12%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: lies in the middle of the hurricane belt and
  subject to severe storms from June to October; occasional flooding;
  periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: water shortages; soil eroding into
  the sea damages coral reefs; deforestation; Hurricane Georges damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: shares island of Hispaniola with Haiti (eastern
  two-thirds is the Dominican Republic, western one-third is Haiti)



People



Population: 8,129,734 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 1,447,435; female 1,393,122)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 2,501,206; female 2,426,564)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 171,049; female 190,358) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.62% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.97 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.66 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 42.52 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.07 years
  male: 67.86 years
  female: 72.4 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.03 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Dominican(s)
  adjective: Dominican

Ethnic groups: white 16%, black 11%, mixed 73%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 82.1%
  male: 82%
  female: 82.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Dominican Republic
  conventional short form: none
  local long form: Republica Dominicana
  local short form: none

Data code: DR

Government type: republic

Capital: Santo Domingo

Administrative divisions: 29 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia) and 1 district* (distrito); Azua, Baoruco,
  Barahona, Dajabon, Distrito Nacional*, Duarte, Elias Pina, El Seibo,
  Espaillat, Hato Mayor, Independencia, La Altagracia, La Romana, La
  Vega, Maria Trinidad Sanchez, Monsenor Nouel, Monte Cristi, Monte
  Plata, Pedernales, Peravia, Puerto Plata, Salcedo, Samana, Sanchez
  Ramirez, San Cristobal, San Juan, San Pedro de Macoris, Santiago,
  Santiago Rodriguez, Valverde

Independence: 27 February 1844 (from Haiti)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 February (1844)

Constitution: 28 November 1966

Legal system: based on French civil codes

Suffrage: 18 years of age, universal and compulsory; married
  persons regardless of age
  note: members of the armed forces and police cannot vote

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Leonel FERNANDEZ Reyna (since 16 August
  1996); Vice President Jaime David FERNANDEZ Mirabal (since 16 August
  1996); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Leonel FERNANDEZ Reyna (since 16
  August 1996); Vice President Jaime David FERNANDEZ Mirabal (since 16
  August 1996); note--the president is both the chief of state and head
  of government
  cabinet: Cabinet nominated by the president
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year term; election last held 16 May 1996;
  runoff election held 30 June 1996 (next to be held 16 May 2000)
  election results: Leonel FERNANDEZ Reyna elected president; percent
  of vote--Leonel FERNANDEZ Reyna (PLD) 51.25%, Jose Francisco PENA
  Gomez (PRD) 48.75%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso
  Nacional consists of the Senate or Senado (30 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms) and the Chamber of
  Deputies or Camara de Diputados (120 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 16 May 1998 (next to be held NA May
  2002); Chamber of Deputies--last held 16 May 1998 (next to be held NA
  May 2002)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PRD 24, PLD 4, PRSC 2; Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--PRD 83, PLD 49, PRSC 17

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Corte Suprema (judges are
  elected by a Council made up of legislative and executive members
  with the president presiding)

Political parties and leaders:
  Rene BEAUCHAMPS Javier]; Liberal Party of the Dominican Republic or
  note: in 1983 several leftist parties, including the PCD, joined to
  form the Dominican Leftist Front or FID; however, they still retain
  individual party structures

Political pressure groups and leaders: Collective of Popular
  Organizations or COP

International organization participation: ACP, Caricom
  (observer), ECLAC, FAO, G-11, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM, ISO (subscriber), ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), NAM (guest),
  OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU,
  WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Bernardo VEGA Boyrie
  chancery: 1715 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, Mayaguez (Puerto
  Rico), Miami, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, San Francisco,
  and San Juan (Puerto Rico)
  consulate(s): Charlotte Amalie (Virgin Islands), Detroit, Houston,
  Jacksonville, Mobile, and Ponce (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  embassy: corner of Calle Cesar Nicolas Penson and Calle Leopoldo
  Navarro, Santo Domingo
  mailing address: Unit 5500, APO AA 34041-5500

Flag description: a centered white cross that extends to the
  edges divides the flag into four rectangles--the top ones are blue
  (hoist side) and red, the bottom ones are red (hoist side) and blue;
  a small coat of arms is at the center of the cross



Economy



Economy--overview: In December 1996, incoming President FERNANDEZ
  presented a bold reform package for this Caribbean economy--including
  the devaluation of the peso, income tax cuts, a 50% increase in
  sales taxes, reduced import tariffs, and increased gasoline
  prices--in an attempt to create a market-oriented economy that can
  compete internationally. Even though most reforms are stalled in the
  legislature, the economy grew vigorously in 1997-98, with tourism
  and telecommunications leading the advance. The government is
  working to increase electric generating capacity, a key to continued
  economic growth, but the privatization of the state electricity
  company has met numerous delays. In late September 1998, Hurricane
  Georges caused approximately $1.3 billion in damages, largely to
  agriculture and infrastructure.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$39.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$5,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 25%
  services: 56% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 20.6% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.6%
  highest 10%: 39.6% (1989)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.3 million to 2.6 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 50%, services and
  government 32%, industry 18% (1991 est.)

Unemployment rate: 16% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.3 billion
  expenditures: $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $867
  million (1999 est.)

Industries: tourism, sugar processing, ferronickel and gold
  mining, textiles, cement, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 6.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 6.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 70.15%
  hydro: 29.85%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, coffee, cotton, cocoa, tobacco,
  rice, beans, potatoes, corn, bananas; cattle, pigs, dairy products,
  beef, eggs

Exports: $997 million (1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: ferronickel, sugar, gold, coffee, cocoa

Exports--partners: US 45%, EU 19.9%, Canada 3.6%, South Korea 3.3%
  (1996)

Imports: $3.6 billion (1998)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum, cotton and fabrics,
  chemicals and pharmaceuticals

Imports--partners: US 44%, EU 16%, Venezuela 11%, Netherlands
  Antilles, Mexico, Japan (1995)

Debt--external: $3.6 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $239.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Dominican peso (RD$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Dominican pesos (RD$) per US$1--15.949 (January
  1999), 15.267 (1998), 14.265 (1997), 13.775 (1996), 13.597 (1995),
  13.160 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 190,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: relatively efficient system based on islandwide microwave
  radio relay network
  international: 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 120, FM 0, shortwave 6

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 25 (1997)

Televisions: 728,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 757 km
  standard gauge: 375 km 1.435-m gauge (Central Romana Railroad)
  narrow gauge: 142 km 0.762-m gauge (Dominica Government Railway);
  240 km operated by sugar companies in various gauges (0.558-m,
  0.762-m, 1.067-m gauges) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 12,600 km
  paved: 6,224 km
  unpaved: 6,376 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 96 km; petroleum products 8 km

Ports and harbors: Barahona, La Romana, Puerto Plata, San Pedro
  de Macoris, Santo Domingo

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,587 GRT/1,165 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 36 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 22
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 15 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,156,827 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,355,342 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 82,902 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $180 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined for the US



======================================================================




@Ecuador
-------





Geography



Location: Western South America, bordering the Pacific Ocean at
  the Equator, between Colombia and Peru

Geographic coordinates: 2 00 S, 77 30 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 283,560 sq km
  land: 276,840 sq km
  water: 6,720 sq km
  note: includes Galapagos Islands

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Nevada

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,010 km
  border countries: Colombia 590 km, Peru 1,420 km

Coastline: 2,237 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: claims continental shelf between mainland and
  Galapagos Islands
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical along coast becoming cooler inland

Terrain: coastal plain (costa), inter-Andean central highlands
  (sierra), and flat to rolling eastern jungle (oriente)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Chimborazo 6,267 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 18%
  forests and woodland: 56%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,560 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent earthquakes, landslides, volcanic
  activity; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
  desertification; water pollution; pollution from oil production
  wastes

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: Cotopaxi in Andes is highest active volcano in
  world



People



Population: 12,562,496 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 2,250,690; female 2,172,302)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 3,745,390; female 3,833,841)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 261,090; female 299,183) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.78% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.26 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.06 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.55 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.69 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.16 years
  male: 69.54 years
  female: 74.9 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.63 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ecuadorian(s)
  adjective: Ecuadorian

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and Spanish) 55%,
  Amerindian 25%, Spanish 10%, black 10%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: Spanish (official), Amerindian languages (especially
  Quechua)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 90.1%
  male: 92%
  female: 88.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Ecuador
  conventional short form: Ecuador
  local long form: Republica del Ecuador
  local short form: Ecuador

Data code: EC

Government type: republic

Capital: Quito

Administrative divisions: 21 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia); Azuay, Bolivar, Canar, Carchi, Chimborazo,
  Cotopaxi, El Oro, Esmeraldas, Galapagos, Guayas, Imbabura, Loja, Los
  Rios, Manabi, Morona-Santiago, Napo, Pastaza, Pichincha, Sucumbios,
  Tungurahua, Zamora-Chinchipe
  note: a new province, Orellana, was reported to have been formed in
  1998

Independence: 24 May 1822 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 10 August (1809)
  (independence of Quito)

Constitution: 10 August 1998

Legal system: based on civil law system; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal, compulsory for literate
  persons ages 18-65, optional for other eligible voters

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jamil MAHUAD (since 10 August 1998); Vice
  President Gustavo NOBOA (since 10 August 1998); note--the president
  is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Jamil MAHUAD (since 10 August 1998);
  Vice President Gustavo NOBOA (since 10 August 1998); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 31 May 1998;
  runoff election held 12 July 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: Jamil MAHUAD elected president; percent of vote--51%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Congress or Congreso
  Nacional (121 seats; 79 members are popularly elected at-large
  nationally to serve four-year terms; 42 members are popularly
  elected by province--two per province--for four-year terms)
  elections: last held 31 May 1998 (next to be held NA May 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--DP 32,
  PSC 27, PRE 24, ID 18, P-NP 9, FRA 5, PCE 3, MPD 2, CFP 1;
  note--defections by members of National Congress are commonplace,
  resulting in frequent changes in the numbers of seats held by the
  various parties

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), new justices are
  elected by the full Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders:
  BRAVO]
  director]
  EHLERS]
  Gonzalez]

International organization participation: CAN, ECLAC, FAO, G-11,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  LAES, LAIA, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ivonne A-BAKI
  chancery: 2535 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, Newark, Philadelphia, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Leslie M. ALEXANDER
  embassy: Avenida 12 de Octubre y Avenida Patria, Quito
  mailing address: APO AA 34039
  consulate(s) general: Guayaquil

Flag description: three horizontal bands of yellow (top, double
  width), blue, and red with the coat of arms superimposed at the
  center of the flag; similar to the flag of Colombia that is shorter
  and does not bear a coat of arms



Economy



Economy--overview: Ecuador has substantial oil resources and rich
  agricultural areas. Because the country exports primary products
  such as oil, bananas, and shrimp, fluctuations in world market
  prices can have a substantial domestic impact. Ecuador joined the
  World Trade Organization in 1996, but has failed to comply with many
  of its accession commitments. In recent years, growth has been
  uneven due to ill-conceived fiscal stabilization measures. The
  populist government of Abdala BUCARAM Ortiz proposed a major
  currency reform in 1996, but popular discontent with BUCARAM'S
  austerity measures and rampant official corruption led to his
  replacement by National Congress with Fabian ALARCON in February
  1997. ALARCON adopted a minimalist economic program that put off
  necessary reforms until August 1998 when President Jamil MAHUAD was
  elected. MAHAUD inherited an economy in crisis due to mismanagement,
  El Nino damage to key export sectors such as agriculture, and low
  world commodity prices in the wake of the Asian financial crisis.
  MAHAUD announced a fiscal austerity package and expressed interest
  in an IMF agreement but faces major difficulties in promoting
  economic growth, including possible political objections to further
  reform.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$58.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 12%
  industry: 37%
  services: 51% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 35% (1994 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.3%
  highest 10%: 37.6% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 43% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.2 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 29%, manufacturing 18%,
  commerce 15%, services and other activities 38% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 12% with widespread underemployment (November
  1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: planned $5.1 billion not including revenue from potential
  privatizations
  expenditures: $5.1 billion (1999)

Industries: petroleum, food processing, textiles, metal work,
  paper products, wood products, chemicals, plastics, fishing, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: 2.4% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 8.45 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 17.16%
  hydro: 82.84%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 8.45 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, coffee, cocoa, rice, potatoes,
  manioc (tapioca), plantains, sugarcane; cattle, sheep, pigs, beef,
  pork, dairy products; balsa wood; fish, shrimp

Exports: $3.4 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum 30%, bananas 26%, shrimp 16%, cut
  flowers 2%, fish 1.9%

Exports--partners: US 39%, Latin America 25%, EU countries 22%,
  Asia 12%

Imports: $2.9 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: transport equipment, consumer goods,
  vehicles, machinery, chemicals

Imports--partners: US 32%, EU 19%, Latin America 35%, Asia 11%

Debt--external: $12.5 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $695.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 sucre (S/) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: sucres (S/) per US$1--7,133.1 (January 1999),
  5,446.6 (1998), 3,988.3 (1997), 3,189.5 (1996), 2,564.5 (1995),
  2,196.7 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 586,300 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: facilities generally inadequate and unreliable
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 272, FM 0, shortwave 39

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 15 (including one station on the
  Galapagos Islands) (1997)

Televisions: 940,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 965 km (single track)
  narrow gauge: 965 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 42,874 km
  paved: 5,752 km
  unpaved: 37,122 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 1,500 km

Pipelines: crude oil 800 km; petroleum products 1,358 km

Ports and harbors: Esmeraldas, Guayaquil, La Libertad, Manta,
  Puerto Bolivar, San Lorenzo

Merchant marine:
  total: 23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 99,078 GRT/162,423 DWT
  ships by type: chemical tanker 2, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker
  17, passenger 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 183 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 56
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
  914 to 1,523 m: 14
  under 914 m: 19 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 127
  914 to 1,523 m: 37
  under 914 m: 90 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (Ejercito Ecuatoriano), Navy (Armada
  Ecuatoriana, includes Marines), Air Force (Fuerza Aerea
  Ecuatoriana), National Police

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,259,534 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,199,704 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 130,208 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $720 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.4% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: on October 26, 1998, Peru and Ecuador
  concluded treaties on commerce and navigation and on boundary
  integration, to complete a package of agreements settling the
  long-standing boundary dispute between them; demarcation of the
  agreed-upon boundary was scheduled to begin in mid-January 1999

Illicit drugs: significant transit country for derivatives of
  coca originating in Colombia, Bolivia, and Peru; importer of
  precursor chemicals used in production of illicit narcotics;
  important money-laundering hub



======================================================================




@Egypt
-----





Introduction



Background: One of the four great ancient civilizations, Egypt,
  ruled by powerful pharaohs, bequeathed to Western civilization
  numerous advances in technology, science, and the arts. For the last
  two millennia, however, Egypt has served a series of foreign
  masters--Persians, Greeks, Romans, Byzantines, Arabs, Turks, and the
  British. Formal independence came in 1922, and the remnants of
  British control ended after World War II. The completion of the
  Aswan High Dam in 1981 altered the time-honored place of the Nile
  River in the agriculture and ecology of Egypt. A rapidly growing
  population will stress Egyptian society and resources as it enters
  the new millenium.



Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea,
  between Libya and the Gaza Strip

Geographic coordinates: 27 00 N, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,001,450 sq km
  land: 995,450 sq km
  water: 6,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than three times the size of New
  Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,689 km
  border countries: Gaza Strip 11 km, Israel 255 km, Libya 1,150 km,
  Sudan 1,273 km

Coastline: 2,450 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; hot, dry summers with moderate winters

Terrain: vast desert plateau interrupted by Nile valley and delta

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Qattara Depression -133 m
  highest point: Mount Catherine 2,629 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, phosphates,
  manganese, limestone, gypsum, talc, asbestos, lead, zinc

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 32,460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; frequent earthquakes, flash
  floods, landslides, volcanic activity; hot, driving windstorm called
  khamsin occurs in spring; dust storms, sandstorms

Environment--current issues: agricultural land being lost to
  urbanization and windblown sands; increasing soil salination below
  Aswan High Dam; desertification; oil pollution threatening coral
  reefs, beaches, and marine habitats; other water pollution from
  agricultural pesticides, raw sewage, and industrial effluents; very
  limited natural fresh water resources away from the Nile which is
  the only perennial water source; rapid growth in population
  overstraining natural resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: controls Sinai Peninsula, only land bridge
  between Africa and remainder of Eastern Hemisphere; controls Suez
  Canal, shortest sea link between Indian Ocean and Mediterranean Sea;
  size, and juxtaposition to Israel, establish its major role in
  Middle Eastern geopolitics



People



Population: 67,273,906 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 36% (male 12,260,845; female 11,712,752)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 20,604,620; female 20,211,012)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 1,099,517; female 1,385,160) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.82% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.8 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.27 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 67.46 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 62.39 years
  male: 60.39 years
  female: 64.49 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.33 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Egyptian(s)
  adjective: Egyptian

Ethnic groups: Eastern Hamitic stock (Egyptians, Bedouins, and
  Berbers) 99%, Greek, Nubian, Armenian, other European (primarily
  Italian and French) 1%

Religions: Muslim (mostly Sunni) 94% (official estimate), Coptic
  Christian and other 6% (official estimate)

Languages: Arabic (official), English and French widely
  understood by educated classes

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 51.4%
  male: 63.6%
  female: 38.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Arab Republic of Egypt
  conventional short form: Egypt
  local long form: Jumhuriyat Misr al-Arabiyah
  local short form: Misr
  former: United Arab Republic (with Syria)

Data code: EG

Government type: republic

Capital: Cairo

Administrative divisions: 26 governorates (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Ad Daqahliyah, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrah,
  Al Fayyum, Al Gharbiyah, Al Iskandariyah, Al Isma'iliyah, Al Jizah,
  Al Minufiyah, Al Minya, Al Qahirah, Al Qalyubiyah, Al Wadi al Jadid,
  Ash Sharqiyah, As Suways, Aswan, Asyut, Bani Suwayf, Bur Sa'id,
  Dumyat, Janub Sina', Kafr ash Shaykh, Matruh, Qina, Shamal Sina',
  Suhaj

Independence: 28 February 1922 (from UK)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 23 July (1952)

Constitution: 11 September 1971

Legal system: based on English common law, Islamic law, and
  Napoleonic codes; judicial review by Supreme Court and Council of
  State (oversees validity of administrative decisions); accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Mohammed Hosni MUBARAK (since 14 October
  1981)
  head of government: Prime Minister Kamal Ahmed El-GANZOURI (since 4
  January 1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president nominated by the People's Assembly for a
  six-year term, the nomination must then be validated by a national,
  popular referendum; national referendum last held 4 October 1993
  (next to be held NA October 1999); prime minister appointed by the
  president
  election results: national referendum validated President MUBARAK's
  nomination by the People's Assembly to a third term

Legislative branch: bicameral system consists of the People's
  Assembly or Majlis al-Sha'b (454 seats; 444 elected by popular vote,
  10 appointed by the president; members serve five-year terms) and
  the Advisory Council or Majlis al-Shura--which functions only in a
  consultative role (264 seats; 176 elected by popular vote, 88
  appointed by the president; members serve NA-year terms)
  elections: People's Assembly--last held 29 November 1995 (next to be
  held NA 2000); Advisory Council--last held 7 June 1995 (next to be
  held NA)
  election results: People's Assembly--percent of vote by party--NDP
  72%, independents 25%, opposition 3%; seats by party--NDP 317,
  independents 114, NWP 6, NPUG 5, Nasserist Arab Democratic Party 1,
  Liberals 1; Advisory Council--percent of vote by party--NDP 99%,
  independents 1%; seats by party--NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Party or NDP
  legal opposition parties are as follows: New Wafd Party or NWP
  note: formation of political parties must be approved by government

Political pressure groups and leaders: despite a constitutional
  ban against religious-based parties, the technically illegal Muslim
  Brotherhood constitutes MUBARAK's potentially most significant
  political opposition; MUBARAK tolerated limited political activity
  by the Brotherhood for his first two terms, but has moved more
  aggressively in the past two years to block its influence; trade
  unions and professional associations are officially sanctioned

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACC, ACCT
  (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, BSEC (observer), CAEU, CCC, EBRD,
  ECA, ESCWA, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURCA, MINURSO, MONUA,
  NAM, OAPEC, OAS (observer), OAU, OIC, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNOMIL,
  UNOMSIL, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ahmed MAHER al-Sayed
  chancery: 3521 International Court NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Daniel C. KURTZER
  embassy: (North Gate) 8, Kamel El-Din Salah Street, Garden City,
  Cairo
  mailing address: Unit 64900, APO AE 09839-4900

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and black with the national emblem (a shield superimposed on
  a golden eagle facing the hoist side above a scroll bearing the name
  of the country in Arabic) centered in the white band; similar to the
  flag of Yemen, which has a plain white band; also similar to the
  flag of Syria that has two green stars and to the flag of Iraq,
  which has three green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a
  horizontal line centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: At the end of the 1980s, Egypt faced problems
  of low productivity and poor economic management, compounded by the
  adverse social effects of excessive population growth, high
  inflation, and massive urban overcrowding. In the face of these
  pressures, in 1991 Egypt undertook wide-ranging macroeconomic
  stabilization and structural reform measures. This reform effort has
  been supported by three IMF arrangements, the last of which expired
  in September 1998. Egypt's reform efforts--and its participation in
  the Gulf war coalition--also led to massive debt relief under the
  Paris Club arrangements. Substantial progress has been made in
  improving macroeconomic performance. Cairo tamed inflation, slashed
  budget deficits, and built up foreign reserves to an all-time high.
  Although the pace of structural reforms--such as privatization and
  new business legislation--has been slower than envisioned under the
  IMF program, Egypt's steps toward a more market-oriented economy
  have prompted increased foreign investment. The November 1997
  massacre of foreign tourists in Luxor affected tourism enough to
  slow the GDP growth rate for 1998 compared to earlier projections.
  Tourism's slow recovery, coupled with low world oil prices, caused a
  downturn in foreign exchange earnings in 1998, but external payments
  are not in crisis.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$188 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,850 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 16%
  industry: 31%
  services: 53% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.9%
  highest 10%: 26.7% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.6% (1998)

Labor force: 17.4 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 40%, services, including
  government 38%, industry 22% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $20 billion
  expenditures: $20.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $4.4
  billion (FY97/98)

Industries: textiles, food processing, tourism, chemicals,
  petroleum, construction, cement, metals

Industrial production growth rate: 9.4% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 46 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 76.09%
  hydro: 23.91%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 46 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, rice, corn, wheat, beans, fruits,
  vegetables; cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats; fish

Exports: $5.5 billion (f.o.b., FY97/98 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil and petroleum products, cotton
  yarn, raw cotton, textiles, metal products, chemicals

Exports--partners: EU, US, Japan

Imports: $16.7 billion (c.i.f., FY97/98 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, foods, fertilizers,
  wood products, durable consumer goods, capital goods

Imports--partners: US, EU, Japan

Debt--external: $28 billion (FY97/98 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $2.4 billion (1996)

Currency: 1 Egyptian pound (LE) = 100 piasters

Exchange rates: Egyptian pounds (LE) per US$1--3.4 (November
  1994); market rate--3.3880 (January 1999), 3.3880 (1998), 3.3880
  (1997), 3.3880 (1996), 3.3900 (1995), 3.3910 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 3.168 million (1996); 70,000 digital cellular
  telephone subscribers (1998); 7,400 analog cellular telephone
  subscribers (1997)

Telephone system: large system by Third World standards but
  inadequate for present requirements and undergoing extensive
  upgrading
  domestic: principal centers at Alexandria, Cairo, Al Mansurah,
  Ismailia, Suez, and Tanta are connected by coaxial cable and
  microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean
  and Indian Ocean), 1 Arabsat, and 1 Inmarsat; 5 coaxial submarine
  cables; tropospheric scatter to Sudan; microwave radio relay to
  Israel; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 57, FM 14, shortwave 3 (1998 est.)

Radios: 16.45 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 42 (in addition, there are nine
  channels received from Europe by satellite) (1997)

Televisions: 5 million (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,751 km
  standard gauge: 4,751 km 1,435-m gauge (42 km electrified; 951 km
  double track)

Highways:
  total: 64,000 km
  paved: 49,984 km
  unpaved: 14,016 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 3,500 km (including the Nile, Lake Nasser,
  Alexandria-Cairo Waterway, and numerous smaller canals in the
  delta); Suez Canal, 193.5 km long (including approaches), used by
  oceangoing vessels drawing up to 16.1 m of water

Pipelines: crude oil 1,171 km; petroleum products 596 km; natural
  gas 460 km

Ports and harbors: Alexandria, Al Ghardaqah, Aswan, Asyut, Bur
  Safajah, Damietta, Marsa Matruh, Port Said, Suez

Merchant marine:
  total: 180 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,334,406
  GRT/2,022,785 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 25, cargo 63, container 1, liquefied gas tanker
  1, oil tanker 14, passenger 56, refrigerated cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 16, short-sea passenger 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 89 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 70
  over 3,047 m: 10
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 37
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 16
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 19
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 9 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Command

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 17,756,706 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 11,507,058 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 694,468 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3.28 billion (FY95/96)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 8.2% (FY95/96)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Egypt asserts its claim to the "Hala'ib
  Triangle," a barren area of 20,580 sq km under partial Sudanese
  administration that is defined by an administrative boundary which
  supersedes the treaty boundary of 1899

Illicit drugs: a transit point for Southwest Asian and Southeast
  Asian heroin and opium moving to Europe and the US; popular transit
  stop for Nigerian couriers



======================================================================




@El Salvador
-----------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering the North Pacific Ocean,
  between Guatemala and Honduras

Geographic coordinates: 13 50 N, 88 55 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 21,040 sq km
  land: 20,720 sq km
  water: 320 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Massachusetts

Land boundaries:
  total: 545 km
  border countries: Guatemala 203 km, Honduras 342 km

Coastline: 307 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (May to October); dry season
  (November to April)

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow coastal belt and central
  plateau

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Cerro El Pital 2,730 m

Natural resources: hydropower, geothermal power, petroleum

Land use:
  arable land: 27%
  permanent crops: 8%
  permanent pastures: 29%
  forests and woodland: 5%
  other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,200 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: known as the Land of Volcanoes; frequent and
  sometimes very destructive earthquakes and volcanic activity

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
  pollution; contamination of soils from disposal of toxic wastes;
  Hurricane Mitch damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: smallest Central American country and only one
  without a coastline on Caribbean Sea



People



Population: 5,839,079 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 37% (male 1,091,500; female 1,044,658)
  15-64 years: 58% (male 1,612,847; female 1,786,318)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 138,052; female 165,704) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.53% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.19 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.2 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 28.38 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.02 years
  male: 66.7 years
  female: 73.5 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.99 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Salvadoran(s)
  adjective: Salvadoran

Ethnic groups: mestizo 94%, Amerindian 5%, white 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 75%
  note: there is extensive activity by Protestant groups throughout
  the country; by the end of 1992, there were an estimated 1 million
  Protestant evangelicals in El Salvador

Languages: Spanish, Nahua (among some Amerindians)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 71.5%
  male: 73.5%
  female: 69.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of El Salvador
  conventional short form: El Salvador
  local long form: Republica de El Salvador
  local short form: El Salvador

Data code: ES

Government type: republic

Capital: San Salvador

Administrative divisions: 14 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento); Ahuachapan, Cabanas, Chalatenango,
  Cuscatlan, La Libertad, La Paz, La Union, Morazan, San Miguel, San
  Salvador, Santa Ana, San Vicente, Sonsonate, Usulutan

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 20 December 1983

Legal system: based on civil and Roman law, with traces of common
  law; judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations
  note: Legislative Assembly passed landmark judicial reforms in 1996

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Armando CALDERON Sol (since 1 June 1994);
  Vice President Enrique BORGO Bustamante (since 1 June 1994);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Armando CALDERON Sol (since 1 June
  1994); Vice President Enrique BORGO Bustamante (since 1 June 1994);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 20 March
  1994, with a run-off election held 24 April 1994 (next to be held 7
  March 1999)
  election results: Armando CALDERON Sol elected president; percent of
  vote--Armando CALDERON Sol (ARENA) 49.03%, Ruben ZAMORA Rivas
  (CD/FMLN/MNR) 24.09%, Fidel CHAVEZ Mena (PDC) 16.39%, other 10.49%;
  because no candidate received a majority, a run-off election was
  held and the results were as follows--Armando CALDERON Sol (ARENA)
  68.35%, Ruben ZAMORA Rivas (CD/FMLN/MNR) 31.65%
  note: in the election held 7 March 1999, Francisco FLORES elected
  president, Carlos QUINTANILLA elected vice president (will take
  office 1 June 1999); percent of vote--Francisco FLORES (ARENA) 52%,
  Facundo GUARDADO (FMLN/USC) 29%, Ruben ZAMORA (CD) 8%, other parties
  11%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Asamblea
  Legislativa (84 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve three-year terms)
  elections: last held 16 March 1997 (next to be held NA March 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--ARENA 35.4%, FMLN 34.3%,
  PCN 8.1%, PDC 7.9%, CD 3.8%, PRSC 3.4%, PLD 3.2%, MU 2.1%, PD 1.0%,
  other 0.8%; seats by party--ARENA 28, FMLN 27, PCN 9, PDC 8, PRSC 3,
  CD 2, PLD 2, MU 1, PD 1, independent 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), judges are
  selected by the Legislative Assembly

Political parties and leaders: National Republican Alliance or
  MARTINEZ, president]
  note: the Social Christian Union or USC is formed by the union of
  the Social Christian Renovation Party or PRSC, the Unity Movement or
  MU, and the MSN

Political pressure groups and leaders:
  labor organizations: National Confederation of Salvadoran Workers or
  CNTS; National Union of Salvadoran Workers or UNTS; Federation of
  the Construction Industry, Similar Transport and other activities,
  or FESINCONTRANS; Salvadoran Workers Central or CTS; Port Industry
  Union of El Salvador or SIPES; Electrical Industry Union of El
  Salvador or SIES; Workers Union of Electrical Corporation or STCEL
  business organizations: Salvadoran Industrial Association or ASI;
  Salvadoran Assembly Industry Association or ASIC; National
  Association of Small Enterprise or ANEP

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent),
  ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), MINURSO, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL,
  OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Rene A. LEON
  chancery: 2308 California Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Dallas, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, and San Francisco
  consulate(s): Boston

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Anne W. PATTERSON
  embassy: Final Boulevard Santa Elena, Antiguo Cuscatlan, San Salvador
  mailing address: Unit 3116, APO AA 34023

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  white, and blue with the national coat of arms centered in the white
  band; the coat of arms features a round emblem encircled by the
  words REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL; similar to the
  flag of Nicaragua, which has a different coat of arms centered in
  the white band--it features a triangle encircled by the words
  REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom;
  also similar to the flag of Honduras, which has five blue stars
  arranged in an X pattern centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: In recent years inflation has fallen to
  unprecedented levels, and exports have grown substantially. Even so,
  El Salvador has experienced sizable deficits in both its trade and
  its fiscal accounts. The trade deficit has been offset by
  remittances from the large number of Salvadorans living abroad and
  from external aid. El Salvador sustained damage from Hurricane
  Mitch, but not as much as other Central American countries.
  Inflation and the trade deficit are expected to rise somewhat as a
  result.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$17.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 15%
  industry: 24%
  services: 61% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 48.3% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.2%
  highest 10%: 38.3% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.6% (1998)

Labor force: 2.26 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 40%, commerce 16%,
  manufacturing 15%, government 13%, financial services 9%,
  transportation 6%, other 1%

Unemployment rate: 7.7% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.75 billion
  expenditures: $1.82 billion, including capital expenditures of $317
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: food processing, beverages, petroleum, chemicals,
  fertilizer, textiles, furniture, light metals

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 3.575 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 22.38%
  hydro: 61.54%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 16.08% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3.547 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 60 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 32 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, sugarcane, corn, rice, beans,
  oilseed, cotton, sorghum; beef, dairy products; shrimp

Exports: $1.96 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: coffee, sugar; shrimp; textiles

Exports--partners: US, Guatemala, Germany, Costa Rica, Honduras

Imports: $3.5 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: raw materials, consumer goods, capital
  goods, fuels

Imports--partners: US, Guatemala, Mexico, Panama, Venezuela, Japan

Debt--external: $2.6 billion (yearend 1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $391.7 million (1995); note?US has
  committed $280 million in economic assistance to El Salvador for
  1995-97 (excludes military aid)

Currency: 1 Salvadoran colon (C) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Salvadoran colones (C) per US$1 (end of
  period)--8.755 (January 1999-1995), 8.750 (1994)
  note: as of 1 June 1990, the rate is based on the average of the
  buying and selling rates, set on a weekly basis, for official
  receipts and payments, imports of petroleum, and coffee exports;
  prior to that date, a system of floating was in effect

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 350,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: nationwide microwave radio relay system
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  connected to Central American Microwave System

Radio broadcast stations: AM 18, FM 80, shortwave 2

Radios: 1.5 million (1997 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (1997)

Televisions: 700,000 (1997 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 602 km (single track; note--some sections abandoned, unusable,
  or operating at reduced capacity)
  narrow gauge: 602 km 0.914-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 10,029 km
  paved: 1,986 km (including 327 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 8,043 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: Rio Lempa partially navigable

Ports and harbors: Acajutla, Puerto Cutuco, La Libertad, La
  Union, Puerto El Triunfo

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 86 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 82
  914 to 1,523 m: 17
  under 914 m: 65 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,393,986 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 884,093 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 65,224 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $105 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.9% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: demarcation of boundary with Honduras
  defined by 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision has
  not been completed; small boundary section left unresolved by ICJ
  decision not yet reported to have been settled; with respect to the
  maritime boundary in the Golfo de Fonseca, ICJ referred to an
  earlier agreement in this century and advised that some tripartite
  resolution among El Salvador, Honduras and Nicaragua likely would be
  required

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine; marijuana
  produced for local consumption



======================================================================




@Equatorial Guinea
-----------------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Biafra, between
  Cameroon and Gabon

Geographic coordinates: 2 00 N, 10 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 28,050 sq km
  land: 28,050 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 539 km
  border countries: Cameroon 189 km, Gabon 350 km

Coastline: 296 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; always hot, humid

Terrain: coastal plains rise to interior hills; islands are
  volcanic

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pico Basile 3,008 m

Natural resources: petroleum, timber, small unexploited deposits
  of gold, manganese, uranium

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 46%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: violent windstorms, flash floods

Environment--current issues: tap water is not potable;
  desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: insular and continental regions rather widely
  separated



People



Population: 465,746 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 100,334; female 99,826)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 118,248; female 129,777)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 7,801; female 9,760) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.55% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 38.49 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.98 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: migration to Spain is a traditional and continuing factor;
  between 80% and 90% of Equatorial Guinean nationals going to Spain
  do not return

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 91.18 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 54.39 years
  male: 52.03 years
  female: 56.83 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Equatorial Guinean(s) or Equatoguinean(s)
  adjective: Equatorial Guinean or Equatoguinean

Ethnic groups: Bioko (primarily Bubi, some Fernandinos), Rio Muni
  (primarily Fang), Europeans less than 1,000, mostly Spanish

Religions: nominally Christian and predominantly Roman Catholic,
  pagan practices

Languages: Spanish (official), French (official), pidgin English,
  Fang, Bubi, Ibo

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 78.5%
  male: 89.6%
  female: 68.1% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Equatorial Guinea
  conventional short form: Equatorial Guinea
  local long form: Republica de Guinea Ecuatorial
  local short form: Guinea Ecuatorial
  former: Spanish Guinea

Data code: EK

Government type: republic in transition to multiparty democracy
  (the transition appears to have halted)

Capital: Malabo

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia); Annobon, Bioko Norte, Bioko Sur, Centro Sur,
  Kie-Ntem, Litoral, Wele-Nzas

Independence: 12 October 1968 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 October (1968)

Constitution: approved by national referendum 17 November 1991;
  amended January 1995

Legal system: partly based on Spanish civil law and tribal custom

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Brig. Gen. (Ret.) Teodoro OBIANG NGUEMA
  MBASOGO (since 3 August 1979)
  head of government: Prime Minister Serafin Seriche DOUGAN (since NA
  April 1996); First Vice Prime Minister for Foreign Affairs Miguel
  OYONO NDONG (since NA January 1998); Second Vice Prime Minister for
  Internal Affairs Demetrio Elo NDONG NGEFUMU (since NA January 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote to a seven-year term;
  election last held 25 February 1996 (next to be held NA February
  2003); prime minister and vice prime ministers appointed by the
  president
  election results: President OBIANG NGUEMA MBASOGO reelected with 98%
  of popular vote in elections marred by widespread fraud

Legislative branch: unicameral House of People's Representatives
  or Camara de Representantes del Pueblo (80 seats; members directly
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 21 November 1993 (next to be held NA 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PDGE
  68, CSDP 6, UDS 5, CLD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Tribunal

Political parties and leaders:
  ruling party: Democratic Party for Equatorial Guinea or PDGE
  opposition parties: Convergence Party for Social Democracy or CPDS
  BOKESA, president]; Party of the Social Democratic Coalition or PCSD
  mayor of Malabo]; Social Democratic and Popular Convergence or CSDP

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
  CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer),
  OAU, OPCW, UDEAC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WToO,
  WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Pastor Micha ONDO BILE
  chancery: 1712 I Street NW, Suite 410, Washington, DC 20005

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Equatorial Guinea (embassy closed September 1995); US
  relations with Equatorial Guinea are handled through the US Embassy
  in Yaounde, Cameroon; the US State Department is considering opening
  a Consulate Agency in Malabo

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and red with a blue isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side and the coat of arms centered in the white band; the coat of
  arms has six yellow six-pointed stars (representing the mainland and
  five offshore islands) above a gray shield bearing a silk-cotton
  tree and below which is a scroll with the motto UNIDAD, PAZ,
  JUSTICIA (Unity, Peace, Justice)



Economy



Economy--overview: The discovery and exploitation of large oil
  reserves have contributed to dramatic economic growth in recent
  years. Several large oil companies are expected to bid on oil
  licenses by May 1999. Forestry, farming, and fishing are also major
  components of GDP. Subsistence farming predominates. Although
  pre-independence Equatorial Guinea counted on cocoa production for
  hard currency earnings, the deterioration of the rural economy under
  successive brutal regimes has diminished potential for
  agriculture-led growth. A number of aid programs sponsored by the
  World Bank and the IMF have been cut off since 1993 because of the
  government's gross corruption and mismanagement. Businesses, for the
  most part, are owned by government officials and their family
  members. Undeveloped natural resources include titanium, iron ore,
  manganese, uranium, and alluvial gold. The country responded
  favorably to the devaluation of the CFA franc in January 1994.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$660 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,500 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 46%
  industry: 33%
  services: 21% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 30% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $47 million
  expenditures: $43 million, including capital expenditures of $7
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum, fishing, sawmilling, natural gas

Industrial production growth rate: 7.4% (1994 est.)

Electricity--production: 19 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 89.47%
  hydro: 10.53%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 19 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, cocoa, rice, yams, cassava
  (tapioca), bananas, palm oil nuts, manioc (tapioca); livestock;
  timber

Exports: $197 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum, timber, cocoa

Exports--partners: US 34%, Japan 17%, Spain 13%, China 13%, Nigeria

Imports: $248 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: petroleum, food, beverages, clothing,
  machinery

Imports--partners: Cameroon 40%, Spain 18%, France 14%, US 8%

Debt--external: $254 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $33.8 million (1995)

Currency: Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) is used

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (December 1998), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 2,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: poor system with adequate government services
  domestic: NA
  international: international communications from Bata and Malabo to
  African and European countries; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat
  (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 4,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 2,880 km
  paved: 0 km
  unpaved: 2,880 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Bata, Luba, Malabo

Merchant marine:
  total: 12 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 23,370 GRT/25,194 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 9, passenger 2, passenger-cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Rapid Intervention
  Force, National Police

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 102,269 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 51,979 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.5 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary dispute with Gabon
  because of disputed sovereignty over islands in Corisco Bay;
  maritime boundary dispute with Nigeria because of disputed
  jurisdiction over oil-rich areas in the Gulf of Guinea



======================================================================




@Eritrea
-------





Introduction



Background: On 29 May 1991, ISAIAS Afworki, secretary general of
  the People's Front for Democracy and Justice (PFDJ), which then
  served as the country's legislative body, announced the formation of
  the Provisional Government in Eritrea (PGE) in preparation for the
  23-25 April 1993 referendum on independence from Ethiopia. The
  referendum resulted in a landslide vote for independence, which
  became effective on 24 May 1993.



Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Red Sea, between Djibouti
  and Sudan

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 39 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 121,320 sq km
  land: 121,320 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,630 km
  border countries: Djibouti 113 km, Ethiopia 912 km, Sudan 605 km

Coastline: 2,234 km total; mainland on Red Sea 1,151 km, islands
  in Red Sea 1,083 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: hot, dry desert strip along Red Sea coast; cooler and
  wetter in the central highlands (up to 61 cm of rainfall annually);
  semiarid in western hills and lowlands; rainfall heaviest during
  June-September except on coastal desert

Terrain: dominated by extension of Ethiopian north-south trending
  highlands, descending on the east to a coastal desert plain, on the
  northwest to hilly terrain and on the southwest to flat-to-rolling
  plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: near Kulul within the Denakil depression -75 m
  highest point: Soira 3,018 m

Natural resources: gold, potash, zinc, copper, salt, probably oil
  and natural gas (currently under exploration), fish

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 48%
  forests and woodland: 20%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 280 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation; desertification; soil
  erosion; overgrazing; loss of infrastructure from civil warfare

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic geopolitical position along world's
  busiest shipping lanes; Eritrea retained the entire coastline of
  Ethiopia along the Red Sea upon de jure independence from Ethiopia
  on 27 April 1993



People



Population: 3,984,723 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 859,899; female 852,329)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 1,061,921; female 1,078,102)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 67,969; female 64,503) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.88% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 42.56 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.32 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 8.53 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: it is estimated that approximately 315,000 Eritrean refugees
  were still living in Sudan by the end of 1997 according to the UNHCR

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.05 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 76.84 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 55.74 years
  male: 53.61 years
  female: 57.95 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.96 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Eritrean(s)
  adjective: Eritrean

Ethnic groups: ethnic Tigrinya 50%, Tigre and Kunama 40%, Afar
  4%, Saho (Red Sea coast dwellers) 3%

Religions: Muslim, Coptic Christian, Roman Catholic, Protestant

Languages: Afar, Amharic, Arabic, Tigre and Kunama, Tigrinya,
  minor ethnic group languages

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: State of Eritrea
  conventional short form: Eritrea
  local long form: Hagere Ertra
  local short form: Ertra
  former: Eritrea Autonomous Region in Ethiopia

Data code: ER

Government type: transitional government
  note: following a successful referendum on independence for the
  Autonomous Region of Eritrea on 23-25 April 1993, a National
  Assembly, composed entirely of the People's Front for Democracy and
  Justice or PFDJ, was established as a transitional legislature; a
  Constitutional Commission was also established to draft a
  constitution; ISAIAS Afworki was elected president by the
  transitional legislature

Capital: Asmara (formerly Asmera)

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces (singular--awraja); Akale
  Guzay, Barka, Denkel, Hamasen, Sahil, Semhar, Senhit, Seraye
  note: in May 1995 the National Assembly adopted a resolution stating
  that the administrative structure of Eritrea, which had been
  established by former colonial powers, would consist of only six
  provinces when the new constitution, then being drafted, became
  effective in 1997; the new provinces, the names of which had not
  been recommended by the US Board on Geographic Names for recognition
  by the US Government, pending acceptable definition of the
  boundaries, were: Anseba, Debub, Debubawi Keyih Bahri, Gash-Barka,
  Maakel, and Semanawi Keyih Bahri; more recently, it has been
  reported that these provinces have been redesignated regions and
  renamed Southern Red Sea, Northern Red Sea, Anseba, Gash-Barka,
  Southern, and Central

Independence: 24 May 1993 (from Ethiopia; formerly the Eritrea
  Autonomous Region)

National holiday: National Day (independence from Ethiopia), 24
  May (1993)

Constitution: the transitional constitution, decreed on 19 May
  1993, was replaced by a new constitution that was promulgated in May
  1997

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: NA; note--it seems likely that the final version of the
  constitution would follow the example set in the referendum of 1993
  and extend suffrage to all persons 18 years of age or older

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President ISAIAS Afworki (since 8 June 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President ISAIAS Afworki (since 8 June 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: State Council is the collective executive authority
  note: the president is head of the State Council and National
  Assembly
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly; election last
  held 8 June 1993 (next to be held NA)
  election results: ISAIAS Afworki elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--ISAIAS Afworki 95%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (150 seats; term
  limits not established)
  elections: in May 1997, following the adoption of the new
  constitution, 75 members of the PFDJ Central Committee (the old
  Central Committee of the EPLF), 60 members of the 527-member
  Constituent Assembly which had been established in 1997 to discuss
  and ratify the new constitution, and 15 representatives of Eritreans
  living abroad were formed into a Transitional National Assembly to
  serve as the country's legislative body until country-wide elections
  to a National Assembly are held; only 75 members will be elected to
  the National Assembly--the other 75 will be members of the Central
  Committee of the PFDJ

Judicial branch: the Supreme Court; 10 provincial courts; 29
  district courts

Political parties and leaders: People's Front for Democracy and
  Afworki, PETROS Solomon]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Eritrean Islamic Jihad or
  NAWUD]; Eritrean Liberation Front-Revolutionary Council or ELF-RC

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador SEMERE Russom
  chancery: 1708 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William CLARK
  embassy: Franklin D. Roosevelt Street, Asmara
  mailing address: P.O. Box 211, Asmara

Flag description: red isosceles triangle (based on the hoist
  side) dividing the flag into two right triangles; the upper triangle
  is green, the lower one is blue; a gold wreath encircling a gold
  olive branch is centered on the hoist side of the red triangle



Economy



Economy--overview: With independence from Ethiopia on 24 May 1993,
  Eritrea faced the bitter economic problem of a small, desperately
  poor African country. The economy is largely based on subsistence
  agriculture, with over 70% of the population involved in farming and
  herding. The small industrial sector consists mainly of light
  industries with outmoded technologies. Domestic output (GDP) is
  substantially augmented by worker remittances from abroad.
  Government revenues come from custom duties and taxes on income and
  sales. Road construction is a top domestic priority. Eritrea has
  long-term prospects for revenues from the development of offshore
  oil, offshore fishing, and tourism. Eritrea's economic future
  depends on its ability to master fundamental social and economic
  problems, e.g., overcoming illiteracy, promoting job creation,
  expanding technical training, attracting foreign investment, and
  streamlining the bureaucracy. The most immediate threat to the
  economy, however, is the possible expansion of the armed conflict
  with Ethiopia.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$660 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 18%
  industry: 20%
  services: 62% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $226 million
  expenditures: $453 million, including capital expenditures of $88
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, beverages, clothing and textiles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: sorghum, lentils, vegetables, maize,
  cotton, tobacco, coffee, sisal; livestock, goats; fish

Exports: $95 million (1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: livestock, sorghum, textiles, food, small
  manufactures

Exports--partners: Ethiopia 67%, Sudan 10%, US 8%, Italy 4%, Saudi
  Arabia, Yemen (1996)

Imports: $514 million (1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: processed goods, machinery, petroleum
  products

Imports--partners: Ethiopia, Saudi Arabia, Italy, United Arab
  Emirates (1996)

Debt--external: $46 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $149.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 nafka = 100 cents

Exchange rates: nakfa per US$1 = 7.6 (January 1999), 7.2 (March
  1998 est.)
  note: following independence from Ethiopia, Eritrea continued to use
  Ethiopian currency until November 1997 when Eritrea issued its own
  currency, the nakfa, at approximately the same rate as the birr,
  i.e., 7.2 nakfa per US$1

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: very inadequate; about 4 telephones per 100 families, most
  of which are in Asmara; government is seeking international tenders
  to improve the system
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 1

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (government controlled) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 307 km
  narrow gauge: 307 km 0.950-m gauge (1995 est.)
  note: nonoperational since 1978 except for about a 5 km stretch that
  was reopened in Massawa in 1994; rehabilitation of the remainder and
  of the rolling stock is under way; links Ak'ordat and Asmara
  (formerly Asmera) with the port of Massawa (formerly Mits'iwa)

Highways:
  total: 4,010 km
  paved: 874 km
  unpaved: 3,136 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Assab (Aseb), Massawa (Mits'iwa)

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,947 GRT/5,747 DWT
  ships by type: oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 20 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $196 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 28.6% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute over alignment of boundary with
  Ethiopia led to armed conflict in 1998, which is still unresolved
  despite arbitration efforts; Hanish Islands dispute with Yemen
  resolved by arbitral tribunal in October 1998



======================================================================




@Estonia
-------





Introduction



Background: In and out of Swedish and Russian control over the
  centuries, this little Baltic state was re-incorporated into the
  USSR after German occupation in World War II. Independence came with
  the collapse of the USSR in 1991; the last Russian troops left in
  1994. Estonia thus became free to promote economic and political
  ties with Western Europe. The position of ethnic Russians (29% of
  the population) remains an issue of concern to Moscow. European
  Union (EU) membership negotiations, which began in 1998, remain a
  domestic issue.



Geography



Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea and Gulf of
  Finland, between Latvia and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 59 00 N, 26 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 45,226 sq km
  land: 43,211 sq km
  water: 2,015 sq km
  note: includes 1,520 islands in the Baltic Sea

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Hampshire and Vermont
  combined

Land boundaries:
  total: 633 km
  border countries: Latvia 339 km, Russia 294 km

Coastline: 3,794 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: limits fixed in coordination with
  neighboring states
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: maritime, wet, moderate winters, cool summers

Terrain: marshy, lowlands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Suur Munamagi 318 m

Natural resources: shale oil (kukersite), peat, phosphorite,
  amber, cambrian blue clay, limestone, dolomite

Land use:
  arable land: 25%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 11%
  forests and woodland: 44%
  other: 20% (1996 est.)

Irrigated land: 110 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding occurs frequently in the spring

Environment--current issues: air heavily polluted with sulfur
  dioxide from oil-shale burning power plants in northeast;
  contamination of soil and groundwater with petroleum products,
  chemicals at former Soviet military bases; Estonia has more than
  1,400 natural and manmade lakes, the smaller of which in
  agricultural areas are heavily affected by organic waste; coastal
  sea water is polluted in many locations

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Ship Pollution, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 1,408,523 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 130,883; female 126,112)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 455,112; female 491,819)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 66,700; female 137,897) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.82% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.05 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.21 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.93 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.48 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.86 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.83 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.65 years
  male: 62.61 years
  female: 75 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.28 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Estonian(s)
  adjective: Estonian

Ethnic groups: Estonian 65.1%, Russian 28.1%, Ukrainian 2.5%,
  Byelorussian 1.5%, Finn 1%, other 1.8% (1998)

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran, Russian Orthodox, Estonian
  Orthodox, others include Baptist, Methodist, Seventh Day Adventist,
  Roman Catholic, Pentecostal, Word of Life, Seventh Day Baptist,
  Judaism

Languages: Estonian (official), Russian, Ukrainian, English,
  Finnish, other

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 100%
  male: 100%
  female: 100% (1998 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Estonia
  conventional short form: Estonia
  local long form: Eesti Vabariik
  local short form: Eesti
  former: Estonian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: EN

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Tallinn

Administrative divisions: 15 counties (maakonnad,
  singular--maakond): Harjumaa (Tallinn), Hiiumaa (Kardla), Ida-Virumaa
  (Johvi), Jarvamaa (Paide), Jogevamaa (Jogeva), Laanemaa (Haapsalu),
  Laane-Virumaa (Rakvere), Parnumaa (Parnu), Polvamaa (Polva),
  Raplamaa (Rapla), Saaremaa (Kuessaare), Tartumaa (Tartu), Valgamaa
  (Valga), Viljandimaa (Viljandi), Vorumaa (Voru)
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 February (1918)

Constitution: adopted 28 June 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal for all Estonian citizens

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Lennart MERI (since 5 October 1992)
  head of government: Prime Minister Mart SIIMANN (since 12 March 1997)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
  approved by Parliament
  elections: president elected by Parliament for a five-year term; if
  he or she does not secure two-thirds of the votes after three rounds
  of balloting, then an electoral assembly (made up of Parliament plus
  members of local governments) elects the president, choosing between
  the two candidates with the largest percentage of votes; election
  last held August-September 1996 (next to be held fall 2001); prime
  minister nominated by the president and approved by Parliament
  election results: Lennart MERI elected president by an electoral
  assembly after Parliament was unable to break a deadlock between
  MERI and RUUTEL; percent of electoral assembly vote--Lennart MERI
  61%, Arnold RUUTEL 39%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Riigikogu (101
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 5 March 1995 (next to be held 7 March 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--KMU 32.22%, RE 16.18%, K
  14.17%, Pro Patria and ERSP 7.85%, M 5.98%, Our Home is Estonia and
  Right-Wingers 5.0%; seats by party--KMU 41, RE 19, K 16, Pro Patria
  8, Our Home is Estonia 6, M 6, Right-Wingers 5

Judicial branch: National Court, chairman appointed by Parliament
  for life

Political parties and leaders: Coalition Party and Rural Union or
  SAVISAAR, chairman]; Union of Pro Patria or Fatherland League
  ANDREJEV] made up of two parties: United People's Party and the
  Russian Party of Estonia; note--Our Home is Estonia split when two
  Russian Party of Estonia members withdrew; United People's Party
  parties: Social Democratic Party or ESDP and Rural Center Party or
  VEIDEMANN, chairwoman] (created by defectors from Center Party in
  late spring 1996, Development Party faction split and now holds five

International organization participation: BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent),
  ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNMIBH, UNTSO, UPU, WEU
  (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Grigore-Kaleu STOICESCU
  chancery: 2131 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Melissa WELLS
  embassy: Kentmanni 20, Tallinn EE 0001
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: pre-1940 flag restored by Supreme Soviet in May
  1990--three equal horizontal bands of blue (top), black, and white



Economy



Economy--overview: Estonia's continued adherence to market
  reforms, disciplined fiscal and monetary policies, and a liberal
  free trade regime resulted in GDP growth in 1998 of 5.5% and a
  decrease in inflation to 6.5% from 11.2% in 1997. A high but
  slightly decreased current account deficit was estimated at 8.6%.
  The fall in GDP growth is largely due to the impact of Russia's
  financial crisis and reduced investment in emerging markets in the
  wake of the Asian financial crisis. Like other small emerging
  markets, Estonia will face difficulties in 1999 as a result of
  continuing fallout from Asia. Key events of 1998 were the start of
  official EU accession talks, banking sector consolidation--nine banks
  were reduced to five--and the important role that Swedish capital
  played in the large banks (Swedbank's acquisition of a majority
  stake in Hansapank has accounted for the large increase in foreign
  direct investment). The IMF urged Estonia to maintain a stable
  economy and good reputation in international markets and to avoid
  populist policies in the run-up to March 1999 parliamentary
  elections. The government completed restructuring of
  state-controlled Estonian Telecom, the sale of 49% of which will be
  the flagship privatization in 1999 and the largest public equity
  transaction in the Baltics. Estonia expects to join the World Trade
  Organization in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$5,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6.2%
  industry: 24.3%
  services: 69.5% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 6.3% (1994 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.2%
  highest 10%: 28.5% (1996)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 717,000 (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 42%, agriculture and forestry
  11%, services 47% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 9.6% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.37 billion
  expenditures: $1.37 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: oil shale, shipbuilding, phosphates, electric motors,
  excavators, cement, furniture, clothing, textiles, paper, shoes,
  apparel

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 8.065 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 99.96%
  hydro: 0.04%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.581 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 1.2 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--imports: 210 million kWh (1997)

Agriculture--products: potatoes, fruits, vegetables; livestock and
  dairy products; fish

Exports: $2.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment 17%, textiles 16%,
  food products 8%, transport equipment 8%, mineral products 8%,
  chemical products 8% (1997)

Exports--partners: Finland, Russia, Sweden, Germany, Latvia (1997)

Imports: $3.9 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 21%, transport
  equipment 12%, foodstuffs 10%, minerals 9%, textiles 8%, metals 8%,
  chemical products 8% (1997)

Imports--partners: Finland, Germany, Russia, Sweden, Japan, US
  (1997)

Debt--external: $270 million (January 1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $137.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Estonian kroon (EEK) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: krooni (EEK) per US$1--13.473 (January 1999),
  14.075 (1998), 13.882 (1997), 12.034 (1996), 11.465 (1995), 12.991
  (1994); note--krooni are tied to the German deutsche mark at a fixed
  rate of 8 to 1

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 531,000 (1997)

Telephone system: the Ministry of Transportation and
  Communications (MOTC) administers Estonia's telephone system;
  Internet services available throughout most of the country; about
  150,000 unfilled subscriber requests
  domestic: local--cellular phones services are growing and expanding
  to develop rural networks under direction of the MOTC;
  intercity--Estonia has a highly developed fiber-optic backbone
  (double loop) system presently serving at least 16 major cities
  (1998)
  international: foreign investment in the form of joint business
  ventures greatly improved Estonia's telephone service; fiber-optic
  cables to Finland, Sweden, Latvia, and Russia provide worldwide
  packet switched service

Radio broadcast stations: 27 commercial broadcast stations, 1
  government broadcast station (1997); note--by law 51% of shows must
  be produced within the EU; equal air time must be given to all
  candidates during elections by public and private stations

Radios: 1.12 million (1997 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (1997); note--Ministry of Culture
  administers television licensing; mainly Estonian, European, and
  Russian programming; by law 51% of shows must be produced within the
  EU; equal air time must be given to all candidates during elections
  by public and private stations

Televisions: 1.132 million (1997 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,018 km common carrier lines only; does not include
  dedicated industrial lines
  broad gauge: 1,018 km 1.520-m gauge (132 km electrified) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 16,437 km
  paved: 8,343 km (including 65 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 8,094 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 320 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: natural gas 420 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Haapsalu, Kunda, Muuga, Paldiski, Parnu,
  Tallinn

Merchant marine:
  total: 52 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 337,163 GRT/348,749 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 22, combination bulk 1, container 5,
  oil tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 12, short-sea passenger 6 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 5 (1997 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1997 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy/Coast Guard, Air and Air
  Defense Force (not officially sanctioned), Maritime Border Guard,
  Volunteer Defense League (Kaitseliit), Security Forces (internal and
  border troops)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 349,263 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 274,276 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 10,503 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $70 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.2% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Estonian and Russian negotiators reached
  a technical border agreement in December 1996 which has not been
  ratified

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from
  Southwest Asia and the Caucasus via Russia, and cocaine from Latin
  America to Western Europe and Scandinavia; possible precursor
  manufacturing and/or trafficking



======================================================================




@Ethiopia
--------





Introduction



Background: On 28 May 1991 the Ethiopian People's Revolutionary
  Democratic Front (EPRDF) toppled the authoritarian government of
  MENGISTU Haile-Mariam and took control in Addis Ababa. A new
  constitution was promulgated in December 1994 and national and
  regional popular elections were held in May and June 1995.



Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, west of Somalia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,127,127 sq km
  land: 1,119,683 sq km
  water: 7,444 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,311 km
  border countries: Djibouti 337 km, Eritrea 912 km, Kenya 830 km,
  Somalia 1,626 km, Sudan 1,606 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical monsoon with wide topographic-induced variation

Terrain: high plateau with central mountain range divided by
  Great Rift Valley

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Denakil -125 m
  highest point: Ras Dashen Terara 4,620 m

Natural resources: small reserves of gold, platinum, copper,
  potash, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 40%
  forests and woodland: 25%
  other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,900 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: geologically active Great Rift Valley
  susceptible to earthquakes, volcanic eruptions; frequent droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation; overgrazing; soil
  erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: landlocked?entire coastline along the Red Sea was
  lost with the de jure independence of Eritrea on 24 May 1993



People



Population: 59,680,383 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 46% (male 13,787,810; female 13,703,546)
  15-64 years: 51% (male 15,398,123; female 15,141,892)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 745,737; female 903,275) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.16% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 44.34 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 21.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: repatriation of Ethiopians who fled to Sudan, Kenya, and
  Somalia for refuge from war and famine in earlier years, is expected
  to continue slowly in 1998; small numbers of Sudanese and Somali
  refugees, who fled to Ethiopia from the fighting in their own
  countries, began returning to their homes in 1998

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 124.57 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 40.46 years
  male: 39.22 years
  female: 41.73 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.81 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ethiopian(s)
  adjective: Ethiopian

Ethnic groups: Oromo 40%, Amhara and Tigrean 32%, Sidamo 9%,
  Shankella 6%, Somali 6%, Afar 4%, Gurage 2%, other 1%

Religions: Muslim 45%-50%, Ethiopian Orthodox 35%-40%, animist
  12%, other 3%-8%

Languages: Amharic, Tigrinya, Orominga, Guaraginga, Somali,
  Arabic, English (major foreign language taught in schools)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 35.5%
  male: 45.5%
  female: 25.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federal Democratic Republic of Ethiopia
  conventional short form: Ethiopia
  local long form: YeItyop'iya Federalawi Demokrasiyawi Ripeblik
  local short form: YeItyop'iya
  abbreviation: FDRE

Data code: ET

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Addis Ababa

Administrative divisions: 9 states and 2 chartered cities*: Addis
  Ababa*; Afar; Amhara; Benshangul/Gumuz (Benishangul-Gumaz); Dire
  Dawa*; Gambela (Gambella); Harari (Harar); Oromia (Oromiya); Somalia
  (Somali); Southern Nations, Nationalities, and Peoples (SNNP);
  Tigray (Tigre)

Independence: oldest independent country in Africa and one of the
  oldest in the world--at least 2,000 years

National holiday: National Day, 28 May (1991) (defeat of MENGISTU
  regime)

Constitution: promulgated December 1994

Legal system: currently transitional mix of national and regional
  courts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President NEGASSO Gidada (since 22 August 1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister MELES Zenawi (since August 1995)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers as provided in the December 1994
  constitution; ministers are selected by the prime minister and
  approved by the House of People's Representatives
  elections: president elected by the House of People's
  Representatives for a six-year term; election last held June 1995
  (next to be held NA 2001); prime minister designated by the party in
  power following legislative elections
  election results: NEGASSO Gidada elected president; percent of vote
  by the House of People's Representatives--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the House of
  Federation or upper chamber (117 seats; members are chosen by state
  assemblies to serve five-year terms) and the House of People's
  Representatives or lower chamber (548 seats; members are directly
  elected by popular vote from single-member districts to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: regional and national popular elections were held in May
  and June 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--NA; note--EPRDF won
  nearly all seats

Judicial branch: Federal Supreme Court; the president and vice
  president of the Federal Supreme Court are recommended by the prime
  minister and appointed by the House of People's Representatives; for
  other federal judges, the prime minister submits candidates selected
  by the Federal Judicial Administrative Council to the House of
  People's Representatives for appointment

Political parties and leaders: Ethiopian People's Revolutionary

Political pressure groups and leaders: Oromo Liberation Front or
  OLF; All Amhara People's Organization; Southern Ethiopia People's
  Democratic Coalition; numerous small, ethnically-based groups have
  formed since former President MENGISTU'S defeat, including several
  Islamic militant groups

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAU,
  OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador BERHANE Gebre-Christos
  chancery: 2134 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador David H. SHINN
  embassy: Entoto Street, Addis Ababa
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1014, Addis Ababa

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  yellow, and red with a yellow pentagram and single yellow rays
  emanating from the angles between the points on a light blue disk
  centered on the three bands; Ethiopia is the oldest independent
  country in Africa, and the colors of her flag were so often adopted
  by other African countries upon independence that they became known
  as the pan-African colors



Economy



Economy--overview: Ethiopia remains one of the least developed
  countries in the world. Its economy is based on agriculture, which
  accounts for more than half of GDP, 90% of exports, and 80% of total
  employment; coffee generates 60% of export earnings. The
  agricultural sector suffers from frequent periods of drought, poor
  cultivation practices, and deterioration of internal security
  conditions. The manufacturing sector is heavily dependent on inputs
  from the agricultural sector. Over 90% of large-scale industry, but
  less than 10% of agriculture, is state-run. The government is
  considering selling off a portion of state-owned plants and is
  implementing reform measures that are gradually liberalizing the
  economy. A major medium-term problem is the improvement of roads,
  water supply, and other parts of an infrastructure badly neglected
  during years of civil strife. Renewed fighting with Eritrea dims
  economic prospects for 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$32.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$560 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 55%
  industry: 12%
  services: 33% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and animal husbandry 80%,
  government and services 12%, industry and construction 8% (1985)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $1 billion
  expenditures: $1.48 billion, including capital expenditures of $415
  million (FY96/97)

Industries: food processing, beverages, textiles, chemicals,
  metals processing, cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.32 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 7.58%
  hydro: 87.12%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 5.3% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.32 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cereals, pulses, coffee, oilseed,
  sugarcane, potatoes; hides, cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $550 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: coffee, leather products, gold, oilseeds
  (1995)

Exports--partners: Germany 26%, Japan 11%, Italy 10%, UK 8%,
  Djibouti, Saudi Arabia (1996 est.)

Imports: $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: food and live animals, petroleum and
  petroleum products, chemicals, machinery, motor vehicles and
  aircraft (1994)

Imports--partners: Italy 11%, US 11%, Germany 7%, Saudi Arabia 4%
  (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $10 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $367 million (FY95/96)

Currency: 1 birr (Br) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: birr (Br) per US$1 (end of period)--7.58 (January
  1999), 6.8640 (1997), 6.4260 (1996), 6.3200 (1995), 5.9500 (1994)
  note: since May 1993, the birr market rate has been determined in an
  interbank market supported by weekly wholesale auction; prior to
  that date, the official rate was pegged to US$1 = 5.000 birr

Fiscal year: 8 July--7 July



Communications



Telephones: 100,000 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: open wire and microwave radio relay system
  adequate for government use
  domestic: open wire and microwave radio relay
  international: open wire to Sudan and Djibouti; microwave radio
  relay to Kenya and Djibouti; satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1
  Atlantic Ocean and 2 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 0, shortwave 1

Radios: 9 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 25 (1998)

Televisions: 150,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 681 km (Ethiopian segment of the Addis Ababa-Djibouti
  railroad)
  narrow gauge: 681 km 1.000-m gauge
  note: in April 1998, Djibouti and Ethiopia announced plans to
  revitalize the century-old railroad that links their capitals

Highways:
  total: 28,500 km
  paved: 4,275 km
  unpaved: 24,225 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: none; Ethiopia is landlocked and was by
  agreement with Eritrea using the ports of Assab and Massawa, but
  since the border dispute with Eritrea flared, Ethiopia has used the
  port of Djibouti

Merchant marine:
  total: 11 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 71,264 GRT/94,489 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 7, oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 84 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 11
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 73
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
  914 to 1,523 m: 36
  under 914 m: 18 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Air Force, Police
  note: Ethiopia is landlocked and has no navy; following the de jure
  independence of Eritrea, Ethiopian naval facilities remained in
  Eritrean possession and ships which belonged to the former Ethiopian
  Navy and based at Djibouti have been sold

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 13,520,302 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 7,052,710 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 655,290 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $138 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.5% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: most of the southern half of the boundary
  with Somalia is a Provisional Administrative Line; territorial
  dispute with Somalia over the Ogaden; dispute over alignment of
  boundary with Eritrea led to armed conflict in 1998, which is still
  unresolved despite arbitration efforts

Illicit drugs: transit hub for heroin originating in Southwest
  and Southeast Asia and destined for Europe and North America as well
  as cocaine destined for markets in southern Africa; cultivates qat
  (chat) for local use and regional export



======================================================================




@Europa Island
-------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Mozambique Channel,
  about one-half of the way from southern Madagascar to southern
  Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 22 20 S, 40 22 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 28 sq km
  land: 28 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.16 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 22.2 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 24 m

Natural resources: negligible

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: wildlife sanctuary



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there is a small French military garrison



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Europa Island
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ile Europa

Data code: EU

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Independence: none (possession of France)

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (possession of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Communications



Communications--note: 1 meteorological station



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Madagascar



======================================================================




@Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)
---------------------------------





Geography



Location: Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic
  Ocean, east of southern Argentina

Geographic coordinates: 51 45 S, 59 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 12,173 sq km
  land: 12,173 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes the two main islands of East and West Falkland and
  about 200 small islands

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,288 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: cold marine; strong westerly winds, cloudy, humid; rain
  occurs on more than half of days in year; occasional snow all year,
  except in January and February, but does not accumulate

Terrain: rocky, hilly, mountainous with some boggy, undulating
  plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Usborne 705 m

Natural resources: fish, wildlife

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 99%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 1% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: strong winds persist throughout the year

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: deeply indented coast provides good natural
  harbors; short growing season



People



Population: 2,758 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 2.43% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA years
  male: NA years
  female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Falkland Islander(s)
  adjective: Falkland Island

Ethnic groups: British

Religions: primarily Anglican, Roman Catholic, United Free
  Church, Evangelist Church, Jehovah's Witnesses, Lutheran,
  Seventh-Day Adventist

Languages: English



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Colony of the Falkland Islands
  conventional short form: Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas)

Data code: FA

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK, also claimed by
  Argentina

Government type: NA

Capital: Stanley

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK;
  also claimed by Argentina)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK; also claimed by
  Argentina)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 14 June (1982)

Constitution: 3 October 1985; amended 1997

Legal system: English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  head of government: Governor Richard RALPH (since 29 January 1996;
  to be replaced in May 1999 by Donald LAMONT); Chief Executive A. M.
  GURR (since NA); Financial Secretary D. F. HOWATT (since NA)
  cabinet: Executive Council; three members elected by the Legislative
  Council, two ex officio members (chief executive and the financial
  secretary), and the governor
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (10 seats--8
  elected, 2 ex officio; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 9 October 1997 (next to be held NA October 2001)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 8

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is a nonresident

Political parties and leaders: none; all independents

International organization participation: ICFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK; also claimed by Argentina)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK; also claimed by Argentina)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Falkland Island coat of arms in a white
  disk centered on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms
  contains a white ram (sheep raising is the major economic activity)
  above the sailing ship Desire (whose crew discovered the islands)
  with a scroll at the bottom bearing the motto DESIRE THE RIGHT



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy was formerly based on agriculture,
  mainly sheep farming, but today fishing contributes the bulk of
  economic activity. In 1987 the government began selling fishing
  licenses to foreign trawlers operating within the Falklands
  exclusive fishing zone. These license fees total more than $40
  million per year, which goes to support the island's health,
  education, and welfare system. Squid accounts for 75% of the fish
  taken. Dairy farming supports domestic consumption; crops furnish
  winter fodder. Exports feature shipments of high-grade wool to the
  UK and the sale of postage stamps and coins. To encourage tourism,
  the Falkland Islands Development Corporation has built three lodges
  for visitors attracted by the abundant wildlife and trout fishing.
  The islands are now self-financing except for defense. The British
  Geological Survey announced a 200-mile oil exploration zone around
  the islands in 1993, and early seismic surveys suggest substantial
  reserves capable of producing 500,000 barrels per day; to date no
  exploitable site has been identified. An agreement between Argentina
  and the UK in 1995 seeks to defuse licensing and sovereignty
  conflicts that would dampen foreign interest in exploiting potential
  oil reserves.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 1,100 (est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 95% (mostly sheepherding
  and fishing)

Unemployment rate: full employment; labor shortage

Budget:
  revenues: $66.1 million
  expenditures: $66.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: wool and fish processing; sale of stamps and coins

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 10 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 10 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fodder and vegetable crops; sheep, dairy
  products

Exports: $7.6 million (1995)

Exports--commodities: wool, hides, meat

Exports--partners: UK, Netherlands, Japan (1992)

Imports: $24.7 million (1995)

Imports--commodities: fuel, food and drink, building materials,
  clothing

Imports--partners: UK, Netherlands Antilles, Japan (1992)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $1.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Falkland pound (LF) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Falkland pound (LF) per US$1--0.6057 (January
  1999), 0.5037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995),
  0.6529 (1994); note--the Falkland pound is at par with the British
  pound

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 1,180 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: government-operated radiotelephone and private VHF/CB
  radiotelephone networks provide effective service to almost all
  points on both islands
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
  with links through London to other countries

Radio broadcast stations: 1 (government operated)

Radios: 1,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (operated by the British Forces
  Broadcasting Service) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 348 km
  paved: 83 km
  unpaved: 265 km

Ports and harbors: Stanley

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: British Forces Falkland Islands (includes
  Army, Royal Air Force, Royal Navy, and Royal Marines), Police Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Argentina



======================================================================




@Faroe Islands
-------------





Geography



Location: Northern Europe, island group between the Norwegian Sea
  and the north Atlantic Ocean, about one-half of the way from Iceland
  to Norway

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 7 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 1,399 sq km
  land: 1,399 sq km
  water: 0 sq km (some lakes and streams)

Area--comparative: eight times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,117 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: mild winters, cool summers; usually overcast; foggy,
  windy

Terrain: rugged, rocky, some low peaks; cliffs along most of coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Slaettaratindur 882 m

Natural resources: fish, whales

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 94% (1996)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: archipelago of 17 inhabited islands and one
  uninhabited island, and a few uninhabited islets; strategically
  located along important sea lanes in northeastern Atlantic;
  precipitous terrain limits habitation to small coastal lowlands



People



Population: 41,059 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 23% (male 4,819; female 4,629)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 13,600; female 11,811)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 2,786; female 3,414) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -2.03% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.54 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.08 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -23.72 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.15 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.26 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.56 years
  male: 75.66 years
  female: 81.58 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.36 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Faroese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Faroese

Ethnic groups: Scandinavian

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran

Languages: Faroese (derived from Old Norse), Danish

Literacy: NA
  note: similar to Denmark proper



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Faroe Islands
  local long form: none
  local short form: Foroyar

Data code: FO

Dependency status: part of the Kingdom of Denmark; self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark since 1948

Government type: NA

Capital: Torshavn

Administrative divisions: none (part of the Kingdom of Denmark;
  self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)

Independence: none (part of the Kingdom of Denmark;
  self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark)

National holiday: Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940)

Constitution: 5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)

Legal system: Danish

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen MARGRETHE II of Denmark (since 14 January
  1972), represented by High Commissioner Bente KLINTE, chief
  administrative officer (since NA)
  head of government: Prime Minister Anfinn KALLSBERG (since 9 May
  1998)
  cabinet: Landsstyri elected by the Faroese Parliament
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; high commissioner appointed by
  the monarch; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  party that wins the most seats is usually elected prime minister by
  the Faroese Parliament; election last held 30 April 1998 (next to be
  held NA 2002)
  election results: Anfinn KALLSBERG elected prime minister; percent
  of parliamentary vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Faroese Parliament or Logting (32
  seats; members are elected by popular vote on a proportional basis
  from the seven constituencies to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 30 April 1998 (next to be held by NA July 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Republicans 23.8%,
  People's Party 21.3%, Social Democrats 21.9%, Coalition Party (Union
  Party, Labor Front, Home Rule Party) 15%; seats by party--Republicans
  8, People's Party 8, Social Democrats 7, Coalition Party 6, other
  parties 3
  note: election of 2 seats to the Danish Parliament was last held on
  11 March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2002); results--percent of vote
  by party--NA; seats by party--Social Democrats 1, Conservatives 1

Judicial branch: none

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party [Joannes
  KALLSBERG]

International organization participation: NC, NIB

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark)

Flag description: white with a red cross outlined in blue that
  extends to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is
  shifted to the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)



Economy



Economy--overview: After the severe economic troubles of the early
  1990s, brought on by a drop in the vital fish catch, the Faroe
  Islands have come back in the last few years, with unemployment down
  to 5% in mid-1998. Nevertheless the total dependence on fishing
  means the economy remains extremely vulnerable. The Faroese hope to
  broaden their economic base by building new fish-processing plants.
  Oil finds close to the Faroese area give hope for deposits in the
  immediate Faroese area, which may lay the basis for sustained
  economic prosperity. The Faroese are supported by a substantial
  annual subsidy from Denmark.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$700 million (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6% (1996 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$16,000 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 20%
  industry: 16%
  services: 64% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.8% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 20,345 (1995 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: largely engaged in fishing,
  manufacturing, transportation, and commerce

Unemployment rate: 5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $467 million
  expenditures: $468 million, including capital expenditures of $11
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: fishing, shipbuilding, construction, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 170 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 52.94%
  hydro: 47.06%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 170 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: milk, potatoes, vegetables; sheep; salmon,
  other fish

Exports: $362 million (f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: fish and fish products 92%, animal
  feedstuffs, transport equipment (ships)

Exports--partners: Denmark 22.2%, UK 25.8%, Germany 9.7%, France
  8.3%, Norway 6.2%, US 2.0%

Imports: $315.6 (c.i.f., 1995)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 17.0%,
  consumer goods 33%, raw materials and semi-manufactures 26.9%, fuels
  11.4%, fish and salt 6.7%

Imports--partners: Denmark 34.5%, Norway 15.9%, UK 8.4% Germany
  7.8%, Sweden 5.8%, US 1.5%

Debt--external: $767 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $150 million (annual subsidy from
  Denmark) (1995)

Currency: 1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1--6.408 (January
  1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1966), 5.602 (1995), 6.361
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 22,500 (3,500 cellular telephone subscribers) (1996)

Telephone system: good international communications; good
  domestic facilities
  domestic: digitalization was to hve been completed in 1998
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Orion; 1 fiber-optic
  submarine cable linking the Faroe Islands with Denmark and Iceland

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1 (repeaters 13), shortwave 0

Radios: 11,800 (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, there are 29
  low-power repeaters; satellite relays of MTV Europe, BBC World, and
  Scansat TV3 Eurosport are also available) (1997)

Televisions: 11,600 (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 458 km
  paved: 450 km
  unpaved: 8 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Torshavn, Klaksvik, Tvoroyri, Runavik,
  Fuglafjorour

Merchant marine:
  total: 6 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 22,853 GRT/13,481 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 2, oil tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no organized native military forces; only a
  small Police Force and Coast Guard are maintained

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Denmark



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Fiji
----





Geography



Location: Oceania, island group in the South Pacific Ocean, about
  two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 18 00 S, 175 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 18,270 sq km
  land: 18,270 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,129 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation;
  rectilinear shelf claim added
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; only slight seasonal temperature
  variation

Terrain: mostly mountains of volcanic origin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Tomanivi 1,324 m

Natural resources: timber, fish, gold, copper, offshore oil
  potential

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 10%
  forests and woodland: 65%
  other: 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cyclonic storms can occur from November to
  January

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertication, Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: includes 332 islands of which approximately 110
  are inhabited



People



Population: 812,918 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 138,796; female 133,428)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 257,130; female 256,834)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 12,527; female 14,203) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.28% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.76 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.21 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 66.59 years
  male: 64.19 years
  female: 69.11 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.7 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Fijian(s)
  adjective: Fijian

Ethnic groups: Fijian 51%, Indian 44%, European, other Pacific
  Islanders, overseas Chinese, and other 5% (1998 est.)

Religions: Christian 52% (Methodist 37%, Roman Catholic 9%),
  Hindu 38%, Muslim 8%, other 2%
  note: Fijians are mainly Christian, Indians are Hindu, and there is
  a Muslim minority (1986)

Languages: English (official), Fijian, Hindustani

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 91.6%
  male: 93.8%
  female: 89.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of the Fiji Islands
  conventional short form: Fiji

Data code: FJ

Government type: republic
  note: military coup leader Maj. Gen. Sitiveni RABUKA formally
  declared Fiji a republic on 6 October 1987

Capital: Suva

Administrative divisions: 4 divisions and 1 dependency*; Central,
  Eastern, Northern, Rotuma*, Western

Independence: 10 October 1970 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 10 October (1970)

Constitution: 10 October 1970 (suspended 1 October 1987); a new
  constitution was proposed on 23 September 1988 and promulgated on 25
  July 1990; amended 25 July 1997 to allow non-ethnic Fijians greater
  say in government and to make multi-party government mandatory;
  entered into force 28 July 1998; note-- the May 1999 election will be
  the first test of the amended constitution and will introduce open
  voting--not racially prescribed--for the first time at the national
  level

Legal system: based on British system

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ratu Sir Kamisese MARA (acting president
  since 15 December 1993, president since 12 January 1994); Vice
  President Ratu Josefa Iloilo ULUIVUDA (since 18 January 1999)
  head of government: Prime Minister Sitiveni RABUKA (since 2 June
  1992); Deputy Prime Minister Taufa VAKATALE (since 7 August 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister from among the
  members of Parliament and is responsible to Parliament
  note: there is also a Presidential Council that advises the
  president on matters of national importance and a Great Council of
  Chiefs which consists of the highest ranking members of the
  traditional chiefly system
  elections: president elected by the Great Council of Chiefs for a
  five-year term; prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Ratu Sir Kamisese MARA elected president; percent
  of Great Council of Chiefs vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (34 seats; 24 reserved for ethnic Fijians, 9 for Indians and others,
  and 1 for the island of Rotuma; members appointed by the president
  to serve five-year terms) and the House of Representatives (70
  seats; 37 reserved for ethnic Fijians, 27 reserved for ethnic
  Indians, and 6 for independents and others; members elected by
  popular vote on a communal basis to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 18-25 February 1994
  (next to be held 11 May 1999)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--SVT 31, NFP 20, FLP 7, FAP 5, GVP 4,
  independents 2, ANC 1; note--results are for the last election before
  the new constitution came into force
  note: when the new constitution is applied to the upcoming May
  elections, the composition of the legislative branch will change to
  the following: Senate--32 seats (14 appointed by the Great Council of
  Chiefs, nine appointed by the prime minister, eight appointed by the
  leader of the opposition, and one appointed by the council of
  Rotuma) and House of Representatives--71 seats (23 reserved for
  ethnic Fijians, 19 reserved for ethnic Indians, three reserved for
  other ethnic groups, one reserved for the Rotuman constituency
  encompassing the whole of Fiji, and 25 open seats)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: Fijian Political Party or SVT
  Lewenivanua Vakarisito Party or VLV or Christian Fellowship Party
  note: in early 1995, ethnic Fijian members of the All National
  Congress or ANC merged with the Fijian Association or FA; the
  remaining members of the ANC have renamed their party the General
  Electors' Association

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, CP,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU,
  OPCW, PCA, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL,
  UNIKOM, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador "Ratu" Napolioni MASIREWA
  chancery: Suite 240, 2233 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Larry M.
  DINGER
  embassy: 31 Loftus Street, Suva
  mailing address: P. O. Box 218, Suva

Flag description: light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Fijian shield centered on the outer half
  of the flag; the shield depicts a yellow lion above a white field
  quartered by the cross of Saint George featuring stalks of
  sugarcane, a palm tree, bananas, and a white dove



Economy



Economy--overview: Fiji, endowed with forest, mineral, and fish
  resources, is one of the most developed of the Pacific island
  economies, though still with a large subsistence sector. Sugar
  exports and a growing tourist industry are the major sources of
  foreign exchange. Sugar processing makes up one-third of industrial
  activity. Roughly 250,000 tourists visit each year. Political
  uncertainty and drought, however, contribute to substantial
  fluctuations in earnings from tourism and sugar and to the
  emigration of skilled workers. Fiji's growth slowed in 1997 because
  the sugar industry suffered from low world prices and rent disputes
  between farmers and landowners. Drought in 1998 further damaged the
  sugar industry. Overall growth in 1991-98 has averaged less than 2%
  per year, with long-term problems of low investment and uncertain
  property rights. The central bank predicts growth of 2% to 3% in
  1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 22%
  services: 59% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 235,000

Labor force--by occupation: subsistence agriculture 67%, wage
  earners 18%, salary earners 15% (1987)

Unemployment rate: 6% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $540.65 million
  expenditures: $742.65 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: sugar, tourism, copra, gold, silver, clothing,
  lumber, small cottage industries

Industrial production growth rate: 2.9% (1995)

Electricity--production: 545 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 21.1%
  hydro: 78.9%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 545 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, coconuts, cassava (tapioca),
  rice, sweet potatoes, bananas; cattle, pigs, horses, goats; fish

Exports: $655 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: sugar 32%, clothing, gold, processed fish,
  lumber

Exports--partners: Australia 27%, UK 14%, NZ 12%, US 8%, Japan
  (1996)

Imports: $838 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment, petroleum
  products, food, chemicals

Imports--partners: Australia 44%, NZ 15%, US 9%, Japan 5%,
  Singapore 5% (1996)

Debt--external: $217 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $40.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Fijian dollar (F$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Fijian dollars (F$) per US$1--1.9556 (January
  1999), 1.9868 (1998), 1.4437 (1997), 1.4033 (1996), 1.4063 (1995),
  1.4641 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 60,017 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern local, interisland, and international
  (wire/radio integrated) public and special-purpose telephone,
  telegraph, and teleprinter facilities; regional radio communications
  center
  domestic: NA
  international: access to important cable link between US and Canada
  and NZ and Australia; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific
  Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0

Televisions: 12,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 597 km; note--belongs to the government-owned Fiji Sugar
  Corporation
  narrow gauge: 597 km 0.610-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 3,440 km
  paved: 1,692 km
  unpaved: 1,748 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 203 km; 122 km navigable by motorized craft and
  200-metric-ton barges

Ports and harbors: Labasa, Lautoka, Levuka, Savusavu, Suva

Merchant marine:
  total: 5 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 10,721 GRT/13,145 DWT
  ships by type: chemical tanker 2, passenger 1, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 1, specialized tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 24 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 21
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 17 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Republic of Fiji Military Forces (RFMF;
  includes ground and naval forces)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 218,853 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 120,555 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 9,326 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $34 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.6% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Finland
-------





Introduction



Background: Long ruled by foreign powers, including Sweden and
  the pre-revolutionary Russian Empire, Finland finally declared
  independence in 1917. During World War II, Finland fought the USSR
  twice and then the Germans toward the end of the war. In the
  following half-century, the Finns made a remarkable transformation
  from a farm/forest economy to a diversified modern industrial
  economy. Per capita income has risen to the West European level;
  Finland is a member of the European Union and is the only Nordic
  state to join the euro system at its initiation in January 1999.



Geography



Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of
  Bothnia, and Gulf of Finland, between Sweden and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 64 00 N, 26 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 337,030 sq km
  land: 305,470 sq km
  water: 31,560 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,628 km
  border countries: Norway 729 km, Sweden 586 km, Russia 1,313 km

Coastline: 1,126 km (excludes islands and coastal indentations)

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 6 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm (in the Gulf of Finland--3 nm)

Climate: cold temperate; potentially subarctic, but comparatively
  mild because of moderating influence of the North Atlantic Current,
  Baltic Sea, and more than 60,000 lakes

Terrain: mostly low, flat to rolling plains interspersed with
  lakes and low hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Haltiatunturi 1,328 m

Natural resources: timber, copper, zinc, iron ore, silver

Land use:
  arable land: 8%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: 76%
  other: 16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 640 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: air pollution from manufacturing and
  power plants contributing to acid rain; water pollution from
  industrial wastes, agricultural chemicals; habitat loss threatens
  wildlife populations

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: long boundary with Russia; Helsinki is
  northernmost national capital on European continent; population
  concentrated on small southwestern coastal plain



People



Population: 5,158,372 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 483,700; female 464,431)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 1,743,340; female 1,706,873)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 289,405; female 470,623) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.15% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.77 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.67 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.32 years
  male: 73.81 years
  female: 80.98 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.68 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Finn(s)
  adjective: Finnish

Ethnic groups: Finn 93%, Swede 6%, Lapp 0.11%, Gypsy 0.12%, Tatar
  0.02%

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 89%, Greek Orthodox 1%, none 9%,
  other 1%

Languages: Finnish 93.5% (official), Swedish 6.3% (official),
  small Lapp- and Russian-speaking minorities

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 100% (1980 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Finland
  conventional short form: Finland
  local long form: Suomen Tasavalta
  local short form: Suomi

Data code: FI

Government type: republic

Capital: Helsinki

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces (laanit, singular--laani);
  Aland, Etela-Suomen Laani, Ita-Suomen Lanni, Lansi-Suomen Laani,
  Lappi, Oulun Laani

Independence: 6 December 1917 (from Russia)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 December (1917)

Constitution: 17 July 1919

Legal system: civil law system based on Swedish law; Supreme
  Court may request legislation interpreting or modifying laws;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Martti AHTISAARI (since 1 March 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Paavo LIPPONEN (since 13 April
  1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Sauli NIINISTO (since 13 April 1995)
  cabinet: Council of State or Valtioneuvosto appointed by the
  president, responsible to Parliament
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 31 January-6 February 1994 (next to be held NA
  January 2000); prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed
  from the majority party by the president after parliamentary
  elections
  election results: Martti AHTISAARI elected president; percent of
  vote--Martti AHTISAARI 54%, Elisabeth REHN 46%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Eduskunta (200
  seats; members are elected by popular vote on a proportional basis
  to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 21 March 1999 (next to be held NA March 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Social Democratic Party
  22.9%, Center Party 22.5%, National Coalition (Conservative) Party
  21.0%, Leftist Alliance (Communist) 10.9%, Swedish People's Party
  5.1%, Green Union 7.2%, Finnish Christian League 4.2%; seats by
  party--Social Democratic Party 51, Center Party 48, National
  Coalition (Conservative) Party 46, Leftist Alliance (Communist) 20,
  Swedish People's Party 11, Green Union 11, Finnish Christian League
  10, other 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Korkein Oikeus, judges
  appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders:
  Alliance (Communist) composed of People's Democratic League and

Political pressure groups and leaders: Finnish Communist

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, ESA, EU,
  FAO, G- 9, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NAM (guest), NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OAS (observer),
  OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOGIP, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UPU,
  WEU (observer), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jaakko Tapani LAAJAVA
  chancery: 3301 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Eric EDELMAN
  embassy: Itainen Puistotie 14A, FIN-00140, Helsinki
  mailing address: APO AE 09723

Flag description: white with a blue cross that extends to the
  edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the
  hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)



Economy



Economy--overview: Finland has a highly industrialized, largely
  free-market economy, with per capita output roughly that of the UK,
  France, Germany, and Italy. Its key economic sector is
  manufacturing--principally the wood, metals, engineering,
  telecommunications, and electronics industries. Trade is important,
  with the export of goods representing about 30% of GDP. Except for
  timber and several minerals, Finland depends on imports of raw
  materials, energy, and some components for manufactured goods.
  Because of the climate, agricultural development is limited to
  maintaining self-sufficiency in basic products. Forestry, an
  important export earner, provides a secondary occupation for the
  rural population. The economy has come back from the recession of
  1990-92, which had been caused by economic overheating, depressed
  foreign markets, and the dismantling of the barter system between
  Finland and the former Soviet Union. Rapidly increasing integration
  with Western Europe--Finland was one of the 11 countries joining the
  euro monetary system (EMU) on 1 January 1999--will dominate the
  economic picture over the next several years. Growth in 1999
  probably will slow, perhaps to 3%, a barrier to any substantial drop
  in unemployment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$103.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$20,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 32%
  services: 63% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.2%
  highest 10%: 21.6% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.533 million

Labor force--by occupation: public services 30.4%, industry 20.9%,
  commerce 15%, finance, insurance, and business services 10.2%,
  agriculture and forestry 8.6%, transport and communications 7.7%,
  construction 7.2%

Unemployment rate: 12% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $33 billion
  expenditures: $40 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: metal products, shipbuilding, pulp and paper, copper
  refining, foodstuffs, chemicals, textiles, clothing

Industrial production growth rate: 7.4% (1995)

Electricity--production: 67.469 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 54.73%
  hydro: 17.35%
  nuclear: 27.9%
  other: 0.02% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 71.169 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 5.4 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cereals, sugar beets, potatoes; dairy
  cattle; fish

Exports: $43 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals;
  timber, paper, and pulp

Exports--partners: Germany 11%, UK 10%, Sweden 10%, US 7%, Russia
  7%, France 4%, Japan (1997)

Imports: $30.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum and petroleum
  products, chemicals, transport equipment, iron and steel, machinery,
  textile yarn and fabrics, fodder grains

Imports--partners: Germany 15%, Sweden 12%, UK 8%, Russia 8%, US
  7%, Japan 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $30 billion (December 1993)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $388 million (1995)

Currency: 1 markka (FMk) or Finmark = 100 pennia

Exchange rates: markkaa (FMk) per US$1--5.12 (January 1999),
  5.3441 (1998), 5.1914 (1997), 4.5936 (1996), 4.3667 (1995), 5.2235
  (1994);
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 5.93472 Markkaa per euro; the euro will replace the local
  currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2.5 million (1995 est.)

Telephone system: modern system with excellent service
  domestic: cable, microwave radio relay, and an extensive cellular
  net care for domestic needs
  international: 1 submarine cable; satellite earth stations--access to
  Intelsat transmission service via a Swedish satellite earth station,
  1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions); note--Finland shares
  the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark,
  Iceland, Norway, and Sweden)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 105, shortwave 0

Radios: 4.98 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 120 (in addition, there are 431
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.92 million (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 5,859 km
  broad gauge: 5,859 km 1.524-m gauge (2,073 km electrified; 480 km
  double- or more-track) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 77,796 km
  paved: 49,789 km (including 444 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 28,007 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 6,675 km total (including Saimaa Canal); 3,700 km
  suitable for steamers

Pipelines: natural gas 580 km

Ports and harbors: Hamina, Helsinki, Kokkola, Kotka, Loviisa,
  Oulu, Pori, Rauma, Turku, Uusikaupunki, Varkaus

Merchant marine:
  total: 101 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,192,559
  GRT/1,161,594 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 23, chemical tanker 6, oil tanker 11,
  passenger 1, railcar carrier 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 38, short-sea
  passenger 12 (1998 est.)

Airports: 157 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 68
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 26
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 20
  under 914 m: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 89
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 83 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Frontier Guard
  (includes Sea Guard)

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,274,654 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,050,944 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 34,336 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.8 billion (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for Latin American
  cocaine for the West European market



======================================================================




@France
------





Introduction



Background: Although ultimately a victor in World Wars I and II,
  France lost many men, much wealth, its extensive empire, and its
  rank as a dominant nation-state. France has struggled since
  1958--arguably with success--to construct a presidential democracy
  resistant to the severe instabilities inherent in the parliamentary
  democracy of early 20th century France. In recent years, its
  reconciliation and cooperation with Germany have proved central to
  the economic integration of Europe, including the advent of the euro
  in January 1999.



Geography



Location: Western Europe, bordering the Bay of Biscay and English
  Channel, between Belgium and Spain southeast of the UK; bordering
  the Mediterranean Sea, between Italy and Spain

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 2 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 547,030 sq km
  land: 545,630 sq km
  water: 1,400 sq km
  note: includes only metropolitan France, but excludes the overseas
  administrative divisions

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Colorado

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,892.4 km
  border countries: Andorra 60 km, Belgium 620 km, Germany 451 km,
  Italy 488 km, Luxembourg 73 km, Monaco 4.4 km, Spain 623 km,
  Switzerland 573 km

Coastline: 3,427 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm (does not apply to the Mediterranean)
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: generally cool winters and mild summers, but mild
  winters and hot summers along the Mediterranean

Terrain: mostly flat plains or gently rolling hills in north and
  west; remainder is mountainous, especially Pyrenees in south, Alps
  in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Rhone River delta -2 m
  highest point: Mont Blanc 4,807 m

Natural resources: coal, iron ore, bauxite, fish, timber, zinc,
  potash

Land use:
  arable land: 33%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 27%
  other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 16,300 sq km (1995 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding; avalanches

Environment--current issues: some forest damage from acid rain;
  air pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution
  from urban wastes, agricultural runoff

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: largest West European nation; occasional strong,
  cold, dry, north-to-northwesterly wind known as mistral



People



Population: 58,978,172 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 5,638,462; female 5,375,911)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 19,302,121; female 19,235,235)
  65 years and over: 16% (male 3,825,232; female 5,601,211) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.27% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.38 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.17 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.53 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.62 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.63 years
  male: 74.76 years
  female: 82.71 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.61 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Frenchman(men), Frenchwoman(women)
  adjective: French

Ethnic groups: Celtic and Latin with Teutonic, Slavic, North
  African, Indochinese, Basque minorities

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Protestant 2%, Jewish 1%, Muslim
  (North African workers) 1%, unaffiliated 6%

Languages: French 100%, rapidly declining regional dialects and
  languages (Provencal, Breton, Alsatian, Corsican, Catalan, Basque,
  Flemish)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 99% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: French Republic
  conventional short form: France
  local long form: Republique Francaise
  local short form: France

Data code: FR

Government type: republic

Capital: Paris

Administrative divisions: 22 regions (regions, singular--region);
  Alsace, Aquitaine, Auvergne, Basse-Normandie, Bourgogne, Bretagne,
  Centre, Champagne-Ardenne, Corse, Franche-Comte, Haute-Normandie,
  Ile-de-France, Languedoc-Roussillon, Limousin, Lorraine,
  Midi-Pyrenees, Nord-Pas-de-Calais, Pays de la Loire, Picardie,
  Poitou-Charentes, Provence-Alpes-Cote d'Azur, Rhone-Alpes
  note: metropolitan France is divided into 22 regions (including the
  "territorial collectivity" of Corse or Corsica) and is subdivided
  into 96 departments; see separate entries for the overseas
  departments (French Guiana, Guadeloupe, Martinique, Reunion) and the
  overseas territorial collectivities (Mayotte, Saint Pierre and
  Miquelon)

Dependent areas: Bassas da India, Clipperton Island, Europa
  Island, French Polynesia, French Southern and Antarctic Lands,
  Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island, New Caledonia, Tromelin
  Island, Wallis and Futuna
  note: the US does not recognize claims to Antarctica

Independence: 486 (unified by Clovis)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958, amended concerning election of
  president in 1962, amended to comply with provisions of EC
  Maastricht Treaty in 1992; amended to tighten immigration laws 1993

Legal system: civil law system with indigenous concepts; review
  of administrative but not legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC (since 17 May 1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister Lionel JOSPIN (since 3 June 1997)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  suggestion of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 23 April and 7 May 1995 (next to be held by May
  2002); prime minister nominated by the National Assembly majority
  and appointed by the president
  election results: Jacques CHIRAC elected president; percent of vote,
  second ballot--Jacques CHIRAC 52.64%, Lionel JOSPIN 47.36%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlement consists of
  the Senate or Senat (321 seats--296 for metropolitan France, 13 for
  overseas departments and territories, and 12 for French nationals
  abroad; members are indirectly elected by an electoral college to
  serve nine-year terms; elected by thirds every three years) and the
  National Assembly or Assemblee Nationale (577 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote under a single-member majoritarian system to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 27 September 1998 (next to be held
  September 2001); National Assembly--last held 25 May-1 June 1997
  (next to be held NA May 2002)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--RPR 99, Centrist Union 52, Republicans and independents 47, PS
  78, PCF 16, other 29; National Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--PS 245, RPR 140, UDF 109, PCF 37, PRS 13, Ecologists
  8, MDC 7, LDI-MPF 1, FN 1, various left 9, various right 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Appeals or Cour de Cassation,
  judges are appointed by the president from nominations of the High
  Council of the Judiciary; Constitutional Council or Conseil
  Constitutionnel, three members appointed by the president, three
  members appointed by the president of the National Assembly, and
  three appointed by the president of the Senate; Council of State or
  Conseil d'Etat

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR

Political pressure groups and leaders: Communist-controlled labor
  union (Confederation Generale du Travail) or CGT, nearly 2.4 million
  members (claimed); Socialist-leaning labor union (Confederation
  Francaise Democratique du Travail) or CFDT, about 800,000 members
  (est.); independent labor union or Force Ouvriere, 1 million members
  (est.); independent white-collar union or Confederation Generale des
  Cadres, 340,000 members (claimed); National Council of French
  Employers (Conseil National du Patronat Francais) or CNPF or Patronat

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AsDB,
  Australia Group, BDEAC, BIS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECA (associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA, ESCAP, EU,
  FAO, FZ, G- 5, G- 7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, InOC,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURCA, MINURSO, MIPONUH,
  MONUA, MTCR, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA,
  SPC, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL,
  UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UNRWA, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Francois V. BUJON DE L'ESTANG
  chancery: 4101 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los
  Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Felix G. ROHATYN
  embassy: 2 Avenue Gabriel, 75382 Paris Cedex 08
  mailing address: PSC 116, APO AE 09777
  consulate(s) general: Marseille, Strasbourg

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist
  side), white, and red; known as the French Tricouleur (Tricolor);
  the design and colors are similar to a number of other flags,
  including those of Belgium, Chad, Ireland, Cote d'Ivoire, and
  Luxembourg; the official flag for all French dependent areas



Economy



Economy--overview: One of the four West European trillion-dollar
  economies, France matches a growing services sector with a
  diversified industrial base and substantial agricultural resources.
  Industry generates one-quarter of GDP and more than 80% of export
  earnings. The government retains considerable influence over key
  segments of each sector, with majority ownership of railway,
  electricity, aircraft, and telecommunication firms. It has been
  gradually relaxing its control over these sectors since the early
  1990s. The government is slowly selling off its holdings in France
  Telecom, in Air France, and in the insurance, banking, and defense
  industries. Meanwhile, large tracts of fertile land, the application
  of modern technology, and subsidies have combined to make France the
  leading agricultural producer in Western Europe. A major exporter of
  wheat and dairy products, France is practically self-sufficient in
  agriculture. The economy expanded by 3% in 1998, following a 2.3%
  gain in 1997. Persistently high unemployment still poses a major
  problem for the government. France has shied away from cutting
  exceptionally generous social welfare benefits or the enormous state
  bureaucracy, preferring to pare defense spending and raise taxes to
  keep the deficit down. The JOSPIN administration has pledged both to
  lower unemployment and trim spending, pinning its hopes for new jobs
  on economic growth and on legislation to gradually reduce the
  workweek from 39 to 35 hours by 2002. France joined 10 other EU
  members to launch the euro on 1 January 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.32 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2.4%
  industry: 28.4%
  services: 69.2% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.5%
  highest 10%: 24.9% (1989)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.7% (1998)

Labor force: 25.4 million

Labor force--by occupation: services 69%, industry 26%,
  agriculture 5% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 11.5% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $222 billion
  expenditures: $265 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: steel, machinery, chemicals, automobiles, metallurgy,
  aircraft, electronics, mining, textiles, food processing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.9% (1998)

Electricity--production: 480.783 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 8.72%
  hydro: 12.92%
  nuclear: 78.25%
  other: 0.11% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 411.743 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 72.64 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 3.6 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, cereals, sugar beets, potatoes, wine
  grapes; beef, dairy products; fish

Exports: $289 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and transportation equipment,
  chemicals, foodstuffs, agricultural products, iron and steel
  products, textiles and clothing

Exports--partners: Germany 16%, UK 10%, Italy 9%, Spain 8%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 8%, US 6.5%, Netherlands 4.5%, Japan 2%, Russia
  0.9% (1997)

Imports: $255 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: crude oil, machinery and equipment,
  agricultural products, chemicals, iron and steel products

Imports--partners: Germany 17%, Italy 10%, US 9%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 8%, UK 8%, Spain 7%, Netherlands 5%, Japan 3%,
  China 2.5% (1997)

Debt--external: $117.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $8.4 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 6.55957 French francs per euro; the euro will replace the
  local currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 35 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed
  domestic: extensive cable and microwave radio relay; extensive
  introduction of fiber-optic cable; domestic satellite system
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (with total of 5
  antennas--2 for Indian Ocean and 3 for Atlantic Ocean), NA Eutelsat,
  1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region); HF radiotelephone communications
  with more than 20 countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 41, FM 800 (mostly repeaters),
  shortwave 0

Radios: 49 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 310 (in addition, there are about
  1,400 repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 29.3 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 32,027 km ( 31,940 km are operated by French National
  Railways (SNCF); 13,803 km of SNCF routes are electrified and 12,132
  km are double- or multiple-tracked)
  standard gauge: 31,928 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 99 km 1.000-m gauge
  note: does not include 33 tourist railroads, totaling 469 km, many
  being of very narrow gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 892,900 km
  paved: 892,900 km (including 9,900 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 14,932 km; 6,969 km heavily traveled

Pipelines: crude oil 3,059 km; petroleum products 4,487 km;
  natural gas 24,746 km

Ports and harbors: Bordeaux, Boulogne, Cherbourg, Dijon,
  Dunkerque, La Pallice, Le Havre, Lyon, Marseille, Mullhouse, Nantes,
  Paris, Rouen, Saint Nazaire, Saint Malo, Strasbourg

Merchant marine:
  total: 64 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,826,364 GRT/2,962,338
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 5, cargo 5, chemical tanker 6, combination bulk
  1, container 6, liquefied gas tanker 4, multifunction large-load
  carrier 2, oil tanker 20, passenger 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 5,
  short-sea passenger 6, specialized tanker 1
  note: France also maintains a captive register for French-owned
  ships in Iles Kerguelen (French Southern and Antarctic Lands) (1998
  est.)

Airports: 474 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 267
  over 3,047 m: 13
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 31
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 94
  914 to 1,523 m: 73
  under 914 m: 56 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 207
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 75
  under 914 m: 129 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (includes Marines), Navy (includes Naval
  Air), Air Force (includes Air Defense, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 14,666,286 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 12,203,675 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 411,911 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $39.831 billion (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.5% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Madagascar claims Bassas da India, Europa
  Island, Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island;
  Comoros claims Mayotte; Mauritius claims Tromelin Island;
  territorial dispute between Suriname and French Guiana; territorial
  claim in Antarctica (Adelie Land); Matthew and Hunter Islands east
  of New Caledonia claimed by France and Vanuatu

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for and consumer of South
  American cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin



======================================================================




@French Guiana
-------------





Geography



Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic
  Ocean, between Brazil and Suriname

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 53 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 91,000 sq km
  land: 89,150 sq km
  water: 1,850 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,183 km
  border countries: Brazil 673 km, Suriname 510 km

Coastline: 378 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; little seasonal temperature
  variation

Terrain: low-lying coastal plains rising to hills and small
  mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Bellevue de l'Inini 851 m

Natural resources: bauxite, timber, gold (widely scattered),
  cinnabar, kaolin, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 83%
  other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: high frequency of heavy showers and severe
  thunderstorms; flooding

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: mostly an unsettled wilderness



People



Population: 167,982 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 31% (male 26,713; female 25,514)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 57,935; female 48,959)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 4,479; female 4,382) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.19% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 23.27 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.52 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 13.1 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.18 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.02 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.13 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.93 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 76.61 years
  male: 73.41 years
  female: 79.97 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.31 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: French Guianese (singular and plural)
  adjective: French Guianese

Ethnic groups: black or mulatto 66%, white 12%, East Indian,
  Chinese, Amerindian 12%, other 10%

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 83%
  male: 84%
  female: 82% (1982 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Department of Guiana
  conventional short form: French Guiana
  local long form: none
  local short form: Guyane

Data code: FG

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Cayenne

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France)

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by Prefect Dominique VIAN (since NA January 1997)
  head of government: President of the General Council Stephan PHINERA
  (since NA March 1994); President of the Regional Council Antoine
  KARAM (since NA March 1992)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
  French Ministry of Interior; presidents of the General and Regional
  Councils are appointed by the members of those councils

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General
  (19 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year
  terms) and a unicameral Regional Council or Conseil Regional (31
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
  elections: General Council--last held 20-27 March 1994 (next to be
  held NA 2000); Regional Council--last held 15 March 1998 (next to be
  held NA 2004)
  election results: General Council--percent of vote by party--NA; seats
  by party--PSG 8, FDG 4, RPR 1, other left 2, other right 2, other 2;
  Regional Council--percent of vote by party--PS 28.28%, various left
  parties 22.56%, RPR 15.91%, independents 8.6%, Walwari 6%; seats by
  party--PS 11, various left parties 9, RPR 6, independents 3, Walwari 2
  note: one seat was elected to the French Senate on 27 September 1998
  (next to be held NA September 2007); results--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--NA; 2 seats were elected to the French
  National Assembly on 25 May--1 June 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
  results--percent of vote by party --NA; seats by party--RPR 1, PSG 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeals or Cour d'Appel (highest local
  court based in Martinique with jurisdiction over Martinique,
  Guadeloupe, and French Guiana)

Political parties and leaders: Guianese Socialist Party or PSG
  subset of PSG); Nationalist Popular Party of Guyana (Parti
  LECANTE]; Democratic and European Rally of the Senate or RDSE

International organization participation: FZ, WCL, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department
  of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is tied closely to that of France
  through subsidies and imports. Besides the French space center at
  Kourou, fishing and forestry are the most important economic
  activities, with exports of fish and fish products (mostly shrimp)
  accounting for more than 60% of total revenue in 1992. The large
  reserves of tropical hardwoods, not fully exploited, support an
  expanding sawmill industry which provides sawn logs for export.
  Cultivation of crops is limited to the coastal area, where the
  population is largely concentrated; sugar cane is the major cash
  crop. French Guiana is heavily dependent on imports of food and
  energy. Unemployment is a serious problem, particularly among
  younger workers.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (1992)

Labor force: 58,800 (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services, government, and commerce
  60.6%, industry 21.2%, agriculture 18.2% (1980)

Unemployment rate: 25.7% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $191 million
  expenditures: $332 million, including capital expenditures of $88
  million (1996)

Industries: construction, shrimp processing, forestry products,
  rum, gold mining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 425 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 425 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugar, rice, corn, manioc (tapioca), cocoa,
  vegetables, bananas; cattle, pigs, poultry

Exports: $148 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: shrimp, timber, gold, rum, rosewood essence,
  clothing

Exports--partners: France 60%, EU 7% (1994)

Imports: $600 million (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: food (grains, processed meat), machinery and
  transport equipment, fuels and chemicals

Imports--partners: France 62%, Germany 4%, Belgium-Luxembourg 4%,
  US 2% (1994)

Debt--external: $1.2 billion (1988)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 31,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: fair open wire and microwave radio relay system
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 7, shortwave 0

Radios: 79,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, there are eight
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 22,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km (1995)

Highways:
  total: 1,817 km (national 432 km, departmental 385 km, community
  1,000 km)
  paved: 727 km
  unpaved: 1,090 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 460 km, navigable by small oceangoing vessels and
  river and coastal steamers; 3,300 km navigable by native craft

Ports and harbors: Cayenne, Degrad des Cannes, Saint-Laurent du
  Maroni

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 11 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: French Forces, Gendarmerie

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 47,354 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 30,656 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Suriname claims area between Riviere
  Litani and Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa)

Illicit drugs: small amount of marijuana grown for local
  consumption; minor transshipment point to Europe



======================================================================




@French Polynesia
----------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from South America to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 S, 140 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 4,167 sq km (118 islands and atolls)
  land: 3,660 sq km
  water: 507 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than one-third the size of
  Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,525 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but moderate

Terrain: mixture of rugged high islands and low islands with reefs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Orohena 2,241 m

Natural resources: timber, fish, cobalt

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 6%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 31%
  other: 57% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: occasional cyclonic storms in January

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: includes five archipelagoes; Makatea in French
  Polynesia is one of the three great phosphate rock islands in the
  Pacific Ocean--the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in Kiribati and
  Nauru



People



Population: 242,073 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 40,422; female 38,913)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 78,637; female 72,832)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 5,642; female 5,627) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.72% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.08 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.06 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.19 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.59 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.33 years
  male: 69.93 years
  female: 74.85 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.64 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: French Polynesian(s)
  adjective: French Polynesian

Ethnic groups: Polynesian 78%, Chinese 12%, local French 6%,
  metropolitan French 4%

Religions: Protestant 54%, Roman Catholic 30%, other 16%

Languages: French (official), Tahitian (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 14 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 98%
  female: 98% (1977 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of French Polynesia
  conventional short form: French Polynesia
  local long form: Territoire de la Polynesie Francaise
  local short form: Polynesie Francaise

Data code: FP

Dependency status: overseas territory of France since 1946

Government type: NA

Capital: Papeete

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France);
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the
  US Government, but there are 5 archipelagic divisions named Archipel
  des Marquises, Archipel des Tuamotu, Archipel des Tubuai, Iles du
  Vent, and Iles Sous-le-Vent
  note: Clipperton Island is administered by France from French
  Polynesia

Independence: none (overseas territory of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: based on French system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by High Commissioner of the Republic Paul
  RONCIERE (since NA 1994)
  head of government: President of the Territorial Government of
  French Polynesia Gaston FLOSSE (since 4 April 1991); President of
  the Territorial Assembly Justin ARAPARI (since 13 May 1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers; president submits a list of members
  of the Territorial Assembly for approval by them to serve as
  ministers
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; high commissioner appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the
  Territorial Government and the president of the Territorial Assembly
  are elected by the members of the assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Assembly or Assemblee
  Territoriale (41 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 May 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--People's Rally for the Republic (Gaullist) 22, Polynesian
  Liberation Front 10, New Fatherland Party 5, other 4
  note: one seat was elected to the French Senate on 24 September 1989
  (next to be held NA September 1998); results--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--UC 1; two seats were elected to the French
  National Assembly on 25 May--1 June 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--People's Rally
  for the Republic (Gaullist) 2

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Court of the
  First Instance or Tribunal de Premiere Instance; Court of
  Administrative Law or Tribunal Administratif

Political parties and leaders: People's Rally for the Republic
  Independent Front for the Liberation of Polynesia (Tavini

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), FZ,
  ICFTU, SPC, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of France)

Flag description: two narrow red horizontal bands encase a wide
  white band; centered on the white band is a disk with blue and white
  wave pattern on the lower half and gold and white ray pattern on the
  upper half; a stylized red, blue and white ship rides on the wave
  pattern; the French flag is used for official occasions



Economy



Economy--overview: Since 1962, when France stationed military
  personnel in the region, French Polynesia has changed from a
  subsistence economy to one in which a high proportion of the work
  force is either employed by the military or supports the tourist
  industry. Tourism accounts for about 20% of GDP and is a primary
  source of hard currency earnings. The small manufacturing sector
  primarily processes agricultural products. The territory benefited
  from a five-year (1994-98) development agreement with France aimed
  principally at creating new jobs.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.6 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,800 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 18%
  services: 78% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.5% (1994)

Labor force: 118,744 (of which 70,044 are employed) (1988)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 13%, industry 19%,
  services 68% (1997)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $652 million
  expenditures: $613 million, including capital expenditures of $155
  million (1996)

Industries: tourism, pearls, agricultural processing, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 350 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 57.14%
  hydro: 42.86%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 350 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, vanilla, vegetables, fruits;
  poultry, beef, dairy products

Exports: $212 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: cultured pearls 53.8%, coconut products,
  mother-of-pearl, vanilla, shark meat (1992)

Exports--partners: France 33%, US 8.5% (1994)

Imports: $860 million (c.i.f., 1996)

Imports--commodities: fuels, foodstuffs, equipment

Imports--partners: France 44.7%, US 13.9% (1994)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $450.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (CFPF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per
  US$1--102.72 (January 1999), 107.25 (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00
  (1996), 90.75 (1995), 100.94 (1994); note--linked at the rate of
  18.18 to the French franc

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 33,200 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 116,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (in addition, there are 17
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 35,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 792 km
  paved: 792 km (1995 est.)

Ports and harbors: Mataura, Papeete, Rikitea, Uturoa

Merchant marine:
  total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,240 GRT/7,765 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 1, passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated cargo 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 45 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 29
  over 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 17
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 16
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 11 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: French Forces (includes Army, Navy, Air
  Force), Gendarmerie

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@French Southern and Antarctic Lands
-----------------------------------





Geography



Location: south of Africa, islands in the southern Indian Ocean,
  about equidistant between Africa, Antarctica, and Australia;
  note--French Southern and Antarctic Lands includes Ile Amsterdam, Ile
  Saint-Paul, Iles Crozet, and Iles Kerguelen in the southern Indian
  Ocean, along with the French-claimed sector of Antarctica, "Adelie
  Land"; the US does not recognize the French claim to "Adelie Land"

Geographic coordinates: 43 00 S, 67 00 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
  total: 7,781 sq km
  land: 7,781 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Ile Amsterdam, Ile Saint-Paul, Iles Crozet and Iles
  Kerguelen; excludes "Adelie Land" claim of about 500,000 sq km in
  Antarctica that is not recognized by the US

Area--comparative: slightly less than 1.3 times the size of
  Delaware

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,232 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm from Iles Kerguelen only
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: antarctic

Terrain: volcanic

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Ross on Ile Kerguelen 1,850 m

Natural resources: fish, crayfish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: Ile Amsterdam and Ile Saint-Paul are extinct
  volcanoes

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: remote location in the southern Indian Ocean



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: in 1997 there were about 100 researchers whose numbers vary
  from winter (July) to summer (January)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of the French Southern and
  Antarctic Lands
  conventional short form: French Southern and Antarctic Lands
  local long form: Territoire des Terres Australes et Antarctiques
  Francaises
  local short form: Terres Australes et Antarctiques Francaises

Data code: FS

Dependency status: overseas territory of France since 1955;
  administered from Paris by a high commissioner of the Republic

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France);
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the
  US Government, but there are 3 districts named Ile Crozet, Iles
  Kerguelen, and Iles Saint-Paul et Amsterdam; excludes "Adelie Land"
  claim in Antarctica that is not recognized by the US

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity is limited to servicing
  meteorological and geophysical research stations and French and
  other fishing fleets. The fish catches landed on Iles Kerguelen by
  foreign ships are exported to France and Reunion.

Budget:
  revenues: $19 million
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA (1997)



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine:
  total: 66 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,201,120 GRT/3,832,935
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 3, cargo 7, chemical tanker 10, container 9,
  liquefied gas tanker 6, oil tanker 19, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 10 (1998 est.)

Airports: none



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: "Adelie Land" claim in Antarctica is not
  recognized by the US



======================================================================




@Gabon
-----





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the Atlantic Ocean at the
  Equator, between Republic of the Congo and Equatorial Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 S, 11 45 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 267,670 sq km
  land: 257,670 sq km
  water: 10,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Colorado

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,551 km
  border countries: Cameroon 298 km, Republic of the Congo 1,903 km,
  Equatorial Guinea 350 km

Coastline: 885 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; always hot, humid

Terrain: narrow coastal plain; hilly interior; savanna in east
  and south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Iboundji 1,575 m

Natural resources: petroleum, manganese, uranium, gold, timber,
  iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 18%
  forests and woodland: 77%
  other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: deforestation; poaching

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 1,225,853 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 205,076; female 205,198)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 376,181; female 370,479)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 34,078; female 34,841) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.48% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27.89 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.07 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.98 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 83.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 56.98 years
  male: 53.98 years
  female: 60.08 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.77 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Gabonese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Gabonese

Ethnic groups: Bantu tribes including four major tribal groupings
  (Fang, Eshira, Bapounou, Bateke), other Africans and Europeans
  154,000, including 6,000 French and 11,000 persons of dual
  nationality

Religions: Christian 55%-75%, Muslim less than 1%, animist

Languages: French (official), Fang, Myene, Bateke,
  Bapounou/Eschira, Bandjabi

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 63.2%
  male: 73.7%
  female: 53.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Gabonese Republic
  conventional short form: Gabon
  local long form: Republique Gabonaise
  local short form: Gabon

Data code: GB

Government type: republic; multiparty presidential regime
  (opposition parties legalized 1990)

Capital: Libreville

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Estuaire, Haut-Ogooue,
  Moyen-Ogooue, Ngounie, Nyanga, Ogooue-Ivindo, Ogooue-Lolo,
  Ogooue-Maritime, Woleu-Ntem

Independence: 17 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 17 August (1960) (Gabon
  granted full independence from France)

Constitution: adopted 14 March 1991

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in Constitutional Chamber of the
  Supreme Court; compulsory ICJ jurisdiction not accepted

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President El Hadj Omar BONGO (since 2 December 1967)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jean-Francois NTOUTOUME-EMANE
  (since 23 January 1999)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister in
  consultation with the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 6 December 1998 (next to be held NA 2005); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: President El Hadj Omar BONGO reelected; percent of
  vote--El Hadj Omar BONGO 66%, Pierre MAMBOUNDOU 17%, Fr. Paul
  M'BA-ABESSOLE 13%

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the Senate
  (91 seats) and the National Assembly or Assemblee Nationale (120
  seats); members are elected by direct popular vote to serve
  five-year terms
  elections: National Assembly--last held in December 1996 (next to be
  held NA December 2001); Senate--last held 12 January 1997 (next to be
  held in January 2002)
  election results: National Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--PDG 100, Morena-Bucherons/RNB 8, PUP 3, CLR 3, FAR 1,
  UPG 1, USG 2, PGP 2; Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PDG 51, RNB 17, PGP 4, ADERE 3, RDP 1, others 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Cour Supreme consisting of
  three chambers--Judicial, Administrative, and Accounts;
  Constitutional Court; Courts of Appeal; Court of State Security;
  County Courts

Political parties and leaders: African Forum for Reconstruction
  NA]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, BDEAC,
  CCC, CEEAC, ECA, FAO, FZ, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS (associate), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, MINURCA, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UDEAC,
  UN, UN Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Paul BOUNDOUKOU-LATHA
  chancery: Suite 200, 2034 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James V. LEDESMA
  embassy: Boulevard de la Mer, Libreville
  mailing address: B. P. 4000, Libreville

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  yellow, and blue



Economy



Economy--overview: Gabon enjoys a per capita income four times
  that of most nations of sub-Saharan Africa. This has supported a
  sharp decline in extreme poverty; yet because of high income
  inequality a large proportion of the population remains poor. Gabon
  depended on timber and manganese until oil was discovered offshore
  in the early 1970s. The oil sector now accounts for 50% of GDP.
  Gabon continues to face fluctuating prices for its oil, timber,
  manganese, and uranium exports. Despite the abundance of natural
  wealth, the economy is hobbled by poor fiscal management. In 1992,
  the fiscal deficit widened to 2.4% of GDP, and Gabon failed to
  settle arrears on its bilateral debt, leading to a cancellation of
  rescheduling agreements with official and private creditors.
  Devaluation of its Francophone currency by 50% on 12 January 1994
  sparked a one-time inflationary surge, to 35%; the rate dropped to
  6% in 1996. The IMF provided a one-year standby arrangement in
  1994-95 and a three-year Enhanced Financing Facility (EFF) at near
  commercial rates beginning in late 1995. Those agreements mandate
  progress in privatization and fiscal discipline. France provided
  additional financial support in January 1997 after Gabon had met IMF
  targets for mid-1996. In 1997, an IMF mission to Gabon criticized
  the government for overspending on off-budget items, overborrowing
  from the central bank, and slipping on its schedule for
  privatization and administrative reform. Growth in 1999 will depend
  mainly on how world oil prices move.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 8%
  industry: 67%
  services: 25% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry and
  commerce, services

Unemployment rate: 21% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.5 billion
  expenditures: $1.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $302
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: food and beverage; textile; lumbering and plywood;
  cement; petroleum extraction and refining; manganese, uranium, and
  gold mining; chemicals; ship repair

Industrial production growth rate: 2.3% (1995)

Electricity--production: 930 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 22.04%
  hydro: 77.96%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 930 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cocoa, coffee, sugar, palm oil, rubber;
  cattle; okoume (a tropical softwood); fish

Exports: $2.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil 81%, timber 12%, manganese 5%,
  uranium (1996)

Exports--partners: US 67%, China 9%, France 8%, Japan 3% (1997)

Imports: $890 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs,
  chemicals, petroleum products, construction materials

Imports--partners: France 38%, US 8%, Cameroon 5%, Netherlands 4%,
  Cote d'Ivoire, Japan (1997)

Debt--external: $4.1 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $331 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--577.61 (January 1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 22,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: adequate system of cable, microwave radio relay,
  tropospheric scatter, radiotelephone communication stations, and a
  domestic satellite system with 12 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 250,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (in addition, there are five
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 40,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 649 km Gabon State Railways (OCTRA)
  standard gauge: 649 km 1.435-m gauge; single track (1994)

Highways:
  total: 7,670 km
  paved: 629 km (including 30 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 7,041 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,600 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 270 km; petroleum products 14 km

Ports and harbors: Cap Lopez, Kango, Lambarene, Libreville,
  Mayumba, Owendo, Port-Gentil

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 13,613 GRT/22,599 DWT
  (1998 est.)
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 62 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 52
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 16
  under 914 m: 26 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Republican Guard
  (charged with protecting the president and other senior officials),
  National Gendarmerie, National Police

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 280,719 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 144,133 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 11,392 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $91 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.6% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary dispute with Equatorial
  Guinea because of disputed sovereignty over islands in Corisco Bay



======================================================================




@Gambia, The
-----------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and
  Senegal

Geographic coordinates: 13 28 N, 16 34 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 11,300 sq km
  land: 10,000 sq km
  water: 1,300 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Delaware

Land boundaries:
  total: 740 km
  border countries: Senegal 740 km

Coastline: 80 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 18 nm
  continental shelf: not specified
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, rainy season (June to November); cooler,
  dry season (November to May)

Terrain: flood plain of the Gambia River flanked by some low hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 53 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 18%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 28%
  other: 45% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 150 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: rainfall has dropped by 30% in the last 30 years

Environment--current issues: deforestation; desertification;
  water-borne diseases prevalent

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: almost an enclave of Senegal; smallest country on
  the continent of Africa



People



Population: 1,336,320 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 46% (male 305,839; female 304,905)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 341,947; female 348,163)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 18,706; female 16,760) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.35% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 42.76 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.57 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.12 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 75.33 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 54.39 years
  male: 52.02 years
  female: 56.83 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.83 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Gambian(s)
  adjective: Gambian

Ethnic groups: African 99% (Mandinka 42%, Fula 18%, Wolof 16%,
  Jola 10%, Serahuli 9%, other 4%), non-African 1%

Religions: Muslim 90%, Christian 9%, indigenous beliefs 1%

Languages: English (official), Mandinka, Wolof, Fula, other
  indigenous vernaculars

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 38.6%
  male: 52.8%
  female: 24.9% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of The Gambia
  conventional short form: The Gambia

Data code: GA

Government type: republic under multiparty democratic rule

Capital: Banjul

Administrative divisions: 5 divisions and 1 city*; Banjul*, Lower
  River, MacCarthy Island, North Bank, Upper River, Western
  note: it has been reported but not verified that the name of the
  MacCarthy Island division has been changed to Central River

Independence: 18 February 1965 (from UK); note--The Gambia and
  Senegal signed an agreement on 12 December 1981 that called for the
  creation of a loose confederation to be known as Senegambia, but the
  agreement was dissolved on 30 September 1989

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 February (1965)

Constitution: 24 April 1970; suspended July 1994; rewritten and
  approved by national referendum 8 August 1996; reestablished in
  January 1997

Legal system: based on a composite of English common law, Koranic
  law, and customary law; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH (since 12 October
  1996); Vice President Isatou Njie SAIDY (since 20 March 1997);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH (since 18
  October 1996); Vice President Isatou Njie SAIDY (since 20 March
  1997); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet is appointed by the president
  elections: the president is elected by popular vote to a five-year
  term; the number of terms is not restricted; election last held 26
  September 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH elected president; percent
  of vote--Yahya A. J. J. JAMMEH 55.5%, Ousainou DARBOE 35.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly; 49 seats (45
  elected by popular vote, 4 appointed by the president; all for
  five-year terms)
  elections: last popular election held 2 January 1997 (next to be
  held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--APRC
  33, UDP 7, NRP 2, PDOIS 1, independents 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Patriotic
  Democratic Organization for Independence and Socialism or PDOIS
  note--in August 1996 the government banned the following from
  participation in the elections of 1996: People's Progressive Party
  President Sheriff DIBBA] and the Gambian People's Party or GPP

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
  ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UN Security Council (temporary),
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Crispin GREY-JOHNSON
  chancery: Suite 1000, 1155 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador George W. HALEY
  embassy: Fajara, Kairaba Avenue, Banjul
  mailing address: P. M. B. No. 19, Banjul

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue
  with white edges, and green



Economy



Economy--overview: The Gambia has no important mineral or other
  natural resources and has a limited agricultural base. About 75% of
  the population depends on crops and livestock for its livelihood.
  Small-scale manufacturing activity features the processing of
  peanuts, fish, and hides. Reexport trade normally constitutes a
  major segment of economic activity, but the 50% devaluation of the
  CFA franc in January 1994 made Senegalese goods more competitive and
  hurt the reexport trade. The Gambia has benefited from a rebound in
  tourism after its decline in response to the military's takeover in
  July 1994. Short-run economic progress remains highly dependent on
  sustained bilateral and multilateral aid and on responsible
  government economic management as forwarded by IMF technical help
  and advice.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.3 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 23%
  industry: 13%
  services: 64% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 75%, industry, commerce,
  and services 19%, government 6%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $88.6 million
  expenditures: $98.2 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: processing peanuts, fish, and hides; tourism;
  beverages; agricultural machinery assembly, woodworking,
  metalworking; clothing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 70 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 70 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: peanuts, millet, sorghum, rice, corn,
  cassava (tapioca), palm kernels; cattle, sheep, goats; forest and
  fishery resources not fully exploited

Exports: $120 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: peanuts and peanut products, fish, cotton
  lint, palm kernels

Exports--partners: Belgium, Japan, Senegal, Hong Kong, France,
  Switzerland, UK, US, Indonesia (1997)

Imports: $207 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, manufactures, raw materials,
  fuel, machinery and transport equipment

Imports--partners: Cote d'Ivoire, Hong Kong, UK, Germany,
  Netherlands, France, Belgium (1997)

Debt--external: $426 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $45.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 dalasi (D) = 100 butut

Exchange rates: dalasi (D) per US$1--10.947 (December 1998),
  10.643 (1998), 10.200 (1997), 9.789 (1996), 9.546 (1995), 9.576
  (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 11,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: adequate network of microwave radio relay and open wire
  international: microwave radio relay links to Senegal and
  Guinea-Bissau; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 5, shortwave 0

Radios: 180,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (government owned) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 2,700 km
  paved: 956 km
  unpaved: 1,744 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 400 km

Ports and harbors: Banjul

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (includes marine unit), National Police,
  National Guard

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 296,976 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 149,670 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.2 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: short section of boundary with Senegal is
  indefinite



======================================================================




@Gaza Strip
----------





Introduction



Background: The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
  Self-Government Arrangements ("the DOP"), signed in Washington on 13
  September 1993, provides for a transitional period not exceeding
  five years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip
  and the West Bank. Permanent status negotiations began on 5 May
  1996, but have not resumed since the initial meeting. Under the DOP,
  Israel agreed to transfer certain powers and responsibilities to the
  Palestinian Authority, which includes a Palestinian Legislative
  Council elected in January 1996, as part of interim self-governing
  arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers
  and responsibilities for the Gaza Strip and Jericho took place
  pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4 May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza
  Strip and the Jericho Area and in additional areas of the West Bank
  pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28 September 1995 Interim Agreement, the
  Israel-PLO 15 January 1997 Protocol Concerning Redeployment in
  Hebron, and the Israel-PLO 23 October 1998 Wye River Memorandum. The
  DOP provides that Israel will retain responsibility during the
  transitional period for external security and for internal security
  and public order of settlements and Israelis. Permanent status is to
  be determined through direct negotiations.



Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
  Egypt and Israel

Geographic coordinates: 31 25 N, 34 20 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 360 sq km
  land: 360 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 62 km
  border countries: Egypt 11 km, Israel 51 km

Coastline: 40 km

Maritime claims: Israeli-occupied with current status subject to
  the Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement--permanent status to be
  determined through further negotiation

Climate: temperate, mild winters, dry and warm to hot summers

Terrain: flat to rolling, sand- and dune-covered coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Abu 'Awdah (Joz Abu 'Auda) 105 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 39%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 11%
  other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 120 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: desertification; salination of fresh
  water; sewage treatment

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: there are 24 Israeli settlements and civilian
  land use sites in the Gaza Strip (August 1998 est.)



People



Population: 1,112,654 (July 1999 est.)
  note: in addition, there are some 6,000 Israeli settlers in the Gaza
  Strip (August 1998 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 52% (male 294,196; female 280,017)
  15-64 years: 46% (male 255,209; female 251,317)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 13,475; female 18,440) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.44% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 48.24 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.8 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 22.92 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.44 years
  male: 72.01 years
  female: 74.95 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.46 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: NA
  adjective: NA

Ethnic groups: Palestinian Arab and other 99.4%, Jewish 0.6%

Religions: Muslim (predominantly Sunni) 98.7%, Christian 0.7%,
  Jewish 0.6%

Languages: Arabic, Hebrew (spoken by Israeli settlers and many
  Palestinians), English (widely understood)

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Gaza Strip
  local long form: none
  local short form: Qita Ghazzah

Data code: GZ



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic conditions in the Gaza Strip?under the
  responsibility of the Palestinian Authority since the Cairo
  Agreement of May 1994--have deteriorated since the early 1990s. Real
  per capita GDP for the West Bank and Gaza Strip (WBGS) declined 36%
  between 1992 and 1996 owing to the combined effect of falling
  aggregate incomes and robust population growth. The downturn in
  economic activity was largely the result of Israeli closure
  policies--the imposition of generalized border closures in response
  to security incidents in Israel--which disrupted previously
  established labor and commodity market relationships between Israel
  and the WBGS. The most serious negative social effect of this
  downturn has been the emergence of chronic unemployment; average
  unemployment rates in the WBGS during the 1980s were generally under
  5%, by the mid-1990s this level had risen to over 20%. Since 1997
  Israel's use of comprehensive closures has decreased and, in 1998,
  Israel implemented new policies to reduce the impact of closures and
  other security procedures on the movement of Palestinian goods and
  labor. These positive changes to the conduct of economic activity,
  combined with international donor pledges of over $3 billion made to
  the Palestinian Authority in November, may fuel a moderate economic
  recovery in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 33%
  industry: 25%
  services: 42% (1995 est., includes West Bank)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8.8% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA
  note: excluding Israeli settlers

Labor force--by occupation: services 66%, industry 21%,
  agriculture 13% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 26.8% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $816 million
  expenditures: $866 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)
  note: includes West Bank

Industries: generally small family businesses that produce
  textiles, soap, olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl souvenirs;
  the Israelis have established some small-scale modern industries in
  an industrial center

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh
  note: electricity supplied by Israel

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: olives, citrus, vegetables; beef, dairy
  products

Exports: $781 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.) (includes West Bank)

Exports--commodities: citrus

Exports--partners: Israel, Egypt, West Bank

Imports: $2.1 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.) (includes West Bank)

Imports--commodities: food, consumer goods, construction materials

Imports--partners: Israel, Egypt, West Bank

Debt--external: $108 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1--4.2260
  (November 1998), 3.4494 (1997), 3.1917 (1996), 3.0113 (1995), 3.0111
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)



Communications



Telephones: NA; 3.1% of Palestinian households have telephones

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA; note--95% of Palestinian households have radios (1992
  est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (operated by the Palestinian
  Broadcasting Corp.) (1997)

Televisions: NA; note--59% of Palestinian households have
  televisions (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: NA km; note--one line, abandoned and in disrepair, little
  trackage remains

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km
  note: small, poorly developed road network

Ports and harbors: Gaza

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)
  note: includes Gaza International Airport that opened on 24 November
  1998 as part of agreements stipulated in the 23 October 1998 Wye
  River Memorandum

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are
  Israeli-occupied with current status subject to the
  Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement--permanent status to be
  determined through further negotiation



======================================================================




@Georgia
-------





Introduction



Background: Beset by ethnic and civil strife since independence
  from the Soviet Union in December 1991, Georgia began to stabilize
  in 1994. Political settlements for separatist conflicts in South
  Ossetia and Abkhazia remain elusive. The conflict in South Ossetia
  has been dormant since spring 1994, but sporadic violence continues
  between Abkhaz forces and Georgian partisans in western Georgia.
  Russian peacekeepers are deployed in both regions and a UN Observer
  Mission is operating in Abkhazia. As a result of these conflicts,
  Georgia still has about 250,000 internally displaced people. In
  1995, Georgia adopted a new constitution and conducted generally
  free and fair nationwide presidential and parliamentary elections.
  In 1996, the government focused its attention on implementing an
  ambitious economic reform program and professionalizing its
  parliament. Violence and organized crime were sharply curtailed in
  1995 and 1996, but corruption remains rife. Georgia has taken some
  steps to reduce its dependence on Russia, acquiring coastal patrol
  boats in 1997 to replace Russian border units along the Black Sea
  coast. In 1998, Georgia assumed control of its Black Sea coast and
  about half of its land border with Turkey in line with a June 1998
  agreement with Russia. Since 1997, Georgia's parliament has
  sharpened its rhetoric against Russia's continued military presence
  on Georgian territory. In February 1998 an assassination attempt was
  made against President SHEVARDNADZE by supporters of the late former
  president Zviad GAMSAKHURDIA. In October 1998, a disaffected
  military officer led a failed mutiny in western Georgia; the armed
  forces continue to feel the ripple effect of the uprising. Georgia
  faces parliamentary elections this fall, and presidential elections
  next spring. After two years of robust growth, the economy, hurt by
  the financial crisis in Russia, slowed in 1998.



Geography



Location: Southwestern Asia, bordering the Black Sea, between
  Turkey and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 42 00 N, 43 30 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 69,700 sq km
  land: 69,700 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,461 km
  border countries: Armenia 164 km, Azerbaijan 322 km, Russia 723 km,
  Turkey 252 km

Coastline: 310 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: warm and pleasant; Mediterranean-like on Black Sea coast

Terrain: largely mountainous with Great Caucasus Mountains in the
  north and Lesser Caucasus Mountains in the south; Kolkhet'is Dablobi
  (Kolkhida Lowland) opens to the Black Sea in the west; Mtkvari River
  Basin in the east; good soils in river valley flood plains,
  foothills of Kolkhida Lowland

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mt'a Mqinvartsveri (Gora Kazbek) 5,048 m

Natural resources: forests, hydropower, manganese deposits, iron
  ore, copper, minor coal and oil deposits; coastal climate and soils
  allow for important tea and citrus growth

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 34%
  other: 28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes

Environment--current issues: air pollution, particularly in
  Rust'avi; heavy pollution of Mtkvari River and the Black Sea;
  inadequate supplies of potable water; soil pollution from toxic
  chemicals

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Desertification



People



Population: 5,066,499 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 21% (male 544,055; female 522,491)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 1,628,993; female 1,753,527)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 236,124; female 381,309) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.74% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.64 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.3 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.69 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.93 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.62 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.91 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 52.01 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.63 years
  male: 61.13 years
  female: 68.32 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.53 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Georgian(s)
  adjective: Georgian

Ethnic groups: Georgian 70.1%, Armenian 8.1%, Russian 6.3%, Azeri
  5.7%, Ossetian 3%, Abkhaz 1.8%, other 5%

Religions: Christian Orthodox 75% (Georgian Orthodox 65%, Russian
  Orthodox 10%), Muslim 11%, Armenian Apostolic 8%, unknown 6%

Languages: Georgian 71% (official), Russian 9%, Armenian 7%,
  Azeri 6%, other 7%
  note: Abkhaz (official in Abkhazia)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 100%
  female: 98% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Georgia
  local long form: none
  local short form: Sak'art'velo
  former: Georgian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: GG

Government type: republic

Capital: T'bilisi

Administrative divisions: 53 rayons (raionebi, singular--raioni),
  9 cities* (k'alak'ebi, singular--k'alak'i), and 2 autonomous
  republics** (avtomnoy respubliki, singular--avtom respublika);
  Abashis, Abkhazia or Ap'khazet'is Avtonomiuri Respublika**
  (Sokhumi), Adigenis, Ajaria or Acharis Avtonomiuri Respublika**
  (Bat'umi), Akhalgoris, Akhalk'alak'is, Akhalts'ikhis, Akhmetis,
  Ambrolauris, Aspindzis, Baghdat'is, Bolnisis, Borjomis, Chiat'ura*,
  Ch'khorotsqus, Ch'okhatauris, Dedop'listsqaros, Dmanisis, Dushet'is,
  Gardabanis, Gori*, Goris, Gurjaanis, Javis, K'arelis, Kaspis,
  Kharagaulis, Khashuris, Khobis, Khonis, K'ut'aisi*, Lagodekhis,
  Lanch'khut'is, Lentekhis, Marneulis, Martvilis, Mestiis,
  Mts'khet'is, Ninotsmindis, Onis, Ozurget'is, P'ot'i*, Qazbegis,
  Qvarlis, Rust'avi*, Sach'kheris, Sagarejos, Samtrediis, Senakis,
  Sighnaghis, T'bilisi*, T'elavis, T'erjolis, T'et'ritsqaros,
  T'ianet'is, Tqibuli*, Ts'ageris, Tsalenjikhis, Tsalkis, Tsqaltubo*,
  Vanis, Zestap'onis, Zugdidi*, Zugdidis
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 9 April 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 May (1991)

Constitution: adopted 17 October 1995

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Eduard Amvrosiyevich SHEVARDNADZE
  (previously elected chairman of the Government Council 10 March
  1992, Council has since been disbanded; previously elected chairman
  of Parliament 11 October 1992; president since 26 November 1995;
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Eduard Amvrosiyevich SHEVARDNADZE
  (previously elected chairman of the Government Council 10 March
  1992, Council has since been disbanded; previously elected chairman
  of Parliament 11 October 1992; president since 26 November 1995;
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 5 November 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: Eduard SHEVARDNADZE elected president; percent of
  vote--Eduard SHEVARDNADZE 74%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Council (commonly referred
  to as Parliament) or Umaghiesi Sabcho (235 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 5 November 1995 (next to be held NA 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--CUG 24%, NDP 8%, AGUR 7%,
  all other parties received less than 5% each; seats by party--CUG
  107, NDP 34, AGUR 32, Progress Bloc 4, SPG 4, others 9, Abkazian
  deputies 12, independents 29, not filled 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges elected by the Supreme
  Council on the president's recommendation; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Citizen's Union of Georgia or CUG
  groups: Democratic Union of Georgia or DUG, Political Association
  "Georgian Proprietors"--Electoral Association "T'bilisi", Political
  Union of Young Democrats "Our Choice", Political Union Tanadgoma)

Political pressure groups and leaders: supporters of the late
  ousted President Zviad GAMSAKHURDYA remain a source of opposition;
  separatist elements in the breakaway region of Abkhazia; Georgian
  refugees from Abkhazia (Abkhaz faction in Georgian Parliament)

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE (guest),
  CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Tedo JAPARIDZE
  chancery: Suite 300, 1615 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kenneth S. YALOWITZ
  embassy: #25 Antoneli Street, T'bilisi 380026
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: maroon field with small rectangle in upper
  hoist side corner; rectangle divided horizontally with black on top,
  white below



Economy



Economy--overview: Georgia's economy has traditionally revolved
  around Black Sea tourism; cultivation of citrus fruits, tea, and
  grapes; mining of manganese and copper; and output of a small
  industrial sector producing wine, metals, machinery, chemicals, and
  textiles. The country imports the bulk of its energy needs,
  including natural gas and oil products. Its only sizable internal
  energy resource is hydropower. Despite the severe damage the economy
  has suffered due to civil strife, Georgia, with the help of the IMF
  and World Bank, made substantial economic gains since 1995,
  increasing GDP growth and slashing inflation. The Georgian economy
  suffered some setbacks in late 1998, including a large budget
  deficit due to a failure to collect tax revenue and to the impact of
  the Russian economic crisis. Georgia also still suffers from energy
  shortages; it privatized the distribution network in 1998, and
  deliveries are steadily improving. Georgia is pinning its hopes for
  long-term recovery on the development of an international
  transportation corridor through the key Black Sea ports of P'ot'i
  and Bat'umi. The construction of a Caspian oil pipeline through
  Georgia--scheduled to open in early 1999--should spur greater Western
  investment in the economy. The global economic slowdown, a growing
  trade deficit, continuing problems with corruption, and political
  uncertainties cloud the short-term economic picture.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$11.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 29%
  industry: 16%
  services: 55% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 3.08 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: industry and construction 31%,
  agriculture and forestry 25%, other 44% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 16% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $364 million
  expenditures: $568 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998)

Industries: steel, aircraft, machine tools, foundry equipment,
  electric locomotives, tower cranes, electric welding equipment,
  machinery for food preparation and meat packing, electric motors,
  process control equipment, trucks, tractors, textiles, shoes,
  chemicals, wood products, wine

Industrial production growth rate: -0.3% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 6.845 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 29.88%
  hydro: 70.12%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.949 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 300 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 404 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: citrus, grapes, tea, vegetables, potatoes;
  livestock

Exports: $230 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: citrus fruits, tea, wine, other agricultural
  products; diverse types of machinery; ferrous and nonferrous metals;
  textiles; chemicals; fuel reexports

Exports--partners: Russia, Turkey, Azerbaijan, Ukraine, Armenia,
  Bulgaria, Turkey, US, UK, Italy, Germany, Romania (1997)

Imports: $931 million (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: fuel, grain and other foods, machinery and
  parts, transport equipment

Imports--partners: Russia, Turkey, Azerbaijan (1996); note?EU and
  US send humanitarian food shipments

Debt--external: $1.3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $212.7 million (1995)

Currency: lari introduced September 1995 replacing the coupon

Exchange rates: lari per US$1 (end of period)--1.82 (December
  1998), 1.32 (December 1997), 1.28 (December 1996), 1.24 (December
  1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 760,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: local--T'bilisi and K'ut'aisi have cellular telephone
  networks with about 10,000 customers total; urban areas 20
  telephones/100 people; rural areas 4 phones/100 people; intercity--a
  fiber-optic line connects T'bilisi to K'ut'aisi (Georgia's second
  largest city); nationwide pager service
  international: Georgia and Russia are working on a fiber-optic line
  between P'ot'i and Sochi (Russia); present international service is
  available by microwave, land line, and satellite through the Moscow
  switch; international electronic mail and telex service available

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note 2
  national broadcast stations, 3 regional broadcast stations

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,583 km in common carrier service; does not include
  industrial lines
  broad gauge: 1,583 km 1.520-m gauge (1993)

Highways:
  total: 20,700 km
  paved: 19,354 km
  unpaved: 1,346 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 370 km; refined products 300 km; natural gas
  440 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Bat'umi, P'ot'i, Sokhumi

Merchant marine:
  total: 8 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 86,667 GRT/121,679 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 2, oil tanker 5, short-sea passenger 1 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 28 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 6 (1994 est.)

Transportation--note: transportation network is in poor condition
  and disrupted by ethnic conflict, criminal activities, and fuel
  shortages; network lacks maintenance and repair



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense
  Forces, National Guard, Republic Security Forces (internal and
  border troops)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,287,225 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,018,309 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 40,604 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $57 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1998)

Military--note: a CIS peacekeeping force consisting of Russian
  troops is deployed in the Abkhazia region of Georgia together with a
  UN military observer group; a Russian peacekeeping battalion is
  deployed in South Ossetia



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy,
  mostly for domestic consumption; used as transshipment point for
  opiates via Central Asia to Western Europe



======================================================================




@Germany
-------





Introduction



Background: Germany--first united in 1871?suffered defeats in
  successive world wars and was occupied by the victorious Allied
  powers of the US, UK, France, and the Soviet Union in 1945. With the
  beginning of the Cold War and increasing tension between the US and
  Soviet Union, two German states were formed in 1949: the western
  Federal Republic of Germany (FRG) and the eastern German Democratic
  Republic (GDR). The newly democratic FRG embedded itself in key
  Western economic and security organizations, the EU and NATO, while
  the Communist GDR was on the front line of the Soviet-led Warsaw
  Pact. The decline of the Soviet Union and end of the Cold War
  cleared the path for the fall of the Berlin Wall in 1989 and German
  re-unification in 1990. Germany has expended considerable
  funds--roughly $100 billion a year--in subsequent years working to
  bring eastern productivity and wages up to western standards, with
  mixed results. Unemployment--which in the east is nearly double that
  in the west--has grown over the last several years, primarily as a
  result of structural problems like an inflexible labor market. In
  January 1999, Germany and 10 other members of the EU formed a common
  European currency, the euro, and the German government is now
  looking toward reform of the EU budget and enlargement of the Union
  into Central Europe.



Geography



Location: Central Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea and the North
  Sea, between the Netherlands and Poland, south of Denmark

Geographic coordinates: 51 00 N, 9 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 356,910 sq km
  land: 349,520 sq km
  water: 7,390 sq km
  note: includes the formerly separate Federal Republic of Germany,
  the German Democratic Republic, and Berlin, following formal
  unification on 3 October 1990

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,621 km
  border countries: Austria 784 km, Belgium 167 km, Czech Republic 646
  km, Denmark 68 km, France 451 km, Luxembourg 138 km, Netherlands 577
  km, Poland 456 km, Switzerland 334 km

Coastline: 2,389 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate and marine; cool, cloudy, wet winters and
  summers; occasional warm, tropical foehn wind; high relative humidity

Terrain: lowlands in north, uplands in center, Bavarian Alps in
  south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Freepsum Lake -2 m
  highest point: Zugspitze 2,962 m

Natural resources: iron ore, coal, potash, timber, lignite,
  uranium, copper, natural gas, salt, nickel

Land use:
  arable land: 33%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 15%
  forests and woodland: 31%
  other: 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding

Environment--current issues: emissions from coal-burning utilities
  and industries and lead emissions from vehicle exhausts (the result
  of continued use of leaded fuels) contribute to air pollution; acid
  rain, resulting from sulfur dioxide emissions, is damaging forests;
  pollution in the Baltic Sea from raw sewage and industrial effluents
  from rivers in eastern Germany; hazardous waste disposal

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location on North European Plain and
  along the entrance to the Baltic Sea



People



Population: 82,087,361 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 15% (male 6,495,882; female 6,172,359)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 28,687,267; female 27,526,698)
  65 years and over: 16% (male 4,990,090; female 8,215,065) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.01% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 8.68 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.76 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.14 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.17 years
  male: 74.01 years
  female: 80.5 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.26 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: German(s)
  adjective: German

Ethnic groups: German 91.5%, Turkish 2.4%, Italians 0.7%, Greeks
  0.4%, Poles 0.4%, other 4.6% (made up largely of people fleeing the
  war in the former Yugoslavia)

Religions: Protestant 38%, Roman Catholic 34%, Muslim 1.7%,
  unaffiliated or other 26.3%

Languages: German

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1977 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federal Republic of Germany
  conventional short form: Germany
  local long form: Bundesrepublik Deutschland
  local short form: Deutschland

Data code: GM

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Berlin
  note: the shift from Bonn to Berlin will take place over a period of
  years, with Bonn retaining many administrative functions and several
  ministries even after parliament moves in 1999

Administrative divisions: 16 states (Laender, singular--Land);
  Baden-Wuerttemberg, Bayern, Berlin, Brandenburg, Bremen, Hamburg,
  Hessen, Mecklenburg-Vorpommern, Niedersachsen, Nordrhein-Westfalen,
  Rheinland-Pfalz, Saarland, Sachsen, Sachsen-Anhalt,
  Schleswig-Holstein, Thueringen

Independence: 18 January 1871 (German Empire unification);
  divided into four zones of occupation (UK, US, USSR, and later,
  France) in 1945 following World War II; Federal Republic of Germany
  (FRG or West Germany) proclaimed 23 May 1949 and included the former
  UK, US, and French zones; German Democratic Republic (GDR or East
  Germany) proclaimed 7 October 1949 and included the former USSR
  zone; unification of West Germany and East Germany took place 3
  October 1990; all four powers formally relinquished rights 15 March
  1991

National holiday: German Unity Day (Day of Unity), 3 October
  (1990)

Constitution: 23 May 1949, known as Basic Law; became
  constitution of the united German people 3 October 1990

Legal system: civil law system with indigenous concepts; judicial
  review of legislative acts in the Federal Constitutional Court; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Roman HERZOG (since 1 July 1994)
  head of government: Chancellor Gerhard SCHROEDER (since 27 October
  1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president upon the proposal of the
  chancellor
  elections: president elected for a five-year term by a Federal
  Convention including all members of the Federal Assembly and an
  equal number of delegates elected by the Land Parliaments; election
  last held 23 May 1994 (next to be held 23 May 1999); chancellor
  elected by an absolute majority of the Federal Assembly for a
  four-year term; election last held 27 September 1998 (next to be
  held in the fall of 2002)
  election results: Roman HERZOG elected president; percent of Federal
  Convention vote--52.6%; Gerhard SCHROEDER elected chancellor; percent
  of Federal Assembly--52.8%

Legislative branch: bicameral chamber (no official name for the
  two chambers as a whole) consists of the Federal Assembly or
  Bundestag (656 seats usually, but 669 for the 1998 term; elected by
  popular vote under a system combining direct and proportional
  representation; a party must win 5% of the national vote or three
  direct mandates to gain representation; members serve four-year
  terms) and the Federal Council or Bundesrat (69 votes; state
  governments are directly represented by votes; each has 3 to 6 votes
  depending on population and are required to vote as a block)
  elections: Federal Assembly--last held 27 September 1998 (next to be
  held by the fall of 2002); note--there are no elections for the
  Bundesrat; composition is determined by the composition of the
  state-level governments; the composition of the Bundesrat has the
  potential to change any time one of the 16 states holds an election
  election results: Federal Assembly--percent of vote by party--SPD
  40.9%, Alliance 90/Greens 6.7%, CDU/CSU 35.1%, FDP 6.2%, PDS 5.1%;
  seats by party--SPD 298, Alliance 90/Greens 47, CDU/CSU 245, FDP 43,
  PDS 36; Federal Council--current composition--votes by party--SPD-led
  states 45, CDU-led states 24

Judicial branch: Federal Constitutional Court or
  Bundesverfassungsgericht, half the judges are elected by the
  Bundestag and half by the Bundesrat

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Union or CDU

Political pressure groups and leaders: employers' organizations,
  expellee, refugee, trade unions, and veterans groups

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BDEAC, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, EAPC,
  EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, ESA, EU, FAO, G- 5, G- 7, G-10, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR,
  NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UPU, WEU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Juergen CHROBOG
  chancery: 4645 Reservoir Road NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Detroit, Houston,
  Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San Francisco, Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John C. KORNBLUM
  embassy: Deichmanns Aue 29, 53170 Bonn
  mailing address: PSC 117, APO AE 09080
  branch office: Berlin; mailing address: Neustaedtische Kirchstrasse
  consulate(s) general: Dusseldorf, Frankfurt am Main, Hamburg,
  Leipzig, Munich

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top),
  red, and gold



Economy



Economy--overview: Germany possesses the world's third most
  powerful economy, with its capitalist market system tempered by
  generous welfare benefits. On 1 January 1999, Germany and 10 other
  European Union countries launched the European Monetary Union (EMU)
  by permanently fixing their bilateral exchange rates and giving the
  new European Central Bank control over the zone's monetary policy.
  Germans expect to have the new European currency, the euro, in
  pocket by 2002. Domestic demand contributed to a moderate economic
  upswing in early 1998, although unemployment remains high.
  Job-creation measures have helped superficially, but structural
  rigidities--like high wages and costly benefits--make unemployment a
  long-term, not just a cyclical, problem. Although minimally affected
  by the Asian crisis in 1998, Germany revised its 1999 forecast
  downward at the beginning of the year to reflect anticipated effects
  from the global economic slowdown. Over the long term, Germany faces
  budgetary problems--lower tax revenues and higher pension outlays--as
  its population ages. Meanwhile, the German nation continues to
  wrestle with the integration of eastern Germany, whose adjustment
  may take decades to complete despite annual transfers from the west
  of roughly $100 billion a year.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.813 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1.1%
  industry: 33.1%
  services: 65.8% (1998)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 38.2 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 33.7%, agriculture 2.7%,
  services 63.6% (1998)

Unemployment rate: 10.6% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $977 billion
  expenditures: $1.024 trillion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: western: among world's largest and technologically
  advanced producers of iron, steel, coal, cement, chemicals,
  machinery, vehicles, machine tools, electronics, food and beverages;
  eastern: metal fabrication, chemicals, brown coal, shipbuilding,
  machine building, food and beverages, textiles, petroleum refining

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1998)

Electricity--production: 515.058 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 66.23%
  hydro: 3.5%
  nuclear: 29.81%
  other: 0.46% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 509.458 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 42.5 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 36.9 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: western?potatoes, wheat, barley, sugar
  beets, fruit, cabbages; cattle, pigs, poultry; eastern--wheat, rye,
  barley, potatoes, sugar beets, fruit; pork, beef, chickens, milk,
  hides

Exports: $510 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: machinery 31%, vehicles 17%, chemicals 13%,
  metals and manufactures, foodstuffs, textiles (1997)

Exports--partners: EU 55.5% (France 10.7%, UK 8.5%, Italy 7.4%,
  Netherlands 7.0%, Belgium-Luxembourg 5.8%), US 8.6%, Japan 2.3%
  (1997 est.)

Imports: $426 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery 22%, vehicles 10%, chemicals 9%,
  foodstuffs 8%, textiles, metals (1997)

Imports--partners: EU 54.3% (France 10.5%, Netherlands 8.5%, Italy
  7.8%, UK 7.0%, Belgium-Luxembourg 6.2%), US 7.7%, Japan 4.9% (1997)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $7.5 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 deutsche mark (DM) = 100 pfennige

Exchange rates: deutsche marks (DM) per US$1--1.69 (January 1999),
  1.7597 (1998), 1.7341 (1997), 1.5048 (1996), 1.4331 (1995), 1.6228
  (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 1.95583 deutsche marks per euro; the euro will replace the
  local currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 44 million

Telephone system: Germany has one of the world's most
  technologically advanced telecommunications systems; as a result of
  intensive capital expenditures since reunification, the formerly
  backward system of the eastern part of the country has been
  modernized and integrated with that of the western part
  domestic: the region which was formerly West Germany is served by an
  extensive system of automatic telephone exchanges connected by
  modern networks of fiber-optic cable, coaxial cable, microwave radio
  relay, and a domestic satellite system; cellular telephone service
  is widely available and includes roaming service to many foreign
  countries; since the reunification of Germany, the telephone system
  of the eastern region has been upgraded and enjoys all of the
  advantages of the national system
  international: satellite earth stations--14 Intelsat (12 Atlantic
  Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean
  region), 2 Intersputnik (1 Atlantic Ocean region and 1 Indian Ocean
  region); 7 submarine cable connections; 2 HF radiotelephone
  communication centers; tropospheric scatter links

Radio broadcast stations: AM 77, FM 1,621, shortwave 37, digital
  audio broadcasting 130

Radios: 47.1 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9,513 (including repeaters)

Televisions: 51.4 million (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 46,300 km including 18,866 km electrified and 14,768 km
  double- or multiple-tracked (1996)
  note: since privatization in 1994, Deutsche Bahn AG (DBAG) no longer
  publishes details of the tracks it owns; in addition to the DBAG
  system there are 102 privately owned railway companies which own an
  approximate 3,000 km to 4,000 km of the total tracks

Highways:
  total: 656,074 km
  paved: 650,169 km (including 11,309 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 5,905 km all-weather (1997 est.)

Waterways: 7,467 km (1997); major rivers include the Rhine and
  Elbe; Kiel Canal is an important connection between the Baltic Sea
  and North Sea

Pipelines: crude oil 2,460 km (1997)

Ports and harbors: Berlin, Bonn, Brake, Bremen, Bremerhaven,
  Cologne, Dresden, Duisburg, Emden, Hamburg, Karlsruhe, Kiel, Lubeck,
  Magdeburg, Mannheim, Rostock, Stuttgart

Merchant marine:
  total: 594 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,699,596
  GRT/9,629,163 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 227, chemical tanker 15, combination bulk 1,
  container 306, liquefied gas tanker 5, multifunction large-load
  carrier 5, oil tanker 7, passenger 3, railcar carrier 2,
  refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 14, short-sea passenger
  7 (1998 est.)

Airports: 618 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 319
  over 3,047 m: 14
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 62
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 68
  914 to 1,523 m: 54
  under 914 m: 121 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 299
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
  914 to 1,523 m: 58
  under 914 m: 227 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 61 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air Arm), Air
  Force, Medical Corps, Border Police, Coast Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 20,860,710 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 17,799,070 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 472,708 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $32.8 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.5% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: individual Sudeten German claims for
  restitution of property confiscated in connection with their
  expulsion after World War II

Illicit drugs: source of precursor chemicals for South American
  cocaine processors; transshipment point for and consumer of
  Southwest Asian heroin and hashish, Latin American cocaine, and
  European-produced synthetic drugs



======================================================================




@Ghana
-----





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the Gulf of Guinea, between
  Cote d'Ivoire and Togo

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 238,540 sq km
  land: 230,020 sq km
  water: 8,520 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,093 km
  border countries: Burkina Faso 548 km, Cote d'Ivoire 668 km, Togo
  877 km

Coastline: 539 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; warm and comparatively dry along southeast
  coast; hot and humid in southwest; hot and dry in north

Terrain: mostly low plains with dissected plateau in
  south-central area

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Afadjato 880 m

Natural resources: gold, timber, industrial diamonds, bauxite,
  manganese, fish, rubber

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 7%
  permanent pastures: 22%
  forests and woodland: 35%
  other: 24% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 60 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dry, dusty, harmattan winds occur from January
  to March; droughts

Environment--current issues: recent drought in north severely
  affecting agricultural activities; deforestation; overgrazing; soil
  erosion; poaching and habitat destruction threatens wildlife
  populations; water pollution; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: Lake Volta is the world's largest artificial
  lake; northeasterly harmattan wind (January to March)



People



Population: 18,887,626 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 42% (male 4,020,493; female 3,982,816)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 5,050,736; female 5,231,951)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 284,423; female 317,207) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.05% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 31.79 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.4 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.88 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 76.15 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 57.14 years
  male: 55.08 years
  female: 59.27 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.11 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ghanaian(s)
  adjective: Ghanaian

Ethnic groups: black African 99.8% (major tribes--Akan 44%,
  Moshi-Dagomba 16%, Ewe 13%, Ga 8%), European and other 0.2%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 38%, Muslim 30%, Christian 24%,
  other 8%

Languages: English (official), African languages (including Akan,
  Moshi-Dagomba, Ewe, and Ga)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 64.5%
  male: 75.9%
  female: 53.5% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Ghana
  conventional short form: Ghana
  former: Gold Coast

Data code: GH

Government type: constitutional democracy

Capital: Accra

Administrative divisions: 10 regions; Ashanti, Brong-Ahafo,
  Central, Eastern, Greater Accra, Northern, Upper East, Upper West,
  Volta, Western

Independence: 6 March 1957 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 6 March (1957)

Constitution: new constitution approved 28 April 1992

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law; has
  not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jerry John RAWLINGS (since 7 January
  1993); Vice President John Evans Atta MILLS (since 7 January 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Jerry John RAWLINGS (since 7 January
  1993); Vice President John Evans Atta MILLS (since 7 January 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers; president nominates members subject
  to approval by the Parliament
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 7 December
  1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: Jerry John RAWLINGS reelected president; percent
  of vote--RAWLINGS 57%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (200 seats; members are
  elected by direct popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 7 December 1996 (next to be held NA December
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NDC
  133, NPP 61, PCP 5, PNC 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Congress or

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  ECOWAS, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNPREDEP, UNU, UPU,
  WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kobena KOOMSON
  chancery: 3512 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kathryn Dee ROBINSON
  embassy: Ring Road East, East of Danquah Circle, Accra
  mailing address: P. O. Box 194, Accra

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  yellow, and green with a large black five-pointed star centered in
  the yellow band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia;
  similar to the flag of Bolivia, which has a coat of arms centered in
  the yellow band



Economy



Economy--overview: Well endowed with natural resources, Ghana has
  twice the per capita output of the poorer countries in West Africa.
  Even so, Ghana remains heavily dependent on international financial
  and technical assistance. Gold, timber, and cocoa production are
  major sources of foreign exchange. The domestic economy continues to
  revolve around subsistence agriculture, which accounts for 41% of
  GDP and employs 60% of the work force, mainly small landholders. In
  1995-97, Ghana made mixed progress under a three-year structural
  adjustment program in cooperation with the IMF. On the minus side,
  public sector wage increases and regional peacekeeping commitments
  have led to continued inflationary deficit financing, depreciation
  of the cedi, and rising public discontent with Ghana's austerity
  measures. Power shortages also helped slow growth in 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$33.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 41%
  industry: 14%
  services: 45% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 31.4% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.4%
  highest 10%: 27.3% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 27.7% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and fishing 61%, industry
  10%, services 29% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.39 billion
  expenditures: $1.47 billion, including capital expenditures of $370
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: mining, lumbering, light manufacturing, aluminum
  smelting, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: 4.2% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 6.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.66%
  hydro: 99.34%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.88 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 225 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 5 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cocoa, rice, coffee, cassava (tapioca),
  peanuts, corn, shea nuts, bananas; timber

Exports: $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: gold 39%, cocoa 35%, timber 9.4%, tuna,
  bauxite, aluminum, manganese ore, and diamonds (1996 est.)

Exports--partners: UK, Germany, US, Netherlands, Japan, Nigeria

Imports: $2.1 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: capital equipment, petroleum, consumer
  goods, foods, intermediate goods

Imports--partners: UK, Nigeria, US, Germany, Japan, Netherlands

Debt--external: $5.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $477.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 new cedi (C) = 100 pesewas

Exchange rates: new cedis per US$1--2,324.70 (September 1998),
  2,050.17 (1997), 1,637.23 (1996), 1,200.43 (1995), 956.71 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 100,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system: poor to fair system
  domestic: primarily microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 23, shortwave 0 (1997)

Radios: 12.5 million (1997 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (in addition, there are eight
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.9 million (1997 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 953 km (undergoing major rehabilitation)
  narrow gauge: 953 km 1.067-m gauge (32 km double track) (1997 est.)

Highways:
  total: 39,409 km
  paved: 11,653 km (including 30 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 27,756 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: Volta, Ankobra, and Tano Rivers provide 168 km of
  perennial navigation for launches and lighters; Lake Volta provides
  1,125 km of arterial and feeder waterways

Pipelines: 0 km

Ports and harbors: Takoradi, Tema

Merchant marine:
  total: 5 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 10,552 GRT/14,839 DWT
  ships by type: oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 12 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 6
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police Force,
  Palace Guard, Civil Defense

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,520,125 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,507,954 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 184,360 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $53 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.7% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the international
  drug trade; transit hub for Southwest and Southeast Asian heroin and
  South American cocaine destined for Europe and the US



======================================================================




@Gibraltar
---------





Geography



Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the Strait of Gibraltar,
  which links the Mediterranean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean, on
  the southern coast of Spain

Geographic coordinates: 36 11 N, 5 22 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 6.5 sq km
  land: 6.5 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 11 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 1.2 km
  border countries: Spain 1.2 km

Coastline: 12 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: Mediterranean with mild winters and warm summers

Terrain: a narrow coastal lowland borders the Rock of Gibraltar

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Rock of Gibraltar 426 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: limited natural freshwater resources;
  large concrete or natural rock water catchments collect rain water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: strategic location on Strait of Gibraltar that
  links the North Atlantic Ocean and Mediterranean Sea



People



Population: 29,165 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 3,129; female 2,749)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 10,888; female 8,247)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 1,729; female 2,423) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.39% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.65 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.81 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.14 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.32 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.17 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.47 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.37 years
  male: 75.1 years
  female: 81.81 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.16 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Gibraltarian(s)
  adjective: Gibraltar

Ethnic groups: Italian, English, Maltese, Portuguese, Spanish

Religions: Roman Catholic 74%, Protestant 11% (Church of England
  8%, other 3%), Muslim 8%, Jewish 2%, none or other 5% (1981)

Languages: English (used in schools and for official purposes),
  Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Russian

Literacy:
  definition: NA
  total population: above 95%
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Gibraltar

Data code: GI

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Gibraltar

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Commonwealth Day (second Monday of March)

Constitution: 30 May 1969

Legal system: English law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal, plus other UK subjects who
  have been residents six months or more

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor and Commander-in-Chief, the Right Honorable
  Sir Richard LUCE (since 24 February 1997)
  head of government: Chief Minister Peter CARUANA (since 17 May 1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed from among the elected
  members of the House of Assembly by the governor in consultation
  with the chief minister
  note: there is also a Gibraltar Council that advises the governor
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (18 seats--15
  elected, on for the Speaker, and two ex officio; members are elected
  by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 16 May 1996 (next to be held NA May 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--SD 53%, SL 42%, NP 3%;
  seats by party--SD 8, SL 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Gibraltar Socialist Labor Party or

Political pressure groups and leaders: Housewives Association;
  Chamber of Commerce; Gibraltar Representatives Organization

International organization participation: Interpol (subbureau)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: two horizontal bands of white (top, double
  width) and red with a three-towered red castle in the center of the
  white band; hanging from the castle gate is a gold key centered in
  the red band



Economy



Economy--overview: Gibraltar benefits from an extensive shipping
  trade, offshore banking, and its position as an international
  conference center. The British military presence has been sharply
  reduced and now contributes about 11% to the local economy. The
  financial sector accounts for 15% of GDP; tourism (more than 5
  million visitors in 1995), shipping services fees, and duties on
  consumer goods also generate revenue. Because more than 70% of the
  economy is in the public sector, changes in government spending have
  a major impact on the level of employment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$500 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$17,500 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.1% (1996)

Labor force: 14,800 (including non-Gibraltar laborers)

Labor force--by occupation: services 60%, industry 40%,
  agriculture NEGL%

Unemployment rate: 13.5% (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $111.6 million
  expenditures: $115.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY95/96)

Industries: tourism, banking and finance, ship-building and
  repairing; support to large UK naval and air bases; tobacco, mineral
  water, beer, canned fish

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 85 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 85 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: none

Exports: $83.7 million (f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: (principally reexports) petroleum 51%,
  manufactured goods 41%, other 8%

Exports--partners: UK, Morocco, Portugal, Netherlands, Spain, US,
  FRG

Imports: $778 million (c.i.f., 1995)

Imports--commodities: fuels, manufactured goods, and foodstuffs

Imports--partners: UK, Spain, Japan, Netherlands

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Gibraltar pound (LG) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Gibraltar pounds (LG) per US$1--0.6057 (January
  1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995),
  0.6529 (1994); note--the Gibraltar pound is at par with the British
  pound

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 19,356 (1994)

Telephone system: adequate, automatic domestic system and
  adequate international facilities
  domestic: automatic exchange facilities
  international: radiotelephone; microwave radio relay; satellite
  earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are 3
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: NA km; 1.000-m gauge system in dockyard area only

Highways:
  total: 49.9 km
  paved: 49.9 km
  unpaved: 0 km

Pipelines: 0 km

Ports and harbors: Gibraltar

Merchant marine:
  total: 18 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 346m951 GRT/588,765 DWT
  ships by type: chemical tanker 2, container 4, oil tanker 11,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: British Army, Royal Navy, Royal Air Force

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: source of friction between Spain and the
  UK



======================================================================




@Glorioso Islands
----------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, group of islands in the Indian Ocean,
  northwest of Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 11 30 S, 47 20 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 5 sq km
  land: 5 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Ile Glorieuse, Ile du Lys, Verte Rocks, Wreck Rock,
  and South Rock

Area--comparative: about eight times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 35.2 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 12 m

Natural resources: guano, coconuts

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 100% (all lush vegetation and coconut palms)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: periodic cyclones

Environment--current issues: NA



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Glorioso Islands
  local long form: none
  local short form: Iles Glorieuses

Data code: GO

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (possession of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Madagascar



======================================================================




@Greece
------





Geography



Location: Southern Europe, bordering the Aegean Sea, Ionian Sea,
  and the Mediterranean Sea, between Albania and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 22 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 131,940 sq km
  land: 130,800 sq km
  water: 1,140 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Alabama

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,210 km
  border countries: Albania 282 km, Bulgaria 494 km, Turkey 206 km,
  The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia 228 km

Coastline: 13,676 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 6 nm

Climate: temperate; mild, wet winters; hot, dry summers

Terrain: mostly mountains with ranges extending into sea as
  peninsulas or chains of islands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Olympus 2,917 m

Natural resources: bauxite, lignite, magnesite, petroleum, marble

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 8%
  permanent pastures: 41%
  forests and woodland: 20%
  other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,140 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe earthquakes

Environment--current issues: air pollution; water pollution

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location dominating the Aegean Sea and
  southern approach to Turkish Straits; a peninsular country,
  possessing an archipelago of about 2,000 islands



People



Population: 10,707,135 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 16% (male 878,349; female 818,311)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 3,619,982; female 3,587,591)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 799,053; female 1,003,849) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.41% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.54 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.44 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.04 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.13 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.43 years
  male: 75.87 years
  female: 81.18 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.3 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Greek(s)
  adjective: Greek

Ethnic groups: Greek 98%, other 2%
  note: the Greek Government states there are no ethnic divisions in
  Greece

Religions: Greek Orthodox 98%, Muslim 1.3%, other 0.7%

Languages: Greek (official), English, French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 95%
  male: 98%
  female: 93% (1991 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Hellenic Republic
  conventional short form: Greece
  local long form: Elliniki Dhimokratia
  local short form: Ellas or Ellada
  former: Kingdom of Greece

Data code: GR

Government type: parliamentary republic; monarchy rejected by
  referendum 8 December 1974

Capital: Athens

Administrative divisions: 51 prefectures (nomoi,
  singular--nomos)and 1 autonomous region*; Ayion Oros* (Mt. Athos),
  Aitolia kai Akarnania, Akhaia, Argolis, Arkadhia, Arta, Attiki,
  Dhodhekanisos, Drama, Evritania, Evros, Evvoia, Florina, Fokis,
  Fthiotis, Grevena, Ilia, Imathia, Ioannina, Irakleion, Kardhitsa,
  Kastoria, Kavala, Kefallinia, Kerkyra, Khalkidhiki, Khania, Khios,
  Kikladhes, Kilkis, Korinthia, Kozani, Lakonia, Larisa, Lasithi,
  Lesvos, Levkas, Magnisia, Messinia, Pella, Pieria, Preveza,
  Rethimni, Rodhopi, Samos, Serrai, Thesprotia, Thessaloniki, Trikala,
  Voiotia, Xanthi, Zakinthos

Independence: 1829 (from the Ottoman Empire)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 March (1821) (proclamation
  of the war of independence)

Constitution: 11 June 1975

Legal system: based on codified Roman law; judiciary divided into
  civil, criminal, and administrative courts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Konstandinos (Kostis) STEPHANOPOULOS
  (since 10 March 1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister Konstandinos SIMITIS (since 19
  January 1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of
  the prime minister
  elections: president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
  election last held 10 March 1995 (next to be held by NA March 2000);
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Konstandinos STEPHANOPOULOS elected president;
  percent of Parliament vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Vouli ton Ellinon
  (300 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: elections last held 22 September 1996 (next to be held by
  NA September 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PASOK 41.5%, ND 38.1%,
  KKE 5.6%, Coalition of the Left and Progress 5.1%, DIKKI 4.4%,
  Political Spring 2.9%; seats by party--PASOK 162, ND 108, KKE 11,
  Coalition of the Left and Progress 10, DIKKI 9; note--seating has
  subsequently changed as a result of disciplinary actions by PASOK,
  ND, and DIKKI; 1998 seating is PASOK 162, ND 105, KKE 11, Coalition
  of the Left and Progress 10, DIKKI 8, independents 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Judicial Court, judges appointed for
  life by the president after consultation with a judicial council;
  Special Supreme Tribunal, judges appointed for life by the president
  after consultation with a judicial council

Political parties and leaders: New Democracy or ND (conservative)

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  BSEC, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EU, FAO, G- 6, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO,
  MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE,
  PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UPU,
  WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Alexandre PHILON
  chancery: 2221 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco
  consulate(s): Atlanta, Houston, and New Orleans

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador R. Nicholas BURNS
  embassy: 91 Vasilissis Sophias Boulevard, 10160 Athens
  mailing address: PSC 108, APO AE 09842-0108
  consulate(s) general: Thessaloniki

Flag description: nine equal horizontal stripes of blue
  alternating with white; there is a blue square in the upper
  hoist-side corner bearing a white cross; the cross symbolizes Greek
  Orthodoxy, the established religion of the country



Economy



Economy--overview: Greece has a mixed capitalist economy with the
  public sector accounting for about half of GDP, although the
  government plans to privatize some leading state enterprises.
  Tourism is a key industry, providing a large portion of GDP and
  foreign exchange earnings. Greece is a major beneficiary of EU aid,
  equal to about 4% of GDP. The economy has improved steadily over the
  last few years, as the government has tightened policy with the goal
  of qualifying Greece to join the EU's single currency (the euro) in
  2001. In particular, Greece has cut its budget deficit to just over
  2% of GDP and tightened monetary policy, with the result that
  inflation fell below 4% by the end of 1998--the lowest rate in 26
  years. The outlook for 1999 is good with the budget deficit and
  inflation both expected to decline further, while GDP growth stays
  near 3% and the current account deficit remains below 2% of GDP.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$143 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$13,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 8.5%
  industry: 23.5%
  services: 68% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.28 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: services 59.2%, agriculture 19.8%,
  industry 21% (1998)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $45 billion
  expenditures: $47.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: tourism; food and tobacco processing, textiles;
  chemicals, metal products; mining, petroleum

Industrial production growth rate: 7.3% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 40.028 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 89.16%
  hydro: 10.75%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0.09% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 41.388 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 2.66 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, corn, barley, sugar beets, olives,
  tomatoes, wine, tobacco, potatoes; beef, dairy products

Exports: $12.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: manufactured goods, foodstuffs, fuels (1998)

Exports--partners: EU 56% (Germany 25%, Italy 11%, UK 8%, France
  6%), US 16% (1997)

Imports: $27.7 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, foodstuffs, fuels,
  chemicals (1998)

Imports--partners: EU 61% (Italy 16%, Germany 16%, France 8%, UK
  7%, Netherlands 5%) US 11% (1997)

Debt--external: $40.8 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $5.4 billion from EU (1997 est.)

Currency: 1 drachma (Dr) = 100 lepta

Exchange rates: drachmae (Dr) per US$1--278.78 (January 1999),
  295.53 (1998), 273.06 (1997), 240.71 (1996), 231.66 (1995), 242.60
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 5,571,293 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: adequate, modern networks reach all areas;
  microwave radio relay carries most traffic; extensive open-wire
  network; submarine cables to off-shore islands
  domestic: microwave radio relay, open wire, and submarine cable
  international: tropospheric scatter; 8 submarine cables; satellite
  earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), 1
  Eutelsat, and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 29, FM 17 (repeaters 20), shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 64 (in addition, there are about
  1,000 low-power repeaters and two stations in the US armed forces
  network) (1997)

Televisions: 2.3 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,548 km
  standard gauge: 1,565 km 1.435-m gauge (36 km electrified; 23 km
  double track)
  narrow gauge: 961 km 1.000-m gauge; 22 km 0.750-m gauge (a rack type
  railway for steep grades)

Highways:
  total: 117,000 km
  paved: 107,406 km (including 470 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 9,594 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 80 km; system consists of three coastal canals;
  including the Corinth Canal (6 km) which crosses the Isthmus of
  Corinth connecting the Gulf of Corinth with the Saronic Gulf and
  shortens the sea voyage from the Adriatic to Peiraiefs (Piraeus) by
  325 km; and three unconnected rivers

Pipelines: crude oil 26 km; petroleum products 547 km

Ports and harbors: Alexandroupolis, Elefsis, Irakleion (Crete),
  Kavala, Kerkyra, Chalkis, Igoumenitsa, Lavrion, Patrai, Peiraiefs
  (Piraeus), Thessaloniki, Volos

Merchant marine:
  total: 810 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 24,798,431
  GRT/44,056,618 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 307, cargo 66, chemical tanker 19, combination
  bulk 9, combination ore/oil 12, container 45, liquefied gas tanker
  5, multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 229, passenger 15,
  passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 17,
  short-sea passenger 76, specialized tanker 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 78 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 63
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 15
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 18
  914 to 1,523 m: 16
  under 914 m: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 15
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 11 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Hellenic Army, Hellenic Navy, Hellenic Air
  Force, National Guard, Police

Military manpower--military age: 21 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,707,628 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,071,670 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 79,376 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $4.04 billion (1998 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: complex maritime, air, and territorial
  disputes with Turkey in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Turkey;
  dispute with The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia over name; in
  September 1995, Skopje and Athens signed an interim accord resolving
  their dispute over symbols and certain constitutional provisions;
  Athens also lifted its economic embargo on The Former Yugoslav
  Republic of Macedonia

Illicit drugs: a gateway to Europe for traffickers smuggling
  cannabis and heroin from the Middle East and Southwest Asia to the
  West and precursor chemicals to the East; some South American
  cocaine transits or is consumed in Greece



======================================================================




@Greenland
---------





Geography



Location: Northern North America, island between the Arctic Ocean
  and the North Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Canada

Geographic coordinates: 72 00 N, 40 00 W

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
  total: 2,175,600 sq km
  land: 2,175,600 sq km (341,600 sq km ice-free, 1,834,000 sq km
  ice-covered) (est.)

Area--comparative: slightly more than three times the size of Texas

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 44,087 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: arctic to subarctic; cool summers, cold winters

Terrain: flat to gradually sloping icecap covers all but a
  narrow, mountainous, barren, rocky coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Gunnbjorn 3,700 m

Natural resources: zinc, lead, iron ore, coal, molybdenum, gold,
  platinum, uranium, fish, seals, whales

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 99% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: continuous permafrost over northern two-thirds
  of the island

Environment--current issues: protection of the arctic environment;
  preservation of their traditional way of life, including whaling;
  note--Greenland participates actively in Inuit Circumpolar Conference
  (ICC)

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: dominates North Atlantic Ocean between North
  America and Europe; sparse population confined to small settlements
  along coast



People



Population: 59,827 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 26% (male 7,789; female 7,728)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 22,248; female 18,678)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 1,562; female 1,822) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.84% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 15.23 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.79 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.19 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.12 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 20.06 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.1 years
  male: 65.98 years
  female: 74.24 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.14 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Greenlander(s)
  adjective: Greenlandic

Ethnic groups: Greenlander 87% (Eskimos and Greenland-born
  whites), Danish and others 13%

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran

Languages: Eskimo dialects, Danish, Greenlandic (an Inuit dialect)

Literacy: NA
  note: similar to Denmark proper



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Greenland
  local long form: none
  local short form: Kalaallit Nunaat

Data code: GL

Dependency status: part of the Kingdom of Denmark; self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark since 1979

Government type: NA

Capital: Nuuk (Godthab)

Administrative divisions: 3 districts (landsdele); Avannaa
  (Nordgronland), Tunu (Ostgronland), Kitaa (Vestgronland)

Independence: none (part of the Kingdom of Denmark;
  self-governing overseas administrative division of Denmark since
  1979)

National holiday: Birthday of the Queen, 16 April (1940)

Constitution: 5 June 1953 (Danish constitution)

Legal system: Danish

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen MARGRETHE II of Denmark (since 14 January
  1972), represented by High Commissioner Gunnar MARTENS (since NA
  1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jonathan MOTZFELDT (since NA
  September 1997)
  cabinet: Landsstyre is formed from the Parliament on the basis of
  the strength of parties
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; high commissioner appointed by
  the monarch; prime minister is elected by the Parliament (usually
  the leader of the majority party); election last held 11 March 1999
  (next to be held NA 2003)
  election results: Jonathan MOTZFELDT reelected prime minister;
  percent of parliamentary vote--23 out of 31 votes

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Landsting (31 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote on the basis of proportional
  representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held on 17 February 1999 (next to be held by NA 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Siumut 35.2%, Inuit
  Ataqatigiit 22%, Atassut Party 25.2%, Candidates' League 12.3%;
  seats by party--Siumut 11, Atassut Party 8, Inuit Ataqatigiit 7,
  Candidates' League 4, independent 1
  note: 2 representatives were elected to the Danish Parliament or
  Folketing on NA March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2002); percent of
  vote by party--Siumut 35.6%, Atassut 35.2%; seats by party--Siumut 1,
  Atassut 1; Greenlandic representatives are affiliated with Danish
  political parties

Judicial branch: High Court or Landsret

Political parties and leaders: two-party ruling coalition; Siumut
  (Forward Party, a moderate socialist party that advocates more
  distinct Greenlandic identity and greater autonomy from Denmark)
  Brotherhood, a Marxist-Leninist party that favors complete
  Atassut Party (Solidarity, a more conservative party that favors

International organization participation: NC, NIB

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing
  overseas administrative division of Denmark)

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and
  red with a large disk slightly to the hoist side of center--the top
  half of the disk is red, the bottom half is white



Economy



Economy--overview: Greenland suffered negative economic growth in
  the early 1990s, but since 1993 the economy has improved. The
  Greenland Home Rule Government (GHRG) has pursued a light fiscal
  policy since the late 1980s which has helped create surpluses in the
  public budget and low inflation. Since 1990, Greenland has
  registered a foreign trade deficit following the closure of the last
  remaining lead and zinc mine in 1989. Greenland today is critically
  dependent on fishing and fish exports; the shrimp fishery is by far
  the largest income earner. Despite resumption of several interesting
  hydrocarbon and minerals exploration activities, it will take
  several years before production can materialize. Tourism is the only
  sector offering any near-term potential and even this is limited due
  to a short season and high costs. The public sector, including
  publicly owned enterprises and the municipalities, plays the
  dominant role in Greenland's economy. About half the government
  revenues come from grants from the Danish Government, an important
  supplement of GDP.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$945 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.6% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$16,100 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.6% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 24,500 (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 10.5% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $706 million
  expenditures: $697 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995)

Industries: fish processing (mainly shrimp), handicrafts, furs,
  small shipyards

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 245 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 245 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: forage crops, garden vegetables; sheep; fish

Exports: $363.4 million (f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: fish and fish products 95%

Exports--partners: Denmark 89%, Japan 5%, UK 5%

Imports: $421 million (c.i.f., 1995)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 25%,
  manufactured goods 18%, food and live animals 11%, petroleum
  products 6%

Imports--partners: Denmark 7.5%, Iceland 3.8%, Japan 3.3%, Norway
  3.1%, US 2.4%, Germany 2.4%, Sweden 1.8%

Debt--external: $243 million (1995)

Economic aid--recipient: $427 million (annual subsidy from
  Denmark) (1995)

Currency: 1 Danish krone (DKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Danish kroner (DKr) per US$1--6.401 (January
  1999), 6.701 (1998), 6.604 (1997), 5.799 (1996), 5.602 (1995), 6.361
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 19,600 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: adequate domestic and international service
  provided by cables and microwave radio relay; totally digitalized in
  1995
  domestic: microwave radio relay
  international: 2 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: 1 publicly-owned station and some local
  radio and TV stations

Radios: 23,000 (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 publicly-owned station and some
  local low-power stations; in addition, there are three AFRTS (US Air
  Force) stations which broadcast in the NTSC system (1997)

Televisions: 12,000 (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 150 km
  paved: 60 km
  unpaved: 90 km

Ports and harbors: Kangerluarsoruseq, Kangerlussuaq, Nanortalik,
  Narsarsuaq, Nuuk (Godthab), Sisimiut

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 passenger (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,211 GRT/162 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 13 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 9
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Denmark



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Grenada
-------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and
  Atlantic Ocean, north of Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 12 07 N, 61 40 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 340 sq km
  land: 340 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 121 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; tempered by northeast trade winds

Terrain: volcanic in origin with central mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Saint Catherine 840 m

Natural resources: timber, tropical fruit, deepwater harbors

Land use:
  arable land: 15%
  permanent crops: 18%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 9%
  other: 55% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies on edge of hurricane belt; hurricane season
  lasts from June to November

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: the administration of the islands of the
  Grenadines group is divided between Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  and Grenada



People



Population: 97,008 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 21,055; female 20,365)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 27,524; female 23,766)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 2,034; female 2,264) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.87% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27.62 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.15 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -13.74 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.16 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.09 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 11.13 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.6 years
  male: 68.97 years
  female: 74.29 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.57 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Grenadian(s)
  adjective: Grenadian

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Roman Catholic 53%, Anglican 13.8%, other Protestant
  sects 33.2%

Languages: English (official), French patois

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 98%
  female: 98% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Grenada

Data code: GJ

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Saint George's

Administrative divisions: 6 parishes and 1 dependency*; Carriacou
  and Petit Martinique*, Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George,
  Saint John, Saint Mark, Saint Patrick

Independence: 7 February 1974 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 February (1974)

Constitution: 19 December 1973

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Daniel WILLIAMS (since 9 August 1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Keith MITCHELL (since 22 June
  1995)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; prime minister appointed by the governor
  general from among the members of the House of Assembly

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (a 13-member body, 10 appointed by the government and three by the
  leader of the opposition) and the House of Representatives (15
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held on 18 January 1999 (next to be held by NA
  October 2004)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--NNP 15

Judicial branch: West Indies Associate States Supreme Court (an
  associate judge resides in Grenada)

Political parties and leaders: National Democratic Congress or

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS,
  OECS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WToO,
  WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Denis G. ANTOINE
  chancery: 1701 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: the ambassador to Barbados is accredited to Grenada
  embassy: Point Salines, Saint George's
  mailing address: P. O. Box 54, Saint George's, Grenada, West Indies

Flag description: a rectangle divided diagonally into yellow
  triangles (top and bottom) and green triangles (hoist side and outer
  side), with a red border around the flag; there are seven yellow,
  five-pointed stars with three centered in the top red border, three
  centered in the bottom red border, and one on a red disk
  superimposed at the center of the flag; there is also a symbolic
  nutmeg pod on the hoist-side triangle (Grenada is the world's
  second-largest producer of nutmeg, after Indonesia); the seven stars
  represent the seven administrative divisions



Economy



Economy--overview: In this island economy progress in fiscal
  reforms and prudent macroeconomic management have boosted annual
  growth to nearly 5% in 1997-98. The increase in economic activity
  has been led by construction and trade. Tourist facilities are being
  expanded; tourism is the leading foreign exchange earner. Major
  short-term concerns are the rising fiscal deficit and the
  deterioration in the external account balance. Grenada shares a
  common central bank and a common currency with seven other members
  of the Organization of Eastern Caribbean States (OECS).

GDP: purchasing power parity--$340 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 9.7%
  industry: 15%
  services: 75.3% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.4% (1998)

Labor force: 36,000

Labor force--by occupation: services 31%, agriculture 24%,
  construction 8%, manufacturing 5%, other 32% (1985)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1 October 1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $85.8 million
  expenditures: $102.1 million, including capital expenditures of $28
  million (1997)

Industries: food and beverages, textiles, light assembly
  operations, tourism, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 0.7% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 70 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 70 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, mace, citrus,
  avocados, root crops, sugarcane, corn, vegetables

Exports: $22 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: bananas, cocoa, nutmeg, fruit and
  vegetables, clothing, mace

Exports--partners: Caricom 32.3%, UK 20%, US 13%, Netherlands 8.8%
  (1991)

Imports: $166.5 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: food 25%, manufactured goods 22%, machinery
  20%, chemicals 10%, fuel 6% (1989)

Imports--partners: US 31.2%, Caricom 23.6%, UK 13.8%, Japan 7.1%
  (1991)

Debt--external: $74 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $8.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 5,650 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: automatic, islandwide telephone system
  domestic: interisland VHF and UHF radiotelephone links
  international: new SHF radiotelephone links to Trinidad and Tobago
  and Saint Vincent; VHF and UHF radio links to Trinidad

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 80,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 30,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,040 km
  paved: 638 km
  unpaved: 402 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Grenville, Saint George's

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Grenada Police Force (includes Special
  Service Unit), Coast Guard

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: small-scale cannabis cultivation; lesser
  transshipment point for marijuana and cocaine to US



======================================================================




@Guadeloupe
----------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, islands in the eastern Caribbean Sea,
  southeast of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 16 15 N, 61 35 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 1,780 sq km
  land: 1,706 sq km
  water: 74 sq km
  note: Guadeloupe is an archipelago of nine inhabited islands,
  including Basse-Terre, Grande-Terre, Marie-Galante, La Desirade,
  Iles des Saintes, Saint Barthelemy, and part of Saint Martin

Area--comparative: 10 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 10.2 km
  border countries: Netherlands Antilles (Sint Maarten) 10.2 km

Coastline: 306 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical tempered by trade winds; moderately high
  humidity

Terrain: Basse-Terre is volcanic in origin with interior
  mountains; Grande-Terre is low limestone formation; most of the
  seven other islands are volcanic in origin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Soufriere 1,467 m

Natural resources: cultivable land, beaches and climate that
  foster tourism

Land use:
  arable land: 14%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 14%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 29% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes (June to October); Soufriere is an
  active volcano

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 420,943 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 25% (male 53,427; female 51,234)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 138,215; female 141,243)
  65 years and over: 9% (male 15,536; female 21,288) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.06% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.33 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.62 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.16 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.54 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.01 years
  male: 74.98 years
  female: 81.18 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.82 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Guadeloupian(s)
  adjective: Guadeloupe

Ethnic groups: black or mulatto 90%, white 5%, East Indian,
  Lebanese, Chinese less than 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Hindu and pagan African 4%,
  Protestant sects 1%

Languages: French (official) 99%, Creole patois

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 90%
  male: 90%
  female: 90% (1982 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Department of Guadeloupe
  conventional short form: Guadeloupe
  local long form: Departement de la Guadeloupe
  local short form: Guadeloupe

Data code: GP

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Basse-Terre

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France)

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by Prefect Jean FEDINI (since NA 1996)
  head of government: President of the General Council Marcellin
  LUBETH (since NA 1998); President of the Regional Council Lucette
  MICHAUX-CHEVRY (since 22 March 1992)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
  French Ministry of Interior; the presidents of the General and
  Regional Councils are elected by the members of those councils
  election results: NA

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General
  (42 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year
  terms) and the unicameral Regional Council or Conseil Regional (41
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
  elections: General Council--last held 22 March 1998 (next to be held
  by NA 2002); Regional Council--last held 15 March 1998 (next to be
  held NA 2004)
  election results: General Council--percent of vote by party--NA; seats
  by party--various left parties 11, PS 8, RPR 8, PPDG 6, various right
  parties 5, PCC 3, UDF 1; Regional Council--percent of vote by
  party--RPR 48.03%, PS/PPDG/DVG 24.49%, PCG 5.29%, DVD 5.73%; seats by
  party--RPR 25, PS/PPDG/DVG 12, PCG 2, DVD 2
  note: Guadeloupe elects two representatives to the French Senate;
  elections last held NA September 1995 (next to be held NA September
  2004); percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR 1, FGPS 1;
  Guadeloupe elects four representatives to the French National
  Assembly; elections last held 25 May--1 June 1997 (next to be held NA
  2002); percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--FGPS 2, RPR 1,
  PPDG 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel with
  jurisdiction over Guadeloupe, French Guiana, and Martinique

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR
  REIETTE]; Christian Movement for the Liberation of Guadeloupe or
  IBO]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Movement for Independent
  Guadeloupe or MPGI; General Union of Guadeloupe Workers or UGTG;
  General Federation of Guadeloupe Workers or CGT-G; Christian
  Movement for the Liberation of Guadeloupe or KLPG

International organization participation: FZ, WCL, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department
  of France)

Flag description: three horizontal bands, a narrow green band
  (top), a wide red band, and a narrow green band; the green bands are
  separated from the red band by two narrow white stripes; a
  five-pointed gold star is centered in the red band toward the hoist
  side; the flag of France is used for official occasions



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy depends on agriculture, tourism,
  light industry, and services. It also depends on France for large
  subsidies and imports. Tourism is a key industry, with most tourists
  from the US; an increasingly large number of cruise ships visit the
  islands. The traditional sugarcane crop is slowly being replaced by
  other crops, such as bananas (which now supply about 50% of export
  earnings), eggplant, and flowers. Other vegetables and root crops
  are cultivated for local consumption, although Guadeloupe is still
  dependent on imported food, mainly from France. Light industry
  features sugar and rum production. Most manufactured goods and fuel
  are imported. Unemployment is especially high among the young.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$3.7 billion (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$9,000 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 9%
  services: 85% (1993 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.7% (1990)

Labor force: 128,000

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 15%, industry 20%,
  services 65% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 29.5% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $200 million
  expenditures: $350 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: construction, cement, rum, sugar, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 960 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 960 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, sugarcane, tropical fruits and
  vegetables; cattle, pigs, goats

Exports: $133 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: bananas, sugar, rum

Exports--partners: France 75%, Martinique 13% (1994)

Imports: $1.7 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, fuels, vehicles, clothing and
  other consumer goods, construction materials

Imports--partners: France 64%, EU 13%, Martinique 4%, US, Japan
  (1994)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?substantial annual French
  subsidies

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155(1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 64,916 (1984 est.)

Telephone system: domestic facilities inadequate
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  microwave radio relay to Antigua and Barbuda, Dominica, and
  Martinique

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 8 (private stations licensed
  to broadcast FM 30), shortwave 0

Radios: 100,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (in addition, there are several
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 150,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: NA km; privately owned, narrow-gauge plantation lines

Highways:
  total: 2,082 km
  paved: 1,742 km
  unpaved: 340 km (1985 est.)
  note: in 1996 there were a total of 3,200 km of roads

Ports and harbors: Basse-Terre, Gustavia (on Saint Barthelemy),
  Marigot, Pointe-a-Pitre

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 8
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: French Forces, Gendarmerie

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Guam
----





Geography



Location: Oceania, island in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to the Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 13 28 N, 144 47 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 541.3 sq km
  land: 541.3 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: three times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 125.5 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; generally warm and humid, moderated by
  northeast trade winds; dry season from January to June, rainy season
  from July to December; little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: volcanic origin, surrounded by coral reefs; relatively
  flat coralline limestone plateau (source of most fresh water), with
  steep coastal cliffs and narrow coastal plains in north, low-rising
  hills in center, mountains in south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Lamlam 406 m

Natural resources: fishing (largely undeveloped), tourism
  (especially from Japan)

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: 11%
  permanent pastures: 15%
  forests and woodland: 18%
  other: 45% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent squalls during rainy season; relatively
  rare, but potentially very destructive typhoons (especially in
  August)

Environment--current issues: extirpation of native bird population
  by the rapid proliferation of the brown tree snake, an exotic species

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: largest and southernmost island in the Mariana
  Islands archipelago; strategic location in western North Pacific
  Ocean



People



Population: 151,716 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 27,301; female 25,106)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 47,691; female 42,714)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 4,486; female 4,418) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.67% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.52 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.35 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.45 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.11 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.12 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.02 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.81 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.78 years
  male: 74.6 years
  female: 81.31 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.92 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Guamanian(s)
  adjective: Guamanian

Ethnic groups: Chamorro 47%, Filipino 25%, white 10%, Chinese,
  Japanese, Korean, and other 18%

Religions: Roman Catholic 98%, other 2%

Languages: English, Chamorro, Japanese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 99% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of Guam
  conventional short form: Guam

Data code: GQ

Dependency status: organized, unincorporated territory of the US
  with policy relations between Guam and the US under the jurisdiction
  of the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of the Interior

Government type: NA

Capital: Hagatna (Agana)

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US)

Independence: none (territory of the US)

National holiday: Guam Discovery Day (first Monday in March)
  (1521); Liberation Day, 21 July (1944)

Constitution: Organic Act of 1 August 1950

Legal system: modeled on US; US federal laws apply

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; US citizens, but do not
  vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON of the US (since
  20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
  1993)
  head of government: Governor Carl GUTIERREZ (since 8 November 1994)
  and Lieutenant Governor Madeleine BORDALLO (since 8 November 1994)
  cabinet: executive departments; heads appointed by the governor with
  the consent of the Guam legislature
  elections: US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for a four-year term; governor and lieutenant governor
  elected on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms;
  election last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November 2002)
  election results: Carl GUTIERREZ reelected governor; percent of
  vote--Carl GUTIERREZ (Democrat) 53.2%, Joseph ADA (Republican) 46.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislature (15 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve two-year terms)
  elections: last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Republican 12, Democratic 3
  note: Guam elects one delegate to the US House of Representatives;
  election last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November
  2000); results--Robert UNDERWOOD was reelected as delegate; percent
  of vote by party--NA; seats by party--Democratic 1

Judicial branch: Federal District Court (judge is appointed by
  the president); Territorial Superior Court (judges appointed for
  eight-year terms by the governor)

Political parties and leaders: Republican Party (controls the

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate),
  Interpol (subbureau), IOC, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: territorial flag is dark blue with a narrow red
  border on all four sides; centered is a red-bordered, pointed,
  vertical ellipse containing a beach scene, outrigger canoe with
  sail, and a palm tree with the word GUAM superimposed in bold red
  letters; US flag is the national flag



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy depends mainly on US military
  spending and on tourist revenue. Over the past 20 years, the tourist
  industry has grown rapidly, creating a construction boom for new
  hotels and the expansion of older ones. More than 1 million tourists
  visit Guam each year. The industry suffered a setback in 1998
  because of the continuing Japanese recession; the Japanese normally
  make up almost 90% of the tourists. Most food and industrial goods
  are imported. Guam faces the problem of building up the civilian
  economic sector to offset the impact of military downsizing.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$3 billion (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$19,000 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4% (1992 est.)

Labor force: 65,660 (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: federal and territorial government
  31%, private 69% (trade 21%, services 33%, construction 12%, other
  3%) (1995)

Unemployment rate: 2% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $524.3 million
  expenditures: $361.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995)

Industries: US military, tourism, construction, transshipment
  services, concrete products, printing and publishing, food
  processing, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 800 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 800 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruits, copra, vegetables; eggs, pork,
  poultry, beef

Exports: $86.1 million (f.o.b., 1992)

Exports--commodities: mostly transshipments of refined petroleum
  products, construction materials, fish, food and beverage products

Exports--partners: US 25%

Imports: $202.4 million (c.i.f., 1992)

Imports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products, food,
  manufactured goods

Imports--partners: US 23%, Japan 19%, other 58%

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?although Guam receives no
  foreign aid, it does receive large transfer payments from the
  general revenues of the US Federal Treasury into which Guamanians
  pay no income or excise taxes; under the provisions of a special law
  of Congress, the Guam Treasury, rather than the US Treasury,
  receives federal income taxes paid by military and civilian Federal
  employees stationed in Guam

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 74,317 (March 1997)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean);
  submarine cables to US and Japan

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 206,000 (1994)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (1997)

Televisions: 97,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 885 km
  paved: 675 km
  unpaved: 210 km
  note: there is another 685 km of roads classified non-public,
  including roads located on federal government installations

Ports and harbors: Apra Harbor

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Guatemala
---------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
  Honduras and Belize and bordering the North Pacific Ocean, between
  El Salvador and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 15 30 N, 90 15 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 108,890 sq km
  land: 108,430 sq km
  water: 460 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,687 km
  border countries: Belize 266 km, El Salvador 203 km, Honduras 256
  km, Mexico 962 km

Coastline: 400 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in lowlands; cooler in highlands

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow coastal plains and rolling
  limestone plateau (Peten)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Volcan Tajumulco 4,211 m

Natural resources: petroleum, nickel, rare woods, fish, chicle

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 24%
  forests and woodland: 54%
  other: 5% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: numerous volcanoes in mountains, with occasional
  violent earthquakes; Caribbean coast subject to hurricanes and other
  tropical storms

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
  pollution; Hurricane Mitch damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertication, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: no natural harbors on west coast



People



Population: 12,335,580 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 2,688,402; female 2,578,934)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 3,312,360; female 3,314,102)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 207,014; female 234,768) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.68% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 35.57 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.8 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.93 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.88 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 46.15 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 66.45 years
  male: 63.78 years
  female: 69.24 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.74 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Guatemalan(s)
  adjective: Guatemalan

Ethnic groups: Mestizo (mixed Amerindian-Spanish--in local Spanish
  called Ladino) 56%, Amerindian or predominantly Amerindian 44%

Religions: Roman Catholic, Protestant, traditional Mayan

Languages: Spanish 60%, Amerindian languages 40% (23 Amerindian
  languages, including Quiche, Cakchiquel, Kekchi)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 55.6%
  male: 62.5%
  female: 48.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Guatemala
  conventional short form: Guatemala
  local long form: Republica de Guatemala
  local short form: Guatemala

Data code: GT

Government type: republic

Capital: Guatemala

Administrative divisions: 22 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento); Alta Verapaz, Baja Verapaz, Chimaltenango,
  Chiquimula, El Progreso, Escuintla, Guatemala, Huehuetenango,
  Izabal, Jalapa, Jutiapa, Peten, Quetzaltenango, Quiche, Retalhuleu,
  Sacatepequez, San Marcos, Santa Rosa, Solola, Suchitepequez,
  Totonicapan, Zacapa

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 31 May 1985, effective 14 January 1986
  note: suspended 25 May 1993 by President SERRANO; reinstated 5 June
  1993 following ouster of president

Legal system: civil law system; judicial review of legislative
  acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen (since 14
  January 1996); Vice President Luis Alberto FLORES Asturias (since 14
  January 1996); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  head of government: President Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen (since 14
  January 1996); Vice President Luis Alberto FLORES Asturias (since 14
  January 1996); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers named by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 12 November 1995; runoff held 7 January 1996
  (next to be held NA November 1999)
  election results: Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen elected president;
  percent of vote--Alvaro Enrique ARZU Irigoyen (PAN) 51.2%, Jorge
  PORTILLO Cabrera (FRG) 48.8%

Legislative branch: unicameral Congress of the Republic or
  Congreso de la Republica (80 seats; members are elected by popular
  vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held on 12 November 1995 (next to be held in
  November 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PAN
  43, FRG 21, FDNG 6, DCG 4, UCN 3, UD 2, MLN 1
  note: on 11 November 1993 the congress approved a procedure that
  reduced its number from 116 seats to 80; the procedure provided for
  a special election in mid-1994 to elect an interim congress of 80
  members to serve until replaced in the November 1995 general
  election; the plan was approved in a general referendum in January
  1994 and the special election was held on 14 August 1994

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justicia); additionally the Court of Constitutionality is presided
  over by the president of the Supreme Court, judges are elected for a
  five-year term by Congress

Political parties and leaders: National Centrist Union or UCN
  ARRIAGA Martinez]; Guatemalan National Revolutionary Union or URNG

Political pressure groups and leaders: Coordinating Committee of
  Agricultural, Commercial, Industrial, and Financial Associations or
  CACIF; Mutual Support Group or GAM; Agrarian Owners Group or UNAGRO;
  Committee for Campesino Unity or CUC; Alliance Against Impunity or
  AAI

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, CCC, ECLAC,
  FAO, G-24, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW,
  PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William STIXRUD
  chancery: 2220 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Donald J. PLANTY
  embassy: 7-01 Avenida de la Reforma, Zone 10, Guatemala City
  mailing address: APO AA 34024

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of light blue (hoist
  side), white, and light blue with the coat of arms centered in the
  white band; the coat of arms includes a green and red quetzal (the
  national bird) and a scroll bearing the inscription LIBERTAD 15 DE
  SEPTIEMBRE DE 1821 (the original date of independence from Spain)
  all superimposed on a pair of crossed rifles and a pair of crossed
  swords and framed by a wreath



Economy



Economy--overview: The agricultural sector accounts for one-fourth
  of GDP and two-thirds of exports and employs more than half of the
  labor force. Coffee, sugar, and bananas are the main products.
  Manufacturing and construction account for one-fifth of GDP. Since
  assuming office in January 1996, President ARZU has worked to
  implement a program of economic liberalization and political
  modernization. The signing of the peace accords in December 1996,
  which ended 36 years of civil war, removed a major obstacle to
  foreign investment. In 1998, Hurricane Mitch caused relatively
  little damage to Guatemala compared to its neighbors. Nevertheless,
  growth will be somewhat smaller due to the storm. Remaining
  challenges include increasing government revenues, and negotiating a
  program with the IMF.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$45.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 24%
  industry: 21%
  services: 55% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.6%
  highest 10%: 46.6% (1989)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.4% (1998)

Labor force: 3.32 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 58%, services 14%,
  manufacturing 14%, commerce 7%, construction 4%, transport 2.6%,
  utilities 0.3%, mining 0.1% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 5.2% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA

Industries: sugar, textiles and clothing, furniture, chemicals,
  petroleum, metals, rubber, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 1.9% (1996)

Electricity--production: 3.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 29.03%
  hydro: 70.97%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, corn, bananas, coffee, beans,
  cardamom; cattle, sheep, pigs, chickens

Exports: $2.9 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: coffee, sugar, bananas, cardamom, petroleum

Exports--partners: US 37%, El Salvador 13%, Honduras 7%, Costa
  Rica 5%, Germany 5%

Imports: $3.3 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: fuel and petroleum products, machinery,
  grain, fertilizers, motor vehicles

Imports--partners: US 44%, Mexico 10%, Venezuela 4.6%, Japan,
  Germany

Debt--external: $3.38 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $211.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 quetzal (Q) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: quetzales (Q) per US$1--6.7284 (January 1999),
  6.3947 (1998), 6.0653 (1997), 6.0495 (1996), 5.8103 (1995), 5.7512
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 210,000 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: fairly modern network centered in the city of
  Guatemala
  domestic: NA
  international: connected to Central American Microwave System;
  satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 91, FM 0, shortwave 15

Radios: 400,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6 (in addition, there are 17
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 475,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 884 km (102 km privately owned)
  narrow gauge: 884 km 0.914-m gauge (single track)

Highways:
  total: 13,100 km
  paved: 3,616 km (including 140 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 9,484 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 260 km navigable year round; additional 730 km
  navigable during high-water season

Pipelines: crude oil 275 km

Ports and harbors: Champerico, Puerto Barrios, Puerto Quetzal,
  San Jose, Santo Tomas de Castilla

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 478 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 466
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
  914 to 1,523 m: 124
  under 914 m: 332 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,915,169 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,903,382 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 134,964 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $124 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.7% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: border with Belize in dispute

Illicit drugs: transit country for cocaine shipments; minor
  producer of illicit opium poppy and cannabis for the international
  drug trade; active eradication program of cannabis crop effectively
  eliminated in 1996



======================================================================




@Guernsey
--------





Geography



Location: Western Europe, islands in the English Channel,
  northwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 49 28 N, 2 35 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 194 sq km
  land: 194 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Alderney, Guernsey, Herm, Sark, and some other
  smaller islands

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 50 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: temperate with mild winters and cool summers; about 50%
  of days are overcast

Terrain: mostly level with low hills in southwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Sark 114 m

Natural resources: cropland

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: large, deepwater harbor at Saint Peter Port



People



Population: 65,386 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 6,012; female 5,875)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 21,287; female 22,165)
  65 years and over: 16% (male 4,069; female 5,978) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.27% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.16 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.44 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 8.01 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.42 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.72 years
  male: 75.78 years
  female: 81.77 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.74 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Channel Islander(s)
  adjective: Channel Islander

Ethnic groups: UK and Norman-French descent

Religions: Anglican, Roman Catholic, Presbyterian, Baptist,
  Congregational, Methodist

Languages: English, French, Norman-French dialect spoken in
  country districts

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Bailiwick of Guernsey
  conventional short form: Guernsey

Data code: GK

Dependency status: British crown dependency

Government type: NA

Capital: Saint Peter Port

Administrative divisions: none (British crown dependency)

Independence: none (British crown dependency)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 9 May (1945)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
  practice

Legal system: English law and local statute; justice is
  administered by the Royal Court

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  head of government: Lieutenant Governor Sir John COWARD (since NA
  1994) and Bailiff Sir Graham Martyn DOREY (since NA February 1992)
  cabinet: Advisory and Finance Committee appointed by the Assembly of
  the States
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; lieutenant governor
  appointed by the monarch; bailiff appointed by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the States (60
  seats--33 elected by popular vote; members serve six-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 April 1994 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--all independents

Judicial branch: Royal Court

Political parties and leaders: none; all independents

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (British crown
  dependency)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (British crown
  dependency)

Flag description: white with the red cross of Saint George
  (patron saint of England) extending to the edges of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Financial services?banking, fund management,
  insurance, etc.--account for about 55% of total income in this tiny
  Channel Island economy. Tourism, manufacturing, and horticulture,
  mainly tomatoes and cut flowers, have been declining. Light tax and
  death duties make Guernsey a popular tax haven. The evolving
  economic integration of the EU nations is changing the rules of the
  game under which Guernsey operates.

GDP: $NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: $NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7% (1988)

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 3%-4% (1994 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $277.9 million
  expenditures: $248.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995 est.)

Industries: tourism, banking

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: tomatoes, greenhouse flowers, sweet
  peppers, eggplant, fruit; Guernsey cattle

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: tomatoes, flowers and ferns, sweet peppers,
  eggplant, other vegetables

Exports--partners: UK (regarded as internal trade)

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: coal, gasoline, oil, machinery and equipment

Imports--partners: UK (regarded as internal trade)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Guernsey (LG) pound = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Guernsey pounds (LG) per US$1--0.6057 (January
  1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995),
  0.6529 (1994); note--the Guernsey pound is at par with the British
  pound

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 41,850 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: 1 submarine cable

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Saint Peter Port, Saint Sampson

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Guinea
------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Guinea-Bissau and Sierra Leone

Geographic coordinates: 11 00 N, 10 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 245,860 sq km
  land: 245,860 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,399 km
  border countries: Guinea-Bissau 386 km, Cote d'Ivoire 610 km,
  Liberia 563 km, Mali 858 km, Senegal 330 km, Sierra Leone 652 km

Coastline: 320 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy season
  (June to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season (December to
  May) with northeasterly harmattan winds

Terrain: generally flat coastal plain, hilly to mountainous
  interior

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Nimba 1,752 m

Natural resources: bauxite, iron ore, diamonds, gold, uranium,
  hydropower, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 22%
  forests and woodland: 59%
  other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 930 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan haze may reduce
  visibility during dry season

Environment--current issues: deforestation; inadequate supplies of
  potable water; desertification; soil contamination and erosion;
  overfishing, overpopulation in forest region

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 7,538,953 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 1,640,158; female 1,653,184)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 1,974,849; female 2,068,221)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 83,859; female 118,682) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.82% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 40.62 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 17.3 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -15.12 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: over the years Guinea has received up to several hundred
  thousand refugees from the civil wars in Liberia and Sierra Leone,
  some of whom are now returning to their own countries

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 126.32 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 46.5 years
  male: 44.02 years
  female: 49.06 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.53 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Guinean(s)
  adjective: Guinean

Ethnic groups: Peuhl 40%, Malinke 30%, Soussou 20%, smaller
  tribes 10%

Religions: Muslim 85%, Christian 8%, indigenous beliefs 7%

Languages: French (official), each tribe has its own language

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 35.9%
  male: 49.9%
  female: 21.9% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Guinea
  conventional short form: Guinea
  local long form: Republique de Guinee
  local short form: Guinee
  former: French Guinea

Data code: GV

Government type: republic

Capital: Conakry

Administrative divisions: 4 administrative regions (regions
  administrative, singular--region administrative) and 1 special zone
  (zone speciale)*; Conakry*, Guinee, Guinee-Forestiere, Haute-Guinee,
  Moyen-Guinee

Independence: 2 October 1958 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Second Republic, 3 April
  (1984)

Constitution: 23 December 1990 (Loi Fundamentale)

Legal system: based on French civil law system, customary law,
  and decree; legal codes currently being revised; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Lansana CONTE (head of military government
  since 5 April 1984, elected president 19 December 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Lamine SIDIME (since 8 March 1999)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  candidate must receive a majority of the votes cast to be elected
  president; election last held 14 December 1998 (next to be held NA
  December 2003); the prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Lansana CONTE reelected president; percent of
  vote--Lansana CONTE (PUP) 56%, Alpha CONDE (RPG) 16%, Mamadou Boye BA
  (UNR-PRP) 24%

Legislative branch: unicameral People's National Assembly or
  Assemblee Nationale Populaire (114 seats; members are elected by
  direct popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 11 June 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PUP
  71, RPG 19, PRP 9, UNR 9, UPG 2, PDG 1, UNP 1, PDG-RDA 1, other 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: political parties were legalized
  on 1 April 1992; of the more than 40 with legal status, the
  following won seats in the legislature in the 11 June 1995 elections
  other: Democratic Party of Guinea-African Democratic Rally or

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ISO (correspondent), ITU, MINURSO, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mohamed Aly THIAM
  chancery: 2112 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Tibor P. NAGY, Jr.
  embassy: Rue Ka 038, Conakry
  mailing address: B. P. 603, Conakry

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side),
  yellow, and green; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia;
  similar to the flag of Rwanda, which has a large black letter R
  centered in the yellow band



Economy



Economy--overview: Guinea possesses major mineral, hydropower, and
  agricultural resources, yet remains a poor underdeveloped nation.
  The agricultural sector employs 80% of the work force. Guinea
  possesses over 25% of the world's bauxite reserves and is the second
  largest bauxite producer. The mining sector accounted for about 75%
  of exports in 1998. Long-run improvements in government fiscal
  arrangements, literacy, and the legal framework are needed if the
  country is to move out of poverty. The government made encouraging
  progress in budget management in 1997-98. Except in the mining
  industry, foreign investment remains minimal but is expected to pick
  up in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,180 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 24%
  industry: 31%
  services: 45% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.9%
  highest 10%: 31.7% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.4 million (1983)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry and commerce
  11%, services 5.4%, civil service 3.6%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $553 million
  expenditures: $652 million, including capital expenditures of $317
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: bauxite, gold, diamonds; alumina refining; light
  manufacturing and agricultural processing industries

Industrial production growth rate: 3.2% (1994)

Electricity--production: 525 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 63.81%
  hydro: 36.19%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 525 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, coffee, pineapples, palm kernels,
  cassava (tapioca), bananas, sweet potatoes; cattle, sheep, goats;
  timber

Exports: $695 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: bauxite, alumina, diamonds, gold, coffee,
  fish, agricultural products

Exports--partners: Russia, US, Belgium, Ukraine, Ireland, Spain
  (1997)

Imports: $560 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: petroleum products, metals, machinery,
  transport equipment, textiles, grain and other foodstuffs (1997)

Imports--partners: France, Cote d'Ivoire, US, Belgium, Hong Kong
  (1997)

Debt--external: $3.15 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $433.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Guinean franc (FG) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Guinean francs (FG) per US$1--1,292.5 (January
  1999), 1,095.3 (1997), 1,004.0 (1996), 991.4 (1995), 976.6 (1994)
  note: the official exchange rate of the Guinean franc was set and
  quoted weekly against the US dollar until the end of October 1993;
  since 1 November 1994, the exchange rate is determined in the
  interbank market for foreign exchange

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 18,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: poor to fair system of open-wire lines, small
  radiotelephone communication stations, and new microwave radio relay
  system
  domestic: microwave radio relay and radiotelephone communication
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 257,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6 (1997)

Televisions: 65,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,086 km
  standard gauge: 279 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 807 km 1.000-m gauge (includes 662 km in common
  carrier service from Kankan to Conakry)

Highways:
  total: 30,500 km
  paved: 5,033 km
  unpaved: 25,467 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,295 km navigable by shallow-draft native craft

Ports and harbors: Boke, Conakry, Kamsar

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 15 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 10
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Republican Guard,
  Presidential Guard, paramilitary National Gendarmerie, National
  Police Force (Surete National)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,726,933 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 871,615 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $56 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Guinea-Bissau
-------------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Guinea and Senegal

Geographic coordinates: 12 00 N, 15 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 36,120 sq km
  land: 28,000 sq km
  water: 8,120 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than three times the size of
  Connecticut

Land boundaries:
  total: 724 km
  border countries: Guinea 386 km, Senegal 338 km

Coastline: 350 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; generally hot and humid; monsoonal-type rainy
  season (June to November) with southwesterly winds; dry season
  (December to May) with northeasterly harmattan winds

Terrain: mostly low coastal plain rising to savanna in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location in the northeast corner of the
  country 300 m

Natural resources: fish, timber, phosphates, bauxite, unexploited
  deposits of petroleum

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 38%
  forests and woodland: 38%
  other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 17 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dusty harmattan haze may reduce
  visibility during dry season; brush fires

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
  overgrazing; overfishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 1,234,555 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 42% (male 260,821; female 259,520)
  15-64 years: 55% (male 322,607; female 356,513)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 16,233; female 18,861) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.31% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 38.23 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 15.13 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 109.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 49.57 years
  male: 47.91 years
  female: 51.28 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.09 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Guinean (s)
  adjective: Guinean

Ethnic groups: African 99% (Balanta 30%, Fula 20%, Manjaca 14%,
  Mandinga 13%, Papel 7%), European and mulatto less than 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 50%, Muslim 45%, Christian 5%

Languages: Portuguese (official), Crioulo, African languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 53.9%
  male: 67.1%
  female: 40.7% (1997 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Guinea-Bissau
  conventional short form: Guinea-Bissau
  local long form: Republica da Guine-Bissau
  local short form: Guine-Bissau
  former: Portuguese Guinea

Data code: PU

Government type: republic, multiparty since mid-1991

Capital: Bissau

Administrative divisions: 9 regions (regioes, singular--regiao);
  Bafata, Biombo, Bissau, Bolama, Cacheu, Gabu, Oio, Quinara, Tombali
  note: Bolama may have been renamed Bolama/Bijagos

Independence: 24 September 1973 (unilaterally declared by
  Guinea-Bissau); 10 September 1974 (recognized by Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 September (1973)

Constitution: 16 May 1984, amended 4 May 1991, 4 December 1991,
  26 February 1993, 9 June 1993, and 1996

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Joao Bernardo VIEIRA (initially assumed
  power 14 November 1980 in a coup d'etat)
  head of government: Prime Minister Francisco FADUL (since NA
  November 1998); note--named in an agreement between President VIEIRA
  and a military-led junta which rebelled against the President
  FADUL's administration in June 1998
  cabinet: none; an interim National Unity Government was provided for
  in the agreement between President VIEIRA and the military junta and
  was scheduled be inaugurated in February 1999
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 3 July and 7 August 1994 (next to be held NA July
  1999); prime minister appointed by the president after consultation
  with party leaders in the legislature
  election results: Joao Bernardo VIEIRA elected president; percent of
  vote--Joao Bernardo VIEIRA 52%, Koumba YALLA 48%

Legislative branch: unicameral National People's Assembly or
  Assembleia Nacional Popular (100 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve a maximum of four years)
  elections: last held 3 July and 7 August 1994 (next to be held by NA)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PAIGC 46.0%, RGB-MB
  19.2%, PRS 10.3%, UM 12.8%, FLING 2.5%, PCD 5.3%, PUSD 2.9%, FCG
  0.2%, others 0.8%; seats by party--PAIGC 62, RGB 19, PRS 12, UM 6,
  FLING 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Supremo Tribunal da Justica,
  consists of 9 justices who are appointed by the president and serve
  at his pleasure, final court of appeals in criminal and civil cases;
  Regional Courts, one in each of nine regions, first court of appeals
  for sectoral court decisions, hear all felony cases and civil cases
  valued at over $1,000; 24 Sectoral Courts, judges are not
  necessarily trained lawyers, hear civil cases under $1,000 and
  misdemeanor criminal cases

Political parties and leaders: African Party for the Independence
  secretary general]; Front for the Liberation and Independence of
  president]; National Union for Democracy and Progress or UNDP
  president, Dr. Anne SAAD, secretary general]; United Social

International organization participation: ACCT (associate), ACP,
  AfDB, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, MONUA, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WAEMU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Henrique
  Adriano DA SILVA
  chancery: Suite 519, 1511 K Street, NW, Washington, DC 20005

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US Embassy suspended
  operations on 14 June 1998 in the midst of violent conflict between
  forces loyal to President VIEIRA and military-led junta

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of yellow (top) and
  green with a vertical red band on the hoist side; there is a black
  five-pointed star centered in the red band; uses the popular
  pan-African colors of Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: One of the 20 poorest countries in the world,
  Guinea-Bissau depends mainly on farming and fishing. Cashew crops
  have increased remarkably in recent years, and the country now ranks
  sixth in cashew production. Guinea-Bissau exports fish and seafood
  along with small amounts of peanuts, palm kernels, and timber. Rice
  is the major crop and staple food. However, intermittent fighting
  between Senegalese-backed government troops and a military junta
  destroyed much of the country's infrastructure and caused widespread
  damage to the economy in 1998. Before the war, trade reform and
  price liberalization were the most successful part of the country's
  structural adjustment program under IMF sponsorship. The tightening
  of monetary policy and the development of the private sector had
  also begun to reinvigorate the economy. Inflation dropped sharply in
  the first quarter of 1997. Membership in the WAMU (West African
  Monetary Union), begun in May 1997, was expected to support 5%
  annual growth and contribute to fiscal discipline. Because of high
  costs, the development of petroleum, phosphate, and other mineral
  resources was not a near-term prospect.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 54%
  industry: 11%
  services: 35% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 48.8% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.5%
  highest 10%: 42.4% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 25.6% (1997)

Labor force: 480,000

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget: $NA

Industries: agricultural products processing, beer, soft drinks

Industrial production growth rate: 2.6% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 40 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 40 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, corn, beans, cassava (tapioca),
  cashew nuts, peanuts, palm kernels, cotton; timber; fish

Exports: $25.8 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: cashews 95%, fish, peanuts, palm kernels,
  sawn lumber (1994)

Exports--partners: Spain 35%, India 30%, Thailand 10%, Italy 10%
  (1995)

Imports: $63 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, transport equipment, petroleum
  products, machinery and equipment (1994)

Imports--partners: Portugal 29.2%, Thailand 8.4%, Netherlands
  8.4%, US 7.5% (1996)

Debt--external: $953 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $115.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes; note--on 1 May 1997, Guinea-Bissau adopted as its currency
  the CFA franc following its membership into the BCEAO

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--566.65 (January 1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997);
  Guinea-Bissauan pesos (PG) per US$1-- 26,373 (1996), 18,073 (1995),
  12,892 (1994)
  note: as of 2 May 1997, Guinea-Bissau has adopted the CFA franc as
  the national currency following its membership in BCEAO

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 13,120 (1997 est.)

Telephone system: small system
  domestic: combination of microwave radio relay, open-wire lines,
  radiotelephone, and cellular communications
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 40,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 4,400 km
  paved: 453 km
  unpaved: 3,947 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: several rivers are accessible to coastal shipping

Ports and harbors: Bissau, Buba, Cacheu, Farim

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 30 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 27
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 22 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: People's Revolutionary Armed Force (FARP;
  includes Army, Navy, and Air Force), paramilitary force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 284,998 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 162,485 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $8 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.8% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Guyana
------





Geography



Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic
  Ocean, between Suriname and Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 5 00 N, 59 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 214,970 sq km
  land: 196,850 sq km
  water: 18,120 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Idaho

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,462 km
  border countries: Brazil 1,119 km, Suriname 600 km, Venezuela 743 km

Coastline: 459 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the outer edge of the continental
  margin
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, moderated by northeast trade
  winds; two rainy seasons (May to mid-August, mid-November to
  mid-January)

Terrain: mostly rolling highlands; low coastal plain; savanna in
  south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Roraima 2,835 m

Natural resources: bauxite, gold, diamonds, hardwood timber,
  shrimp, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 84%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flash floods are a constant threat during rainy
  seasons

Environment--current issues: water pollution from sewage and
  agricultural and industrial chemicals; deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 705,156 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 109,156; female 105,017)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 230,624; female 227,677)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 14,684; female 17,998) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.32% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 18.23 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.04 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -12.43 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 48.64 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 61.82 years
  male: 59.15 years
  female: 64.61 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.09 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Guyanese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Guyanese

Ethnic groups: East Indian 49%, black 32%, mixed 12%, Amerindian
  6%, white and Chinese 1%

Religions: Christian 57%, Hindu 33%, Muslim 9%, other 1%

Languages: English, Amerindian dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 98.1%
  male: 98.6%
  female: 97.5% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Co-operative Republic of Guyana
  conventional short form: Guyana
  former: British Guiana

Data code: GY

Government type: republic

Capital: Georgetown

Administrative divisions: 10 regions; Barima-Waini,
  Cuyuni-Mazaruni, Demerara-Mahaica, East Berbice-Corentyne, Essequibo
  Islands-West Demerara, Mahaica-Berbice, Pomeroon-Supenaam,
  Potaro-Siparuni, Upper Demerara-Berbice, Upper Takutu-Upper Essequibo

Independence: 26 May 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Republic Day, 23 February (1970)

Constitution: 6 October 1980

Legal system: based on English common law with certain admixtures
  of Roman-Dutch law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Janet JAGAN (since NA December 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Samuel HINDS (since NA December
  1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president,
  responsible to the legislature
  elections: president elected by the majority party in the National
  Assembly after legislative elections, which must be held within five
  years; legislative elections last held 15 December 1997 (next to be
  held NA 2000; this date was part of a negotiated settlement between
  the two main political parties following a dispute over the December
  elections); prime minister appointed by the president

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (65 seats, 53
  popularly elected; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held on 15 December 1997 (next to be held by March
  2000; this date was negotiated following a dispute over the December
  elections)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PPP 54%, PNC 41%, AFG 1%,
  TUF 1%; seats by party--PPP 36, PNC 25, AFG 2, TUF 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Judicature

Political parties and leaders: People's Progressive Party or PPP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Trades Union Congress or
  TUC; Guyana Council of Indian Organizations or GCIO; Civil Liberties
  Action Committee or CLAC
  note: the latter two organizations are small and active but not well
  organized

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC,
  CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
  IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OIC (observer), OPANAL,
  OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dr. Ali Odeen ISHMAEL
  chancery: 2490 Tracy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James F. MACK
  embassy: 99-100 Young and Duke Streets, Kingston, Georgetown
  mailing address: P. O. Box 10507, Georgetown

Flag description: green, with a red isosceles triangle (based on
  the hoist side) superimposed on a long, yellow arrowhead; there is a
  narrow, black border between the red and yellow, and a narrow, white
  border between the yellow and the green



Economy



Economy--overview: In 1997, Guyana, one of the poorest countries
  in the Western Hemisphere, posted its sixth straight year of
  economic growth of 5% or better, with the advance led by gold and
  bauxite mining and by sugar growing. Favorable growth factors have
  included expansion in the key agricultural and mining sectors, a
  more favorable atmosphere for business initiative, a more realistic
  exchange rate, a moderate inflation rate, and the continued support
  of international organizations. However, a severe drought and
  political turmoil following the 1997 elections contributed to a
  negative growth rate for 1998. Serious underlying economic problems
  will continue. Electricity has been in short supply and constitutes
  a major barrier to future gains in national output. The government
  must persist in efforts to manage its sizable external debt and
  extend its privatization program.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 37%
  industry: 22%
  services: 41% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.1% (1998)

Labor force: 245,492 (1992)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture, hunting and forestry
  30.2%, commerce 16%, manufacturing 11% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 12% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $253.7 million
  expenditures: $304.1 million, including capital expenditures of
  $108.8 million (1997 est.)

Industries: bauxite, sugar, rice milling, timber, fishing
  (shrimp), textiles, gold mining

Industrial production growth rate: 7.1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 325 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 98.46%
  hydro: 1.54%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 339 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 14 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugar, rice, wheat, vegetable oils; beef,
  pork, poultry, dairy products; forest and fishery potential not
  exploited

Exports: $593.4 million (1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: sugar, gold, bauxite/alumina, rice, shrimp,
  molasses

Exports--partners: Canada 25.9%, US 20.4%, UK 22.7%, Netherlands
  Antilles 8.4%, Germany 4.3% (1996)

Imports: $641.6 million (1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: manufactures, machinery, petroleum, food

Imports--partners: US 27.6%, Trinidad and Tobago 17.7%,
  Netherlands Antilles 12.1%, UK 10.7%, Japan 4.2% (1996)

Debt--external: $1.5 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $84 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Guyanese dollar (G$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Guyanese dollars (G$) per US$1--163.7 (December
  1998), 150.5 (1998), 142.4 (1997), 140.4 (1996), 142.0 (1995), 138.3
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 33,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: fair system for long-distance calling
  domestic: microwave radio relay network for trunk lines
  international: tropospheric scatter to Trinidad; satellite earth
  station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 3, shortwave 1

Radios: 398,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 public station; two private
  stations relay US satellite services (1997)

Televisions: 32,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 88 km (all dedicated to ore transport)
  standard gauge: 40 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 48 km 0.914-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 7,970 km
  paved: 590 km
  unpaved: 7,380 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 6,000 km total of navigable waterways; Berbice,
  Demerara, and Essequibo Rivers are navigable by oceangoing vessels
  for 150 km, 100 km, and 80 km, respectively

Ports and harbors: Bartica, Georgetown, Linden, New Amsterdam,
  Parika

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,340 GRT/4,530
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 48 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 44
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 35 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Guyana Defense Force (GDF; includes Ground
  Forces, Coast Guard, and Air Corps), Guyana People's Militia (GPM),
  Guyana National Service (GNS), Guyana Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 202,509 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 152,839 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $7 million (1994)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.7% (1994)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: all of the area west of the Essequibo
  River claimed by Venezuela; Suriname claims area between New (Upper
  of the Courantyne)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for narcotics from South
  America--primarily Venezuela--to Europe and the US; producer of
  cannabis



======================================================================




@Haiti
-----





Geography



Location: Caribbean, western one-third of the island of
  Hispaniola, between the Caribbean Sea and the North Atlantic Ocean,
  west of the Dominican Republic

Geographic coordinates: 19 00 N, 72 25 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 27,750 sq km
  land: 27,560 sq km
  water: 190 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 275 km
  border countries: Dominican Republic 275 km

Coastline: 1,771 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: to depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; semiarid where mountains in east cut off trade
  winds

Terrain: mostly rough and mountainous

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Chaine de la Selle 2,680 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 20%
  permanent crops: 13%
  permanent pastures: 18%
  forests and woodland: 5%
  other: 44% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 750 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: lies in the middle of the hurricane belt and
  subject to severe storms from June to October; occasional flooding
  and earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: extensive deforestation (much of the
  remaining forested land is being cleared for agriculture and used as
  fuel); soil erosion; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation
  signed, but not ratified: Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: shares island of Hispaniola with Dominican
  Republic (western one-third is Haiti, eastern two-thirds is the
  Dominican Republic)



People



Population: 6,884,264 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 42% (male 1,464,529; female 1,420,772)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 1,783,884; female 1,932,240)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 140,932; female 141,907) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.53% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 32.55 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.97 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.26 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.99 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 97.64 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 51.65 years
  male: 49.53 years
  female: 53.88 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.59 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Haitian(s)
  adjective: Haitian

Ethnic groups: black 95%, mulatto plus white 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 80%, Protestant 16% (Baptist 10%,
  Pentecostal 4%, Adventist 1%, other 1%), none 1%, other 3% (1982)
  note: roughly one-half of the population also practices Voodoo

Languages: French (official) 20%, Creole

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 45%
  male: 48%
  female: 42.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Haiti
  conventional short form: Haiti
  local long form: Republique d'Haiti
  local short form: Haiti

Data code: HA

Government type: republic

Capital: Port-au-Prince

Administrative divisions: 9 departments, (departements,
  singular--departement); Artibonite, Centre, Grand'Anse, Nord,
  Nord-Est, Nord-Ouest, Ouest, Sud, Sud-Est

Independence: 1 January 1804 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 January (1804)

Constitution: approved March 1987; suspended June 1988, with most
  articles reinstated March 1989; in October 1991, government claimed
  to be observing the constitution; return to constitutional rule,
  October 1994

Legal system: based on Roman civil law system; accepts compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Rene Garcia PREVAL (since 7 February 1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Rosny SMARTH resigned June 1997;
  currently no prime minister; ratification of a new prime minister
  held up in political gridlock stemming from controversy over the 6
  April 1997 elections
  cabinet: Cabinet; chosen by the prime minister in consultation with
  the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 17 December 1995 (next to be held by December
  2000); prime minister appointed by the president, ratified by the
  Congress
  election results: Rene Garcia PREVAL elected president; percent of
  vote--Rene Garcia PREVAL 88%, Leon JEUNE 2.5%, Victor BENOIT 2.3%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale consists of the Senate (27 seats; members serve six-year
  terms; one-third elected every two years) and the Chamber of
  Deputies (83 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 25 June 1995, with reruns on 13 August
  and runoffs on 17 September (election held for nine seats 6 April
  1997; results disputed and runoffs postponed indefinitely); Chamber
  of Deputies--last held 25 June 1995, with reruns on 13 August and
  runoffs on 17 September (next Senate and Chamber of Deputies
  elections due November 1998 but delayed indefinitely)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--OPL 7, FL-leaning 7, independents 3, vacant 10; Chamber of
  Deputies--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--OPL 32,
  antineoliberal bloc 24, minor parties and independents 22, vacant 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour de Cassation)

Political parties and leaders: Lavalas Family or FL
  ROUMAIN]; Alliance for the Liberation and Advancement of Haiti or

Political pressure groups and leaders: Roman Catholic Church;
  Confederation of Haitian Workers or CTH; Federation of Workers Trade
  Unions or FOS; Autonomous Haitian Workers or CATH; National Popular
  Assembly or APN; Papaye Peasants Movement or MPP; Popular
  Organizations Gathering Power or PROP

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, Caricom
  (observer), CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ITU, LAES, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Louis
  Harold JOSEPH
  chancery: 2311 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Miami, New York, and San Juan
  (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Timothy Michael CARNEY
  embassy: 5 Harry Truman Boulevard, Port-au-Prince
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1761, Port-au-Prince

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and
  red with a centered white rectangle bearing the coat of arms, which
  contains a palm tree flanked by flags and two cannons above a scroll
  bearing the motto L'UNION FAIT LA FORCE (Union Makes Strength)



Economy



Economy--overview: About 75% of the population lives in abject
  poverty. Nearly 70% of all Haitians depend on the agriculture
  sector, which consists mainly of small-scale subsistence farming and
  employs about two-thirds of the economically active work force. The
  country has experienced little job creation since President PREVAL
  took office in February 1996, although the informal economy is
  growing. Failure to reach agreements with international sponsors
  have denied Haiti badly needed budget and development assistance.
  Meeting aid conditions in 1999 will be especially challenging in the
  face of mounting popular criticism of reforms.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 42%
  industry: 14%
  services: 44% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 75% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 3.6 million (1995)
  note: shortage of skilled labor, unskilled labor abundant (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 66%, services 25%,
  industry 9%

Unemployment rate: 60% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $323 million
  expenditures: $363 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: sugar refining, flour milling, textiles, cement,
  tourism, light assembly industries based on imported parts

Industrial production growth rate: 0.6% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 415 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 60.24%
  hydro: 39.76%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 415 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, mangoes, sugarcane, rice, corn,
  sorghum; wood

Exports: $110 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: light manufactures 80.5%, coffee 7.6%, other
  agriculture 7.2%

Exports--partners: US 76%, EU 19% (1997)

Imports: $486 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machines and manufactures 50%, food and
  beverages 39%, petroleum products 2%, chemicals 5%, fats and oils 4%

Imports--partners: US 60%, EU 12% (1997)

Debt--external: $1 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $730.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 gourde (G) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: gourdes (G) per US$1--16.778 (January 1999),
  16.205 (1998), 17.311 (1997), 15.093 (1996), 16.160 (1995), 12.947
  (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 50,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: domestic facilities barely adequate;
  international facilities slightly better
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 33, FM 0, shortwave 2

Radios: 320,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in addition, there is a cable
  TV station) (1997)

Televisions: 32,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 40 km (single track; privately owned industrial line)--closed
  in early 1990s
  narrow gauge: 40 km 0.760-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 4,160 km
  paved: 1,011 km
  unpaved: 3,149 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: NEGL; less than 100 km navigable

Ports and harbors: Cap-Haitien, Gonaives, Jacmel, Jeremie, Les
  Cayes, Miragoane, Port-au-Prince, Port-de-Paix, Saint-Marc

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 13 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Haitian National Police (HNP)
  note: the regular Haitian Army, Navy, and Air Force have been
  demobilized but still exist on paper until/unless constitutionally
  abolished

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,541,402 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 835,578 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 80,158 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA; note?mainly for police
  and security activities

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: the Haitian Armed Forces have been demobilized and
  replaced by the Haitian National Police



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims US-administered Navassa Island

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana en
  route to the US and Europe



======================================================================




@Heard Island and McDonald Islands
---------------------------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, islands in the Indian Ocean, about
  two-thirds of the way from Madagascar to Antarctica

Geographic coordinates: 53 06 S, 72 31 E

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
  total: 412 sq km
  land: 412 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than 2 times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 101.9 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: antarctic

Terrain: Heard Island--bleak and mountainous, with a quiescent
  volcano; McDonald Islands--small and rocky

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Big Ben 2,745 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: Heard Island is dominated by a dormant volcano
  called Big Ben

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: primarily used for research stations



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of Heard Island and McDonald
  Islands
  conventional short form: Heard Island and McDonald Islands

Data code: HM

Dependency status: territory of Australia; administered from
  Canberra by the Department of the Environment, Sport and Territories

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of
  Australia)

Flag description: the flag of Australia is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Australia



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Holy See (Vatican City)
-----------------------





Introduction



Background: Popes in their secular role ruled much of the Italian
  peninsula, including Rome, for about a thousand years, until 1870. A
  dispute between a series of popes and Italy was settled in 1929 by
  treaties that recognized the Vatican City as an independent
  sovereignty and gave Roman Catholicism special status in Italy. The
  US established formal diplomatic relationships with the Vatican in
  1984. Present issues in the Vatican concern the ill health of Pope
  John Paul II, who turns 79 on 20 May 1999, inter-religious dialogue
  and reconciliation, and the adjustment of church doctrine in an era
  of rapid change. About 1 billion people worldwide profess the Roman
  Catholic faith.



Geography



Location: Southern Europe, an enclave of Rome (Italy)

Geographic coordinates: 41 54 N, 12 27 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 0.44 sq km
  land: 0.44 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.7 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 3.2 km
  border countries: Italy 3.2 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; mild, rainy winters (September to mid-May)
  with hot, dry summers (May to September)

Terrain: low hill

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: unnamed location 19 m
  highest point: unnamed location 75 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (urban area)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution, Environmental Modification

Geography--note: urban; landlocked; enclave of Rome, Italy;
  world's smallest state; outside the Vatican City, 13 buildings in
  Rome and Castel Gandolfo (the pope's summer residence) enjoy
  extraterritorial rights



People



Population: 870 (July 1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.15% (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: none
  adjective: none

Ethnic groups: Italians, Swiss, other

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: Italian, Latin, various other languages



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: The Holy See (State of the Vatican City)
  conventional short form: Holy See (Vatican City)
  local long form: Santa Sede (Stato della Citta del Vaticano)
  local short form: Santa Sede (Citta del Vaticano)

Data code: VT

Government type: monarchical-sacerdotal state

Capital: Vatican City

Independence: 11 February 1929 (from Italy)

National holiday: Installation Day of the Pope (John Paul II), 22
  October (1978)

Constitution: Apostolic Constitution of 1967 (effective 1 March
  1968)

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: limited to cardinals less than 80 years old

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Pope JOHN PAUL II (since 16 October 1978)
  head of government: Secretary of State Archbishop Angelo Cardinal
  SODANO (since 2 December 1990)
  cabinet: Pontifical Commission appointed by the pope
  elections: pope elected for life by the College of Cardinals;
  election last held 16 October 1978 (next to be held after the death
  of the current pope); secretary of state appointed by the pope
  election results: Karol WOJTYLA elected pope

Legislative branch: unicameral Pontifical Commission

Judicial branch: none; normally handled by Italy

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: none (exclusive of
  influence exercised by church officers)

International organization participation: IAEA, ICFTU, Intelsat,
  IOM (observer), ITU, OAS (observer), OPCW, OSCE, UN (observer),
  UNCTAD, UNHCR, UPU, WIPO, WToO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Apostolic Nuncio Archbishop Gabriel MONTALVO
  chancery: 3339 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Corrine C. BOGGS
  embassy: Villa Domiziana, Via Delle Terme Deciane 26, 00153 Rome
  mailing address: PSC 59, Box F, APO AE 09624

Flag description: two vertical bands of yellow (hoist side) and
  white with the crossed keys of Saint Peter and the papal miter
  centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: This unique, noncommercial economy is supported
  financially by contributions (known as Peter's Pence) from Roman
  Catholics throughout the world, the sale of postage stamps and
  tourist mementos, fees for admission to museums, and the sale of
  publications. The incomes and living standards of lay workers are
  comparable to, or somewhat better than, those of counterparts who
  work in the city of Rome.

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: dignitaries, priests, nuns, guards,
  and 3,000 lay workers who live outside the Vatican

Budget:
  revenues: $175.5 million
  expenditures: $175 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1994)

Industries: printing and production of a small amount of mosaics
  and staff uniforms; worldwide banking and financial activities

Electricity--production: 0 kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh; note?electricity supplied by Italy

Economic aid--recipient: none

Currency: 1 Vatican lira (VLit) = 100 centesimi

Exchange rates: Vatican lire (VLit) per US$1--1,688.7 (January
  1998), 1,736.2 (1998), 1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9
  (1995), 1,612.4 (1994); note--the Vatican lira is at par with the
  Italian lira which circulates freely

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2,000

Telephone system: automatic exchange
  domestic: tied into Italian system
  international: uses Italian system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1996)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 862 m; note--connects to Italy's network at Rome's Saint
  Peter's station
  narrow gauge: 862 m 1.435-m gauge

Highways: none; all city streets

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Italy; Swiss
  Papal Guards are posted at entrances to the Vatican City



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Honduras
--------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea, between
  Guatemala and Nicaragua and bordering the North Pacific Ocean,
  between El Salvador and Nicaragua

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 86 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 112,090 sq km
  land: 111,890 sq km
  water: 200 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,520 km
  border countries: Guatemala 256 km, El Salvador 342 km, Nicaragua
  922 km

Coastline: 820 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: natural extension of territory or to 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical in lowlands, temperate in mountains

Terrain: mostly mountains in interior, narrow coastal plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Cerro Las Minas 2,870 m

Natural resources: timber, gold, silver, copper, lead, zinc, iron
  ore, antimony, coal, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 15%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 14%
  forests and woodland: 54%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 740 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent, but generally mild, earthquakes;
  damaging hurricanes and floods along Caribbean coast

Environment--current issues: urban population expanding;
  deforestation results from logging and the clearing of land for
  agricultural purposes; further land degradation and soil erosion
  hastened by uncontrolled development and improper land use practices
  such as farming of marginal lands; mining activities polluting Lago
  de Yojoa (the country's largest source of fresh water) as well as
  several rivers and streams with heavy metals; severe Hurricane Mitch
  damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 5,997,327 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 41% (male 1,262,190; female 1,217,752)
  15-64 years: 55% (male 1,643,550; female 1,665,666)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 98,715; female 109,454) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.24% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 30.98 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.14 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.46 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 40.84 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.68 years
  male: 63.16 years
  female: 66.27 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.97 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Honduran(s)
  adjective: Honduran

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and European) 90%,
  Amerindian 7%, black 2%, white 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant minority

Languages: Spanish, Amerindian dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 72.7%
  male: 72.6%
  female: 72.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Honduras
  conventional short form: Honduras
  local long form: Republica de Honduras
  local short form: Honduras

Data code: HO

Government type: republic

Capital: Tegucigalpa

Administrative divisions: 18 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento) plus probable Central District (Tegucigalpa);
  Atlantida, Choluteca, Colon, Comayagua, Copan, Cortes, El Paraiso,
  Francisco Morazan, Gracias a Dios, Intibuca, Islas de la Bahia, La
  Paz, Lempira, Ocotepeque, Olancho, Santa Barbara, Valle, Yoro

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 11 January 1982, effective 20 January 1982

Legal system: rooted in Roman and Spanish civil law; some
  influence of English common law; accepts ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse (since 27
  January 1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  head of government: President Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse (since
  27 January 1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 30 November 1997 (next to be held NA November
  2001)
  election results: Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse elected president;
  percent of vote--Carlos Roberto FLORES Facusse (PLH) 53%, Nora de
  MELGAR (PNH) 42%, other 5%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Asamblea
  Nacional (128 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held on 30 November 1997 (next to be held November
  2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PLH 50%, PNH 42%, PINU-SD
  4%, PDCH 2%, other 2%; seats by party--PLH 70, PNH 55, PINU-SD 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justica), judges are elected for four-year terms by the National
  Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Party or PLH [Raphael
  MELGAR, president]; National Innovation and Unity Party-Social

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Association of
  Honduran Campesinos or ANACH; Honduran Council of Private Enterprise
  or COHEP; Confederation of Honduran Workers or CTH; National Union
  of Campesinos or UNC; General Workers Confederation or CGT; United
  Federation of Honduran Workers or FUTH; Committee for the Defense of
  Human Rights in Honduras or CODEH; Coordinating Committee of Popular
  Organizations or CCOP

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
  G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer),
  MINURSO, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  chancery: 3007 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)
  consulate(s): Boston, Detroit, and Jacksonville

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James Francis CREAGAN
  embassy: Avenida La Paz, Apartado Postal No. 3453, Tegucigalpa
  mailing address: American Embassy, APO AA 34022, Tegucigalpa

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  white, and blue with five blue five-pointed stars arranged in an X
  pattern centered in the white band; the stars represent the members
  of the former Federal Republic of Central America--Costa Rica, El
  Salvador, Guatemala, Honduras, and Nicaragua; similar to the flag of
  El Salvador, which features a round emblem encircled by the words
  REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA CENTRAL centered in the white
  band; also similar to the flag of Nicaragua, which features a
  triangle encircled by the word REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on top and
  AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom, centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Prior to Hurricane Mitch in the fall of 1998,
  Honduras had been pursuing a moderate economic reform program and
  had posted strong annual growth numbers. The storm has dramatically
  changed economic forecasts for Honduras, one of the poorest
  countries in Central America and the hardest hit by Mitch. Honduras
  sustained approximately $3 billion in damages and will probably see
  GDP shrink by 2% in 1999 and unemployment rise. Hardest hit was the
  all-important agricultural sector, which is responsible for the
  majority of exports. As a result, the trade deficit is likely to
  balloon in 1999 to $445 million. However, significant aid has helped
  to stabilize the country. In addition, the Paris Club and bilateral
  creditors have offered substantial debt relief, and Tegucigalpa is
  currently under consideration for inclusion in the IMF-World Bank
  Highly Indebted Poor Countries Initiative (HIPC). Additional
  financing will be needed to restore the economy to its pre-Mitch
  level.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$14.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 20%
  industry: 19%
  services: 61% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 50% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.2%
  highest 10%: 42.1% (1996)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 14.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.3 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 37%, services 39%,
  industry 24% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 6.3% (1997); underemployed 30% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $655 million
  expenditures: $850 million, including capital expenditures of $150
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: sugar, coffee, textiles, clothing, wood products

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (1992 est.)

Electricity--production: 2.73 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 12.09%
  hydro: 87.91%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 2.734 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 4 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, coffee, citrus; beef; timber;
  shrimp

Exports: $1.3 billion (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: bananas, coffee, shrimp, lobster, minerals,
  meat, lumber

Exports--partners: US 54%, Germany 7%, Belgium 5%, Japan 4%, Spain
  3% (1995)

Imports: $1.8 billion (c.i.f. 1996)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  industrial raw materials, chemical products, manufactured goods,
  fuel and oil, foodstuffs

Imports--partners: US 43%, Guatemala 5%, Japan 5%, Germany 4%,
  Mexico 3%, El Salvador 3% (1995)

Debt--external: $4.1 billion (1995)

Economic aid--recipient: $418.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 lempira (L) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: lempiras (L) per US$1 (end of period)--13.8076
  (December 1998), 13.8076 (1998), 13.0942 (1997), 12.8694 (1996),
  10.3432 (1995), 9.4001 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 105,000 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: inadequate system
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  connected to Central American Microwave System

Radio broadcast stations: AM 176, FM 0, shortwave 7

Radios: 2.115 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 11 (in addition, there are 17
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 400,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 595 km
  narrow gauge: 190 km 1.067-m gauge; 128 km 1.057-m gauge; 277 km
  0.914-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 14,173 km
  paved: 3,126 km
  unpaved: 11,047 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 465 km navigable by small craft

Ports and harbors: La Ceiba, Puerto Castilla, Puerto Cortes, San
  Lorenzo, Tela, Puerto Lempira

Merchant marine:
  total: 247 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 555,534 GRT/730,602 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 21, cargo 157, chemical tanker 4, container 7,
  livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 25, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 4,
  refrigerated cargo 15, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, short-sea passenger
  5, vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; Russia owns 6 ships, Vietnam
  1, Singapore 3, North Korea 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 122 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 11
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 111
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 21
  under 914 m: 87 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,455,053 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 866,492 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 69,646 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $33 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.6% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: demarcation of boundary with El Salvador
  defined by 1992 International Court of Justice (ICJ) decision has
  not been completed; small boundary section left unresolved by ICJ
  decision not yet reported to have been settled; with respect to the
  maritime boundary in the Golfo de Fonseca, ICJ referred to an
  earlier agreement in this century and advised that some tripartite
  resolution among El Salvador, Honduras, and Nicaragua likely would
  be required; maritime boundary dispute with Nicaragua

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for drugs and narcotics;
  illicit producer of cannabis, cultivated on small plots and used
  principally for local consumption



======================================================================




@Hong Kong
---------





Introduction



Background: Pursuant to the agreement signed by China and the UK
  on 19 December 1984, Hong Kong became the Hong Kong Special
  Administrative Region (SAR) of China on 1 July 1997. Under the terms
  of this agreement, China has promised that under its "one country,
  two systems" formula its socialist economic system will not be
  practiced in Hong Kong, and that Hong Kong shall enjoy a high degree
  of autonomy in all matters except foreign and defense affairs.



Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and China

Geographic coordinates: 22 15 N, 114 10 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 1,092 sq km
  land: 1,042 sq km
  water: 50 sq km

Area--comparative: six times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 30 km
  border countries: China 30 km

Coastline: 733 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; cool and humid in winter, hot and
  rainy from spring through summer, warm and sunny in fall

Terrain: hilly to mountainous with steep slopes; lowlands in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: Tai Mo Shan 958 m

Natural resources: outstanding deepwater harbor, feldspar

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 20%
  other: 72% (1997 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1997 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment--current issues: air and water pollution from rapid
  urbanization

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: more than 200 islands



People



Population: 6,847,125 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 644,982; female 598,188)
  15-64 years: 71% (male 2,397,277; female 2,490,745)
  65 years and over: 11% (male 323,949; female 391,984) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.9% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.9 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.96 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 12.07 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.91 years
  male: 76.15 years
  female: 81.85 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.39 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Chinese
  adjective: Chinese

Ethnic groups: Chinese 95%, other 5%

Religions: eclectic mixture of local religions 90%, Christian 10%

Languages: Chinese (Cantonese), English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 92.2%
  male: 96%
  female: 88.2% (1996 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Hong Kong Special Administrative Region
  conventional short form: Hong Kong
  local long form: Xianggang Tebie Xingzhengqu
  local short form: Xianggang
  abbreviation: HK

Data code: HK

Dependency status: special administrative region of China

Government type: NA

Capital: Victoria

Administrative divisions: none (special administrative region of
  China)

Independence: none (special administrative region of China)

National holiday: National Day, 1-2 October; note--1 July 1997 is
  celebrated as Hong Kong Special Administrative Region Establishment
  Day

Constitution: Basic Law approved in March 1990 by China's
  National People's Congress is Hong Kong's "mini-constitution"

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: direct election 18 years of age; universal for
  permanent residents living in the territory of Hong Kong for the
  past seven years; indirect election limited to about 100,000 members
  of functional constituencies and an 800-member Election Commission
  drawn from broad regional groupings and other central government
  bodies

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President of China JIANG Zemin (since 27 March 1993)
  head of government: Chief Executive TUNG Chee-hwa (since 1 July 1997)
  cabinet: Executive Council consists of three ex-officio members and
  10 appointed members; ex-officio members are: Chief Secretary Anson
  CHAN (since 29 November 1993), Financial Secretary Donald TSANG
  (since 7 March 1995), and Secretary of Justice Elsie LEUNG (since 1
  July 1997)
  elections: NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council or LEGCO (60
  seats; 30 indirectly elected by functional constituencies, 20
  elected by popular vote, and 10 elected by an 800-member election
  committee; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 25 May 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Democratic Party 13, Liberal Party 9, Democratic Alliance for
  the Betterment of Hong Kong 9, Hong Kong Progressive Alliance 5,
  Frontier Party 3, Citizens Party 1, independents 20

Judicial branch: The Court of Final Appeal in the Hong Kong
  Special Administrative Region

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party [Martin LEE,

Political pressure groups and leaders: Association for Democracy
  Kowloon Trade Union Council (pro-Taiwan); Confederation of Trade
  Chamber of Commerce; Chinese General Chamber of Commerce
  (pro-China); Federation of Hong Kong Industries; Chinese
  Manufacturers' Association of Hong Kong; Hong Kong Professional
  chairman]

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, BIS, CCC,
  ESCAP (associate), ICFTU, IMO (associate), Interpol (subbureau),
  IOC, ISO (correspondent), WCL, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (special administrative
  region of China)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Consul General Richard A. BOUCHER
  consulate(s) general: 26 Garden Road, Hong Kong
  mailing address: PSC 464, Box 30, FPO AP 96522-0002

Flag description: red with a stylized, white, five-petal bauhinia
  flower in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Hong Kong has a bustling free market economy
  highly dependent on international trade. Natural resources are
  limited, and food and raw materials must be imported. Indeed,
  imports and exports, including reexports, each exceed GDP in dollar
  value. Even before Hong Kong reverted to Chinese administration on 1
  July 1997 it had extensive trade and investment ties with China.
  Real GDP growth averaged a remarkable 8% in 1987-88 and a still
  strong 5% in 1989-97. The widespread Asian economic difficulties in
  1998 hit this trade-dependent economy quite hard, with GDP down 5%.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$168.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$25,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 0.1%
  industry: 15.9%
  services: 84% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 3.216 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: wholesale and retail trade,
  restaurants, and hotels 31.9%, social services 9.9%, manufacturing
  9.2%, financing, insurance, and real estate 13.1%, transport and
  communications 5.7%, construction 2.6%, other 27.6% (October 1998)

Unemployment rate: 5.5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $30.1 billion
  expenditures: $26 billion, including capital expenditures of $289
  million (FY97/98)

Industries: textiles, clothing, tourism, electronics, plastics,
  toys, watches, clocks

Industrial production growth rate: -3.7% (1998)

Electricity--production: 27 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 28.598 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 1.483 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 5.875 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fresh vegetables; poultry

Exports: $188.08 billion (including reexports; f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: clothing, textiles, yarn and fabric,
  footwear, electrical appliances, watches and clocks, toys

Exports--partners: China 35%, US 22%, Japan 6%, Germany 4%, UK 4%
  (1997)

Imports: $208.63 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, transport equipment, raw
  materials, semimanufactures, petroleum; a large share is reexported

Imports--partners: China 38%, Japan 14%, Taiwan 8%, US 8%,
  Singapore 5% (1997)

Debt--external: none (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: none

Currency: 1 Hong Kong dollar (HK$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Hong Kong dollars (HK$) per US$--7.74 (1997-99),
  7.730 (1996), 7.800 (1995), 7.800 (1994); note--linked to the US
  dollar at the rate of about 7.8 HK$ per 1 US$

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 4.47 million (1998)

Telephone system: modern facilities provide excellent domestic
  and international services
  domestic: microwave radio relay links and extensive fiber-optic
  network
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1 Pacific Ocean
  and 2 Indian Ocean); coaxial cable to Guangzhou, China; access to 5
  international submarine cables providing connections to ASEAN member
  nations, Japan, Taiwan, Australia, Middle East, and Western Europe

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 3 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (in addition, there are two
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.75 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 34 km
  standard gauge: 34 km 1.435-m gauge (all electrified) (1996 est.)

Highways:
  total: 1,831 km
  paved: 1,831 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1997)

Ports and harbors: Hong Kong

Merchant marine:
  total: 195 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,075,304
  GRT/10,133,186 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 1, bulk 117, cargo 18, chemical tanker
  2, combination bulk 2, container 40, liquefied gas tanker 1,
  multifunction large-load carrier 2, oil tanker 6, refrigerated cargo
  1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1, short-sea passenger 1, vehicle carrier 3
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 13
  countries among which are UK 16, South Africa 3, China 9, Japan 6,
  Bermuda 2, Germany 3, Canada 2, Cyprus 1, Belgium 1, and Norway 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  over 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Hong Kong garrison of the PLA including
  elements of the PLA Army, the PLA Navy and PLA Air Force; these
  forces are under the direct leadership of the Central Military
  Commission in Beijing and under administrative control of the
  adjacent Guangzhou Military Region

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,924,304 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,452,110 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 45,656 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of China



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: a hub for Southeast Asian heroin trade;
  transshipment and money-laundering center; increasing indigenous
  amphetamine abuse



======================================================================




@Howland Island
--------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, island in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 0 48 N, 176 38 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 1.6 sq km
  land: 1.6 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about three times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 6.4 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: equatorial; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Terrain: low-lying, nearly level, sandy, coral island surrounded
  by a narrow fringing reef; depressed central area

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 3 m

Natural resources: guano (deposits worked until late 1800s)

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 5%
  other: 95%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island
  can be a maritime hazard

Environment--current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: almost totally covered with grasses, prostrate
  vines, and low-growing shrubs; small area of trees in the center;
  primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging habitat for seabirds,
  shorebirds, and marine wildlife



People



Population: uninhabited
  note: American civilians evacuated in 1942 after Japanese air and
  naval attacks during World War II; occupied by US military during
  World War II, but abandoned after the war; public entry is by
  special-use permit from US Fish and Wildlife Service only and
  generally restricted to scientists and educators; visited annually
  by US Fish and Wildlife Service



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Howland Island

Data code: HQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC, by the Fish and Wildlife Service
  of the US Department of the Interior as part of the National
  Wildlife Refuge system

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only; note--there is
  one boat landing area along the middle of the west coast

Airports: airstrip constructed in 1937 for scheduled refueling
  stop on the round-the-world flight of Amelia Earhart and Fred
  Noonan--they left Lae, New Guinea, for Howland Island, but were never
  seen again; the airstrip is no longer serviceable

Transportation--note: Earhart Light is a day beacon near the
  middle of the west coast that was partially destroyed during World
  War II, but has since been rebuilt; named in memory of famed
  aviatrix Amelia Earhart



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US; visited
  annually by the US Coast Guard



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Hungary
-------





Introduction



Background: After World War II Hungary became part of
  Soviet-dominated Eastern Europe, and its government and economy were
  refashioned on the communist model. Increased nationalist
  opposition, which culminated in the government's announcement of
  withdrawal from the Warsaw Pact in 1956, led to massive military
  intervention by Moscow and the swift crushing of the revolt. In the
  more open GORBACHEV years, Hungary led the movement to dissolve the
  Warsaw Pact and steadily moved toward multiparty democracy and a
  market-oriented economy. Following the collapse of the USSR in 1991,
  Hungary has developed close political and economic relations with
  western Europe and is now being considered a possible future member
  of the European Union.



Geography



Location: Central Europe, northwest of Romania

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 93,030 sq km
  land: 92,340 sq km
  water: 690 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,009 km
  border countries: Austria 366 km, Croatia 329 km, Romania 443 km,
  Serbia and Montenegro 151 km (all with Serbia), Slovakia 515 km,
  Slovenia 102 km, Ukraine 103 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cold, cloudy, humid winters; warm summers

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling plains; hills and low mountains
  on the Slovakian border

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Tisza River 78 m
  highest point: Kekes 1,014 m

Natural resources: bauxite, coal, natural gas, fertile soils

Land use:
  arable land: 51%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 19%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,060 sq km (1993 est.)

Environment--current issues: the approximation of Hungary's
  standards in waste management, energy efficiency, and air, soil, and
  water pollution with environmental requirements for EU accession
  will require large investments, estimated by the Government of
  Hungary at $4 billion over six years; the 1997 budget allocated $9.7
  million for this purpose; the 1998 budget allocated $11.3 million;
  the Central Environmental Fund, which collects monies from product
  charges, environmental fines, and mining taxes, provided
  approximately $76.2 million in 1997 and is expected to provide
  $109.5 million in 1998

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked; strategic location astride main land
  routes between Western Europe and Balkan Peninsula as well as
  between Ukraine and Mediterranean basin



People



Population: 10,186,372 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 908,434; female 865,621)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 3,406,512; female 3,524,260)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 552,337; female 929,208) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.2% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.8 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.29 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.59 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9.46 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.18 years
  male: 66.85 years
  female: 75.74 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.45 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Hungarian(s)
  adjective: Hungarian

Ethnic groups: Hungarian 89.9%, Gypsy 4%, German 2.6%, Serb 2%,
  Slovak 0.8%, Romanian 0.7%

Religions: Roman Catholic 67.5%, Calvinist 20%, Lutheran 5%,
  atheist and other 7.5%

Languages: Hungarian 98.2%, other 1.8%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 98% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Hungary
  conventional short form: Hungary
  local long form: Magyar Koztarsasag
  local short form: Magyarorszag

Data code: HU

Government type: republic

Capital: Budapest

Administrative divisions: 19 counties (megyek, singular--megye),
  20 urban counties* (singular--megyei varos), and 1 capital city**
  (fovaros); Bacs-Kiskun, Baranya, Bekes, Bekescsaba*,
  Borsod-Abauj-Zemplen, Budapest**, Csongrad, Debrecen*, Dunaujvaros*,
  Eger*, Fejer, Gyor*, Gyor-Moson-Sopron, Hajdu-Bihar, Heves,
  Hodmezovasarhely*, Jasz-Nagykun-Szolnok, Kaposvar*, Kecskemet*,
  Komarom-Esztergom, Miskolc*, Nagykanizsa*, Nograd, Nyiregyhaza*,
  Pecs*, Pest, Somogy, Sopron*, Szabolcs-Szatmar-Bereg, Szeged*,
  Szekesfehervar*, Szolnok*, Szombathely*, Tatabanya*, Tolna, Vas,
  Veszprem, Veszprem*, Zala, Zalaegerszeg*

Independence: 1001 (unification by King Stephen I)

National holiday: St. Stephen's Day, 20 August (commemorates the
  coronation of King Stephen in 1000 AD)

Constitution: 18 August 1949, effective 20 August 1949, revised
  19 April 1972; 18 October 1989 revision ensured legal rights for
  individuals and constitutional checks on the authority of the prime
  minister and also established the principle of parliamentary
  oversight; 1997 amendment streamlined the judicial system

Legal system: in process of revision, moving toward rule of law
  based on Western model

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Arpad GONCZ (since 3 August 1990;
  previously interim president since 2 May 1990)
  head of government: Prime Minister Viktor ORBAN (since 6 July 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the National Assembly on
  the recommendation of the president
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a
  four-year term; election last held 19 June 1995 (next to be held NA
  1999); prime minister elected by the National Assembly on the
  recommendation of the president
  election results: Arpad GONCZ reelected president; a total of 335
  votes were cast by the National Assembly, Arpad GONCZ received 259;
  Viktor ORBAN elected prime minister; percent of legislative vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Orszaggyules
  (386 seats; members are elected by popular vote under a system of
  proportional and direct representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held on 10 and 24 May 1998 (next to be held May/June
  2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party (5% or more of the vote
  required for parliamentary representation in the first round)--MSZP
  32.0%, FIDESZ 28.2%, FKGP 13.8%, SZDSZ 7.9%, MIEP 5.5%, MMP 4.1%,
  MDF 2.8%, KDNP 2.3%, MDNP 1.5%; seats by party--MSZP 134, FIDESZ 148,
  FKGP 48, SZDSZ 24, MDF 17, MIEP 14, independent 1; note--the MDF won
  17 single-member district seats

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are elected by the
  National Assembly for a nine-year term

Political parties and leaders: Hungarian Democratic Forum or MDF
  GICZY, president]; Hungarian Democratic People's Party or MDNP
  note: the Hungarian Socialist (Communist) Workers' Party or MSZMP
  renounced communism and became the Hungarian Socialist Party or MSZP
  in October 1989; the MDNP was formed in March 1996 by breakaway
  members of the Hungarian Democratic Forum

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, G- 9,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MONUA, MTCR, NAM
  (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UNU,
  UPU, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Geza JESZENSZKY
  chancery: 3910 Shoemaker Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Peter F. TUFO
  embassy: V. 1054 Szabadsag Ter 12, Budapest
  mailing address: pouch: American Embassy Budapest, Department of
  State, Washington, DC 20521-5270

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and green



Economy



Economy--overview: Hungary has consolidated its March 1995
  stabilization program and undergone enough restructuring to become
  an established market economy. The country appears to have entered a
  period of sustainable growth, gradually falling inflation, and
  stable external balances. The government's main economic priorities
  are to complete structural reforms, particularly the implementation
  of the 1997 pension reform act (the first in the region), taxation
  reform, and planning for comprehensive health care, local government
  finance reform, and the reform of education at all levels. Foreign
  investment has totaled more than $17 billion through 1998. In
  recognition of Hungary's improved macroeconomic situation, all major
  credit-rating agencies listed the country's foreign currency debt
  issuances as investment grade in 1996. The current IMF stand-by
  arrangement expired in February 1998, and Budapest and the IMF agree
  that there is no need to renew it. The OECD welcomed Hungary as a
  member in May 1996, and in December 1997 the EU invited Hungary to
  begin the accession process. Forecasters expect 4%-5% growth in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$75.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 30.3%
  services: 66.7% (1996)

Population below poverty line: 25.3% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.1%
  highest 10%: 24% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 14% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.2 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services 65%, industry 26.7%,
  agriculture 8.3 (1996)

Unemployment rate: 10.8% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $11.2 billion
  expenditures: $13.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: mining, metallurgy, construction materials, processed
  foods, textiles, chemicals (especially pharmaceuticals), motor
  vehicles

Industrial production growth rate: 11.1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 33.162 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 58.76%
  hydro: 0.62%
  nuclear: 40.62%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 35.362 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 4.4 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, corn, sunflower seed, potatoes,
  sugar beets; pigs, cattle, poultry, dairy products

Exports: $20.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment 51.9%, other
  manufactures 32.7%, agriculture and food products 10.5%, raw
  materials 2.9%, fuels and electricity 1.9% (1998)

Exports--partners: Germany 37.3%, Austria 11.4%, Italy 6.1%,
  Russia 5.0% (1997)

Imports: $22.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 46.5%, other
  manufactures 40.2%, fuels and electricity 6.6%, agricultural and
  food products 3.7%, raw materials 3.0% (1998)

Imports--partners: Germany 26.7%, Austria 10.5%, Italy 9.5%,
  Russia 7.4% (1997)

Debt--external: $22.1 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $122.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 forint (Ft) = 100 filler

Exchange rates: forints per US$1--215.960 (January 1999), 214.402
  (1998), 186.789 (1997), 152.647 (1996), 125.681 (1995),105.160 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2.16 million (267,000 cellular telephone subscribers)
  (1996)

Telephone system: 14,213 telex lines; automatic telephone network
  based on microwave radio relay system; the average waiting time for
  telephones is expected to drop to one year by the end of 1997 (down
  from over 10 years in the early 1990s); note--the former state-owned
  telecommunications firm MATAV--now privatized and managed by a
  US/German consortium--has ambitious plans to upgrade the inadequate
  system, including a contract with the German firm Siemens and the
  Swedish firm Ericsson to provide 600,000 new telephone lines
  domestic: microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat and 1
  Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 32, FM 15, shortwave 0

Radios: 6 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 39 (in addition, there are
  low-power stations) (1997)

Televisions: 4.38 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 7,606 km
  broad gauge: 36 km 1.524-m gauge
  standard gauge: 7,394 km 1.435-m gauge (2,207 km electrified; 1,236
  km double track)
  narrow gauge: 176 km 0.760-m gauge (1996)
  note: Hungary and Austria jointly manage the cross-border
  standard-gauge railway between Gyor, Sopron, Ebenfurt
  (Gyor-Sopron-Ebenfurti Vasut Rt) a distance of about 101 km in
  Hungary and 65 km in Austria

Highways:
  total: 188,203 km
  paved: 81,680 km (including 438 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 106,523 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 1,622 km (1988)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,204 km; natural gas 4,387 km (1991)

Ports and harbors: Budapest, Dunaujvaros

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 16,210 GRT/19,810
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 25 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 15
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 10
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Air Force, Border Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,601,741 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,073,419 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 70,393 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $645 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: ongoing Gabcikovo Dam dispute with
  Slovakia is before the International Court of Justice

Illicit drugs: major transshipment point for Southwest Asian
  heroin and cannabis and transit point for South American cocaine
  destined for Western Europe; limited producer of precursor
  chemicals, particularly for amphetamines and methamphetamines



======================================================================




@Iceland
-------





Introduction



Background: Iceland boasts the oldest surviving parliament in the
  world, the Althing, established in 930. Subsequently this Nordic
  island, whose small population has largely depended on fishing and
  sheep-herding for a living, came under the rule of Norway and then
  Denmark. It gained home rule in 1874 and full independence in 1944.
  Literacy, longevity, and social cohesion are topnotch by world
  standards. Tensions continue with Norway, Russia, and other nearby
  countries over fishing rights in the North Atlantic and adjacent
  seas.



Geography



Location: Northern Europe, island between the Greenland Sea and
  the North Atlantic Ocean, northwest of the UK

Geographic coordinates: 65 00 N, 18 00 W

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
  total: 103,000 sq km
  land: 100,250 sq km
  water: 2,750 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Kentucky

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 4,988 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; moderated by North Atlantic Current; mild,
  windy winters; damp, cool summers

Terrain: mostly plateau interspersed with mountain peaks,
  icefields; coast deeply indented by bays and fiords

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Hvannadalshnukur 2,119 m

Natural resources: fish, hydropower, geothermal power, diatomite

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 23%
  forests and woodland: 1%
  other: 76% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes and volcanic activity

Environment--current issues: water pollution from fertilizer
  runoff; inadequate wastewater treatment

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Environmental Modification, Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: strategic location between Greenland and Europe;
  westernmost European country; more land covered by glaciers than in
  all of continental Europe



People



Population: 272,512 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 23% (male 32,608; female 31,061)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 89,258; female 87,449)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 14,510; female 17,626) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.57% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.87 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.01 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.22 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.96 years
  male: 76.85 years
  female: 81.19 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.03 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Icelander(s)
  adjective: Icelandic

Ethnic groups: homogeneous mixture of descendants of Norwegians
  and Celts

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 96%, other Protestant and Roman
  Catholic 3%, none 1% (1988)

Languages: Icelandic

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 100% (1976 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Iceland
  conventional short form: Iceland
  local long form: Lyoveldio Island
  local short form: Island

Data code: IC

Government type: constitutional republic

Capital: Reykjavik

Administrative divisions: 23 counties (syslar, singular--sysla)
  and 14 independent towns* (kaupstadhir, singular--kaupstadhur);
  Akranes*, Akureyri*, Arnessysla, Austur-Bardhastrandarsysla,
  Austur-Hunavatnssysla, Austur-Skaftafellssysla, Borgarfjardharsysla,
  Dalasysla, Eyjafjardharsysla, Gullbringusysla, Hafnarfjordhur*,
  Husavik*, Isafjordhur*, Keflavik*, Kjosarsysla, Kopavogur*,
  Myrasysla, Neskaupstadhur*, Nordhur-Isafjardharsysla,
  Nordhur-Mulasys-la, Nordhur-Thingeyjarsysla, Olafsfjordhur*,
  Rangarvallasysla, Reykjavik*, Saudharkrokur*, Seydhisfjordhur*,
  Siglufjordhur*, Skagafjardharsysla, Snaefellsnes-og Hnappadalssysla,
  Strandasysla, Sudhur-Mulasysla, Sudhur-Thingeyjarsysla,
  Vesttmannaeyjar*, Vestur-Bardhastrandarsysla, Vestur-Hunavatnssysla,
  Vestur-Isafjardharsysla, Vestur-Skaftafellssysla

Independence: 17 June 1944 (from Denmark)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Establishment of the
  Republic, 17 June (1944)

Constitution: 16 June 1944, effective 17 June 1944

Legal system: civil law system based on Danish law; does not
  accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Olafur Ragnar GRIMSSON (since 1 August
  1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister David ODDSSON (since 30 April
  1991)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 29 June 1996 (next to be held NA June 2000);
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Olafur Ragnar GRIMSSON elected president; percent
  of vote--41.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Althing (63 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held on 8 April 1995 (next to be held by April 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Independence Party 37.1%,
  Progressive Party 23.3%, Social Democratic Party 11.4%, Socialists
  14.3%, People's Movement 7.2%, Women's Party 4.9%; seats by
  party--Independence 25, Progressive 15, Social Democratic 7,
  Socialists 9, People's Movement 4, Women's Party 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Haestirettur, justices are
  appointed for life by the president

Political parties and leaders: Independence Party (conservative)

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  CBSS, CCC, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, OECD,
  OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNMIBH, UNU, UPU, WEU
  (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jon-Baldvin HANNIBALSSON
  chancery: Suite 1200, 1156 15th Street NW, Washington, DC 20005
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Day Olin MOUNT
  embassy: Laufasvegur 21, Reykjavik
  mailing address: US Embassy, PSC 1003, Box 40, FPO AE 09728-0340

Flag description: blue with a red cross outlined in white that
  extends to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is
  shifted to the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)



Economy



Economy--overview: Iceland's Scandinavian-type economy is
  basically capitalistic, yet with an extensive welfare system, low
  unemployment, and remarkably even distribution of income. The
  economy depends heavily on the fishing industry, which provides 75%
  of export earnings and employs 12% of the work force. In the absence
  of other natural resources--except energy--Iceland's economy is
  vulnerable to changing world fish prices. The economy remains
  sensitive to declining fish stocks as well as to drops in world
  prices for its main exports: fish and fish products, aluminum, and
  ferrosilicon. The center-right government plans to continue its
  policies of reducing the budget and current account deficits,
  limiting foreign borrowing, containing inflation, revising
  agricultural and fishing policies, diversifying the economy, and
  privatizing state-owned industries. The government remains opposed
  to EU membership, primarily because of Icelanders' concern about
  losing control over their fishing resources. Iceland's economy has
  been diversifying into manufacturing and service industries in the
  last decade, and new developments in software production,
  biotechnology, and financial services are taking place. The tourism
  sector is also expanding, with the recent trends in ecotourism and
  whale-watching. Growth is likely to slow in 1999, to a still
  respectable 4.6%.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$6.06 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 13%
  industry: 24%
  services: 63% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.7% (1998)

Labor force: 130,000 (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: manufacturing 12.9%, fishing and fish
  processing 11.8%, construction 10.7%, other services 59.5%,
  agriculture 5.1% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.9 billion
  expenditures: $2.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $146
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: fish processing; aluminum smelting, ferrosilicon
  production, geothermal power; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 5.048 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.06%
  hydro: 93.43%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 6.51%

Electricity--consumption: 5.532 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: potatoes, turnips; cattle, sheep; fish

Exports: $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: fish and fish products 70%, animal products,
  aluminum, diatomite and ferrosilicon

Exports--partners: EU 60% (UK 19%, Germany 13%, France 6%, Denmark
  6%), US 14% (1997)

Imports: $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, petroleum products,
  foodstuffs, textiles

Imports--partners: EU 58% (Germany 12%, Norway 12%, UK 10%,
  Denmark 9%, Sweden 7%), US 9% (1997)

Debt--external: $2.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Icelandic krona (IKr) = 100 aurar

Exchange rates: Icelandic kronur (IKr) per US$1--69.250 (January
  1999), 70.958 (1998), 70.904 (1997), 66.500 (1996), 64.692 (1995),
  69.944 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 143,600 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: adequate domestic service
  domestic: the trunk network consists of coaxial and fiber-optic
  cables and microwave radio relay links
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean),
  1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions); note--Iceland shares
  the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark,
  Finland, Norway, and Sweden)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 147 (transmitters and
  repeaters), shortwave 0

Radios: 91,500 licensed (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 14 (in addition, there are 156
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 96,100 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 12,691 km
  paved: 3,262 km
  unpaved: 9,429 km (1997 est.)

Ports and harbors: Akureyri, Hornafjordur, Isafjordhur, Keflavik,
  Raufarhofn, Reykjavik, Seydhisfjordhur, Straumsvik, Vestmannaeyjar

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 13,085 GRT/16,938 DWT
  ships by type: chemical tanker 1, container 1, oil tanker 1 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 87 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 77
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 21
  under 914 m: 53 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular armed forces; Police, Coast Guard;
  note--Iceland's defense is provided by the US-manned Icelandic
  Defense Force (IDF) headquartered at Keflavik

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 70,958 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 62,570 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: none

Military--note: Iceland's defense is provided by the US-manned
  Icelandic Defense Force (IDF) headquartered at Keflavik



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Rockall continental shelf dispute
  involving Denmark, Ireland, and the UK (Ireland and the UK have
  signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area)



======================================================================




@India
-----





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, bordering the Arabian Sea and the Bay of
  Bengal, between Burma and Pakistan

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 N, 77 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 3,287,590 sq km
  land: 2,973,190 sq km
  water: 314,400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than one-third the size of the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 14,103 km
  border countries: Bangladesh 4,053 km, Bhutan 605 km, Burma 1,463
  km, China 3,380 km, Nepal 1,690 km, Pakistan 2,912 km

Coastline: 7,000 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical monsoon in south to temperate in
  north

Terrain: upland plain (Deccan Plateau) in south, flat to rolling
  plain along the Ganges, deserts in west, Himalayas in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Kanchenjunga 8,598 m

Natural resources: coal (fourth-largest reserves in the world),
  iron ore, manganese, mica, bauxite, titanium ore, chromite, natural
  gas, diamonds, petroleum, limestone

Land use:
  arable land: 56%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 23%
  other: 16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 480,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: droughts, flash floods, severe thunderstorms
  common; earthquakes

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
  overgrazing; desertification; air pollution from industrial
  effluents and vehicle emissions; water pollution from raw sewage and
  runoff of agricultural pesticides; tap water is not potable
  throughout the country; huge and rapidly growing population is
  overstraining natural resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: dominates South Asian subcontinent; near
  important Indian Ocean trade routes



People



Population: 1,000,848,550 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 34% (male 175,463,726; female 165,722,164)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 318,004,920; female 295,245,556)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 23,571,270; female 22,840,914) (1999
  est.)

Population growth rate: 1.68% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.39 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.5 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.03 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 60.81 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 63.4 years
  male: 62.54 years
  female: 64.29 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.18 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Indian(s)
  adjective: Indian

Ethnic groups: Indo-Aryan 72%, Dravidian 25%, Mongoloid and other
  3%

Religions: Hindu 80%, Muslim 14%, Christian 2.4%, Sikh 2%,
  Buddhist 0.7%, Jains 0.5%, other 0.4%

Languages: English enjoys associate status but is the most
  important language for national, political, and commercial
  communication, Hindi the national language and primary tongue of 30%
  of the people, Bengali (official), Telugu (official), Marathi
  (official), Tamil (official), Urdu (official), Gujarati (official),
  Malayalam (official), Kannada (official), Oriya (official), Punjabi
  (official), Assamese (official), Kashmiri (official), Sindhi
  (official), Sanskrit (official), Hindustani (a popular variant of
  Hindi/Urdu spoken widely throughout northern India)
  note: 24 languages each spoken by a million or more persons;
  numerous other languages and dialects, for the most part mutually
  unintelligible

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 52%
  male: 65.5%
  female: 37.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of India
  conventional short form: India

Data code: IN

Government type: federal republic

Capital: New Delhi

Administrative divisions: 25 states and 7 union territories*;
  Andaman and Nicobar Islands*, Andhra Pradesh, Arunachal Pradesh,
  Assam, Bihar, Chandigarh*, Dadra and Nagar Haveli*, Daman and Diu*,
  Delhi*, Goa, Gujarat, Haryana, Himachal Pradesh, Jammu and Kashmir,
  Karnataka, Kerala, Lakshadweep*, Madhya Pradesh, Maharashtra,
  Manipur, Meghalaya, Mizoram, Nagaland, Orissa, Pondicherry*, Punjab,
  Rajasthan, Sikkim, Tamil Nadu, Tripura, Uttar Pradesh, West Bengal

Independence: 15 August 1947 (from UK)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Proclamation of the
  Republic, 26 January (1950)

Constitution: 26 January 1950

Legal system: based on English common law; limited judicial
  review of legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
  with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN (since 25 July
  1997); Vice President Krishnan KANT (since 21 August 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Atal Behari VAJPAYEE (since 19
  March 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by an electoral college consisting of
  elected members of both houses of Parliament and the legislatures of
  the states for a five-year term; election last held 14 July 1997
  (next to be held NA July 2002); vice president elected by both
  houses of Parliament; election last held 16 August 1997 (next to be
  held NA August 2002); prime minister elected by parliamentary
  members of the majority party following legislative elections;
  election last held NA March 1998 (next to be held NA March 2003)
  election results: Kicheril Raman NARAYANAN elected president;
  percent of electoral college vote--NA; Krishnan KANT elected vice
  president; percent of Parliament vote--NA; Atal Behari VAJPAYEE
  elected prime minister; percent of vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Sansad consists of
  the Council of States or Rajya Sabha (a body consisting of not more
  than 250 members, up to 12 of which are appointed by the president,
  the remainder are chosen by the elected members of the state and
  territorial assemblies; members serve six-year terms) and the
  People's Assembly or Lok Sabha (545 seats; 543 elected by popular
  vote, 2 appointed by the president; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: People's Assembly--last held 16 February through 7 March
  1998 (next to be held NA March 2003)
  election results: People's Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--BJP 178, Congress (I) Party 141, CPI/M 32, SP 20,
  ADMK 18, RJD 17, Telugu Desam 12, SAP 12, CPI 9, BJD 9, Akali Dal
  factions 8, Trinamool Congress 7, SHS 6, DMK 6, Janata Dal Party 6,
  BSP 5, RSP 5, independents and others 44, vacant 8, appointed by the
  president 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president and remain in office until they reach the age of 65

Political parties and leaders: Bharatiya Janata Party or BJP
  PALIWAL (chairman), Chitta BASU (general secretary)]; Muslim League
  factions representing Sikh religious community in the Punjab;
  National Conference or NC (a regional party in Jammu and Kashmir)
  NA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: various separatist groups
  seeking greater communal and/or regional autonomy; numerous
  religious or militant/chauvinistic organizations, including Adam
  Sena, Ananda Marg, Vishwa Hindu Parishad, and Rashtriya Swayamsevak
  Sangh

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, BIS, C,
  CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G- 6, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA (observer), IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
  ITU, MIPONUH, MONUA, NAM, OAS (observer), OPCW, PCA, SAARC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNOMIL,
  UNOMSIL, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Naresh CHANDRA
  chancery: 2107 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008;
  note--Embassy located at 2536 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC
  20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Richard F. CELESTE
  embassy: Shanti Path, Chanakyapuri 110021, New Delhi
  mailing address: use embassy street address
  consulate(s) general: Calcutta, Chennai (Madras), Mumbai (Bombay)

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of orange (top),
  white, and green with a blue chakra (24-spoked wheel) centered in
  the white band; similar to the flag of Niger, which has a small
  orange disk centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: India's economy encompasses traditional village
  farming, modern agriculture, handicrafts, a wide range of modern
  industries, and a multitude of support services. 67% of India's
  labor force work in agriculture, which contributes 25% of the
  country's GDP. Production, trade, and investment reforms since 1991
  have provided new opportunities for Indian businesspersons and an
  estimated 300 million middle class consumers. New Delhi has avoided
  debt rescheduling, attracted foreign investment, and revived
  confidence in India's economic prospects since 1991. Many of the
  country's fundamentals--including savings rates (26% of GDP) and
  reserves (now about $30 billion)--are healthy. Even so, the Indian
  Government needs to restore the early momentum of reform, especially
  by continuing reductions in the extensive remaining government
  regulations. India's exports, currency, and foreign institutional
  investment were affected by the East Asian crisis in late 1997 and
  1998; but capital account controls, a low ratio of short-term debt
  to reserves, and enhanced supervision of the financial sector helped
  insulate it from near term balance-of-payments problems. Exports
  fell 5% in 1998 mainly because of the fall in Asian currencies
  relative to the rupee. Energy, telecommunications, and
  transportation bottlenecks continue to constrain growth. A series of
  weak coalition governments have lacked the political strength to
  push reforms forward to address these and other problems. Indian
  think tanks project GDP growth of about 4.5% in 1999. Inflation will
  remain a worrisome problem.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.689 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,720 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 25%
  industry: 30%
  services: 45% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 35% (1994 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.1%
  highest 10%: 25% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 14% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 67%, services 18%,
  industry 15% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $42.12 billion
  expenditures: $63.79 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $13.8 billion (FY98/99 budget est.)

Industries: textiles, chemicals, food processing, steel,
  transportation equipment, cement, mining, petroleum, machinery

Industrial production growth rate: 5.5% (1997)

Electricity--production: 404.475 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 80.35%
  hydro: 17.8%
  nuclear: 1.83%
  other: 0.02% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 406.02 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 130 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.675 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, wheat, oilseed, cotton, jute, tea,
  sugarcane, potatoes; cattle, water buffalo, sheep, goats, poultry;
  fish

Exports: $32.17 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: textile goods, gems and jewelry, engineering
  goods, chemicals, leather manufactures

Exports--partners: US 19%, Hong Kong 6%, UK 6%, Japan 6%, Germany
  5% (1997)

Imports: $41.34 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: crude oil and petroleum products, machinery,
  gems, fertilizer, chemicals

Imports--partners: US 10%, Belgium 7%, UK 7%, Germany 7%, Saudi
  Arabia 6%, Japan 6% (1997)

Debt--external: $93 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.604 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Indian rupee (Re) = 100 paise

Exchange rates: Indian rupees (Rs) per US$1--42.508 (January
  1999), 41.259 (1998), 36.313 (1997), 35.433 (1996), 32.427 (1995),
  31.374 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 12 million (1996)

Telephone system: mediocre; local and long distance service
  provided throughout all regions of the country, with services
  primarily concentrated in the urban areas; major objective is to
  continue to expand and modernize long-distance network in order to
  keep pace with rapidly growing number of local subscriber lines;
  steady improvement is taking place with the recent admission of
  private and private-public investors, but demand for communication
  services is also growing rapidly
  domestic: local service is provided by microwave radio relay and
  coaxial cable, with open wire and obsolete electromechanical and
  manual switchboard systems still in use in rural areas; starting in
  the 1980s, a substantial amount of digital switch gear has been
  introduced for local- and long-distance service; long-distance
  traffic is carried mostly by coaxial cable and low-capacity
  microwave radio relay; since 1985, however, significant trunk
  capacity has been added in the form of fiber-optic cable and a
  domestic satellite system with 254 earth stations; cellular
  telephone service in four metropolitan cities
  international: satellite earth stations--8 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
  and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean Region); four gateway exchanges
  operating from Mumbai, New Delhi, Calcutta, and Chennai; submarine
  cables to Malaysia, UAE, Singapore, and Japan

Radio broadcast stations: AM 153, FM 91, shortwave 62 (1998 est.)

Radios: 111 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 562 (82 stations have 1 kW or
  greater power and 480 stations have less than 1 kW of power) (1997)

Televisions: 50 million (1999 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 62,915 km (12,307 km electrified; 12,617 km double track)
  broad gauge: 40,620 km 1.676-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 18,501 km 1.000-m gauge; 3,794 km 0.762-m and 0.610-m
  gauge (1998 est.)

Highways:
  total: 3,319,644 km
  paved: 1,517,077 km
  unpaved: 1,802,567 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 16,180 km; 3,631 km navigable by large vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 3,005 km; petroleum products 2,687 km;
  natural gas 1,700 km (1995)

Ports and harbors: Calcutta, Chennai (Madras), Cochin, Jawaharal
  Nehru, Kandla, Mumbai (Bombay), Vishakhapatnam

Merchant marine:
  total: 311 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,627,497
  GRT/11,038,723 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 126, cargo 63, chemical tanker 11, combination
  bulk 2, combination ore/oil 3, container 12, liquefied gas tanker
  10, oil tanker 76, passenger-cargo 5, short-sea passenger 1,
  specialized tanker 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 341 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 230
  over 3,047 m: 11
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 48
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 82
  914 to 1,523 m: 70
  under 914 m: 19 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 111
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 50
  under 914 m: 51 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 17 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (including naval air arm), Air
  Force, various security or paramilitary forces (includes Border
  Security Force, Assam Rifles, and Rashtriya Rifles)

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 269,339,985 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 158,141,508 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 10,661,786 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $10.012 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.7% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: boundary with China in dispute; status of
  Kashmir with Pakistan; water-sharing problems with Pakistan over the
  Indus River (Wular Barrage); a portion of the boundary with
  Bangladesh is indefinite; dispute with Bangladesh over New
  Moore/South Talpatty Island

Illicit drugs: world's largest producer of licit opium for the
  pharmaceutical trade, but an undetermined quantity of opium is
  diverted to illicit international drug markets; major transit
  country for illicit narcotics produced in neighboring countries;
  illicit producer of hashish and methaqualone; cultivated 2,050
  hectares of illicit opium in 1997, a 34% decrease from 1996, with a
  potential production of 30 metric tons, a 36% decrease from 1996



======================================================================




@Indian Ocean
------------





Geography



Location: body of water between Africa, Antarctica, Asia, and
  Australia

Geographic coordinates: 30 00 S, 80 00 E

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 73.6 million sq km
  note: includes Andaman Sea, Arabian Sea, Bay of Bengal, Great
  Australian Bight, Gulf of Aden, Gulf of Oman, Mozambique Channel,
  Persian Gulf, Red Sea, Strait of Malacca, and other tributary water
  bodies

Area--comparative: slightly less than eight times the size of the
  US; third-largest ocean (after the Pacific Ocean and Atlantic Ocean,
  but larger than the Arctic Ocean)

Coastline: 66,526 km

Climate: northeast monsoon (December to April), southwest monsoon
  (June to October); tropical cyclones occur during May/June and
  October/November in the northern Indian Ocean and January/February
  in the southern Indian Ocean

Terrain: surface dominated by counterclockwise gyre (broad,
  circular system of currents) in the southern Indian Ocean; unique
  reversal of surface currents in the northern Indian Ocean; low
  atmospheric pressure over southwest Asia from hot, rising, summer
  air results in the southwest monsoon and southwest-to-northeast
  winds and currents, while high pressure over northern Asia from
  cold, falling, winter air results in the northeast monsoon and
  northeast-to-southwest winds and currents; ocean floor is dominated
  by the Mid-Indian Ocean Ridge and subdivided by the Southeast Indian
  Ocean Ridge, Southwest Indian Ocean Ridge, and Ninetyeast Ridge

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Java Trench -7,258 m
  highest point: sea level 0 m

Natural resources: oil and gas fields, fish, shrimp, sand and
  gravel aggregates, placer deposits, polymetallic nodules

Natural hazards: ships subject to superstructure icing in extreme
  south near Antarctica from May to October

Environment--current issues: endangered marine species include the
  dugong, seals, turtles, and whales; oil pollution in the Arabian
  Sea, Persian Gulf, and Red Sea

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: major chokepoints include Bab el Mandeb, Strait
  of Hormuz, Strait of Malacca, southern access to the Suez Canal, and
  the Lombok Strait



Government



Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard
  for hydrographic codes--see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic
  Codes appendix



Economy



Economy--overview: The Indian Ocean provides major sea routes
  connecting the Middle East, Africa, and East Asia with Europe and
  the Americas. It carries a particularly heavy traffic of petroleum
  and petroleum products from the oilfields of the Persian Gulf and
  Indonesia. Its fish are of great and growing importance to the
  bordering countries for domestic consumption and export. Fishing
  fleets from Russia, Japan, South Korea, and Taiwan also exploit the
  Indian Ocean, mainly for shrimp and tuna. Large reserves of
  hydrocarbons are being tapped in the offshore areas of Saudi Arabia,
  Iran, India, and western Australia. An estimated 40% of the world's
  offshore oil production comes from the Indian Ocean. Beach sands
  rich in heavy minerals and offshore placer deposits are actively
  exploited by bordering countries, particularly India, South Africa,
  Indonesia, Sri Lanka, and Thailand.



Communications



Telephone system:
  international: submarine cables from India to UAE and Malaysia and
  from Sri Lanka to Djibouti and Indonesia



Transportation



Ports and harbors: Calcutta (India), Chennai (Madras; India),
  Colombo (Sri Lanka), Durban (South Africa), Jakarta (Indonesia),
  Melbourne (Australia), Mumbai (Bombay; India), Richards Bay (South
  Africa)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: some maritime disputes (see littoral
  states)



======================================================================




@Indonesia
---------





Introduction



Background: Indonesia declared its independence in 1945 from the
  Netherlands, a claim disputed, then recognized by the Dutch in 1949.
  In 1975 Indonesian troops occupied Portuguese East Timor. Current
  issues include implementing IMF-mandated reforms (particularly
  restructuring and recapitalizing the insolvent banking sector),
  effecting a transition to a popularly elected government, addressing
  longstanding grievances over the role of the ethnic Chinese business
  class and charges of cronyism and corruption, alleged human rights
  violations by the military, the role of the military and religion in
  politics, and growing pressures for some form of independence or
  autonomy by Aceh, Irian Jaya, and East Timor.



Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, archipelago between the Indian Ocean
  and the Pacific Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 5 00 S, 120 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 1,919,440 sq km
  land: 1,826,440 sq km
  water: 93,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,602 km
  border countries: Malaysia 1,782 km, Papua New Guinea 820 km

Coastline: 54,716 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Terrain: mostly coastal lowlands; larger islands have interior
  mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Puncak Jaya 5,030 m

Natural resources: petroleum, tin, natural gas, nickel, timber,
  bauxite, copper, fertile soils, coal, gold, silver

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 7%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 62%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 45,970 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional floods, severe droughts, tsunamis,
  earthquakes, volcanoes

Environment--current issues: deforestation; water pollution from
  industrial wastes, sewage; air pollution in urban areas; smoke and
  haze from forest fires

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertication, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine Life
  Conservation

Geography--note: archipelago of 17,000 islands (6,000 inhabited);
  straddles Equator; strategic location astride or along major sea
  lanes from Indian Ocean to Pacific Ocean



People



Population: 216,108,345 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 33,367,287; female 32,411,786)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 70,541,893; female 70,866,972)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 3,936,415; female 4,983,992) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.46% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.78 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.14 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 57.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 62.92 years
  male: 60.67 years
  female: 65.29 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.57 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Indonesian(s)
  adjective: Indonesian

Ethnic groups: Javanese 45%, Sundanese 14%, Madurese 7.5%,
  coastal Malays 7.5%, other 26%

Religions: Muslim 88%, Protestant 5%, Roman Catholic 3%, Hindu
  2%, Buddhist 1%, other 1% (1998)

Languages: Bahasa Indonesia (official, modified form of Malay),
  English, Dutch, local dialects, the most widely spoken of which is
  Javanese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 83.8%
  male: 89.6%
  female: 78% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Indonesia
  conventional short form: Indonesia
  local long form: Republik Indonesia
  local short form: Indonesia
  former: Netherlands East Indies; Dutch East Indies

Data code: ID

Government type: republic

Capital: Jakarta

Administrative divisions: 24 provinces (propinsi-propinsi,
  singular--propinsi), 2 special regions* (daerah-daerah istimewa,
  singular--daerah istimewa), and 1 special capital city district**
  (daerah khusus ibukota); Aceh*, Bali, Bengkulu, Irian Jaya, Jakarta
  Raya**, Jambi, Jawa Barat, Jawa Tengah, Jawa Timur, Kalimantan
  Barat, Kalimantan Selatan, Kalimantan Tengah, Kalimantan Timur,
  Lampung, Maluku, Nusa Tenggara Barat, Nusa Tenggara Timur, Riau,
  Sulawesi Selatan, Sulawesi Tengah, Sulawesi Tenggara, Sulawesi
  Utara, Sumatera Barat, Sumatera Selatan, Sumatera Utara, Timor
  Timur, Yogyakarta*

Independence: 17 August 1945 (proclaimed independence; on 27
  December 1949, Indonesia became legally independent from the
  Netherlands)

National holiday: Independence Day, 17 August (1945)

Constitution: August 1945, abrogated by Federal Constitution of
  1949 and Provisional Constitution of 1950, restored 5 July 1959

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law, substantially modified by
  indigenous concepts and by new criminal procedures code; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal and married persons
  regardless of age

Executive branch:
  note: on 21 May 1998--less than three months after being selected for
  a seventh five-year term--President Gen. (Ret.) SOEHARTO resigned
  from office; immediately following his resignation he announced that
  Vice President HABIBIE would assume the presidency for the remainder
  of the term which expires in 2003; on 28 May 1998, HABIBIE and
  legislative leaders announced an agreement to select a new president
  in 1999
  chief of state: President Bacharuddin J. HABIBIE (since 21 May
  1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Bacharuddin J. HABIBIE (since 21 May
  1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet
  election: president and vice president selected by consensus by the
  People's Consultative Assembly for five-year terms; selection last
  held 10 March 1998 (next to be held by 10 November 1999)
  election results: Gen. (Ret.) SOEHARTO selected president by
  consensus by the People's Consultative Assembly; Bacharuddin J.
  HABIBIE selected vice president by consensus by the People's
  Consultative Assembly; note--Vice President HABIBIE assumed the
  presidency after SOEHARTO's resignation

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives or Dewan
  Perwakilan Rakyat (DPR) (500 seats; 425 elected by popular vote, 75
  are appointed military representatives; members serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: last held 29 May 1997 (next to be held 7 June 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Golkar 74.5%, PPP 22.43%,
  PDI 3.07%; seats by party--Golkar 325, PPP 89, PDI 11
  note: the People's Consultative Assembly (Majelis Permusyawaratan
  Rakyat or MPR) includes the DPR plus 200 indirectly selected
  members; it meets every five years to elect the president and vice
  president and to approve the broad outlines of national policy

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Mahkamah Agung), the judges are
  appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: Golkar (de facto ruling political
  Indonesia Democracy Party or PDI (federation of former Nationalist
  chairman]

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC,
  CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW,
  OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT,
  UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador DORODJATUN Kuntoro-Jakti
  chancery: 2020 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York, and
  San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador J. Stapleton ROY
  embassy: Medan Merdeka Selatan 5, Jakarta
  mailing address: Unit 8129, Box 1, APO AP 96520
  consulate(s) general: Surabaya

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  white; similar to the flag of Monaco, which is shorter; also similar
  to the flag of Poland, which is white (top) and red



Economy



Economy--overview: The collapse of the rupiah in late 1997 and
  early 1998 caused GDP to contract by an estimated 13.7% in 1998
  because of Indonesian firms' reliance on short-term
  dollar-denominated debt and high levels of nonperforming loans in
  the banking sector. The Indonesian Government initially wavered on
  meeting the conditions it agreed to in exchange for a $42 billion
  IMF assistance package, contributing to further loss in investor
  confidence and outflows of capital. Riots that in many cases
  targeted ethnic Chinese business owners also set back chances that
  Indonesia would quickly stabilize its financial crisis and
  contributed to President SOEHARTO's resignation on 21 May 1998. His
  successor, B.J. HABIBIE, improved cooperation with the IMF. The
  money supply--which expanded rapidly early in the year to prop up
  banks hit by deposit runs--was tightened within a few months, and by
  October, inflation--which reached a 77% annual rate--was significantly
  dampened. The government also announced a bank recapitalization
  program in late 1998, but by early 1999 the plan faced growing
  challenges over its reliance on public funds. Doubts about whether
  the program is adequate underlie forecasts of continued--although
  much less severe--GDP contraction for 1999. Signs of spreading unrest
  and sectarian violence and concern that social instability will
  increase as the 7 June 1999 national election approaches also
  contribute to pessimism about the economy, particularly because
  foreign investors remain reluctant to begin to increase capital
  inflows again. The next government will face the challenge of
  establishing a macroeconomic policy framework that addresses
  longstanding grievances and inequities underlying much of the
  current unrest without hampering an economic recovery.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$602 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -13.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,830 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 18.8%
  industry: 40.3%
  services: 40.9% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.6%
  highest 10%: 28.3% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 77% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 87 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 41%, trade, restaurant,
  and hotel 19.8%, manufacturing 14%, construction 4.8%, transport and
  communications 4.75%, other 15.65% (1997)

Unemployment rate: 15%-20% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $35 billion (of which $15 billion is from international
  financial institutions)
  expenditures: $35 billion, including capital expenditures of $12
  billion (FY98/99 est.)

Industries: petroleum and natural gas; textiles, apparel, and
  footwear; mining, cement, chemical fertilizers, plywood; rubber;
  food; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: -13.7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 66.8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 82.34%
  hydro: 14.97%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 2.69% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 66.8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, cassava (tapioca), peanuts, rubber,
  cocoa, coffee, palm oil, copra; poultry, beef, pork, eggs

Exports: $49 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: garments 7.9%, textiles 7.3%, gas 6.4%,
  electrical appliances 5.9%, pulp and paper 5.3%, oil 4.7%, plywood
  4.7%

Exports--partners: Japan 18%, EU 15%, US 14%, Singapore 13%, South
  Korea 5%, Hong Kong 4%, China 3.9%, Taiwan 3.4% (1998 est.)

Imports: $24 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: manufactures 75.3%, raw materials 9.0%,
  foodstuffs 7.8%, fuels 7.7%

Imports--partners: Japan 20%, US 13%, Germany 9%, Singapore 9%,
  Australia 6.4%, South Korea 5.4%, Taiwan 3.4%, China 3.1% (1998 est.)

Debt--external: $136 billion (yearend 1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $43 billion from IMF program and other
  official external financing (1997-2000)

Currency: Indonesian rupiah (Rp)

Exchange rates: Indonesian rupiahs (Rp) per US$1--8,714.3 (January
  1999), 10,013.6 (1998), 2,909.4 (1997), 2,342.3 (1996), 2,248.6
  (1995), 2,160.8 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 1,276,600 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: domestic service fair, international service
  good
  domestic: interisland microwave system and HF radio police net;
  domestic satellite communications system
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 618, FM 38, shortwave 0

Radios: 28.1 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 41 (of which 18 are
  government-owned and 23 are commercial) (1997)

Televisions: 11.5 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 6,458 km
  narrow gauge: 5,961 km 1.067-m gauge (101 km electrified; 101 km
  double track); 497 km 0.750-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 342,700 km
  paved: 158,670 km
  unpaved: 184,030 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 21,579 km total; Sumatra 5,471 km, Java and Madura 820
  km, Kalimantan 10,460 km, Sulawesi (Celebes) 241 km, Irian Jaya
  4,587 km

Pipelines: crude oil 2,505 km; petroleum products 456 km; natural
  gas 1,703 km (1989)

Ports and harbors: Cilacap, Cirebon, Jakarta, Kupang, Palembang,
  Semarang, Surabaya, Ujungpandang

Merchant marine:
  total: 587 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,707,004
  GRT/3,701,001 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 37, cargo 348, chemical tanker 8, container 20,
  liquefied gas tanker 5, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 116,
  passenger 9, passenger-cargo 13, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11,
  short-sea passenger 7, specialized tanker 7, vehicle carrier 5 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 443 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 125
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 41
  914 to 1,523 m: 39
  under 914 m: 30 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 318
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 31
  under 914 m: 282 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 61,087,521 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 35,804,125 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 2,268,638 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $959.7 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Indonesian sovereignty over Timor Timur
  (East Timor Province), which is not recognized by the UN, is the
  subject of discussions between the UN, Indonesia, and Portugal; two
  islands in dispute with Malaysia

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis largely for domestic
  use; possible growing role as transshipment point for Golden
  Triangle heroin



======================================================================




@Iran
----





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Gulf of Oman, the Persian
  Gulf, and the Caspian Sea, between Iraq and Pakistan

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 53 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 1.648 million sq km
  land: 1.636 million sq km
  water: 12,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Alaska

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,440 km
  border countries: Afghanistan 936 km, Armenia 35 km,
  Azerbaijan-proper 432 km, Azerbaijan-Naxcivan exclave 179 km, Iraq
  1,458 km, Pakistan 909 km, Turkey 499 km, Turkmenistan 992 km

Coastline: 2,440 km
  note: Iran also borders the Caspian Sea (740 km)

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: natural prolongation
  exclusive economic zone: bilateral agreements, or median lines in
  the Persian Gulf
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly arid or semiarid, subtropical along Caspian coast

Terrain: rugged, mountainous rim; high, central basin with
  deserts, mountains; small, discontinuous plains along both coasts

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caspian Sea -28 m
  highest point: Qolleh-ye Damavand 5,671 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, chromium,
  copper, iron ore, lead, manganese, zinc, sulfur

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 27%
  forests and woodland: 7%
  other: 55% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 94,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts, floods; dust storms,
  sandstorms; earthquakes along western border and in the northeast

Environment--current issues: air pollution, especially in urban
  areas, from vehicle emissions, refinery operations, and industrial
  effluents; deforestation; overgrazing; desertification; oil
  pollution in the Persian Gulf; inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Life Conservation



People



Population: 65,179,752 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 36% (male 11,963,438; female 11,447,191)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 19,549,935; female 19,276,784)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 1,561,877; female 1,380,527) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.07% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.71 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.39 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.6 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.13 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 29.73 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.76 years
  male: 68.43 years
  female: 71.16 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.45 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Iranian(s)
  adjective: Iranian

Ethnic groups: Persian 51%, Azerbaijani 24%, Gilaki and
  Mazandarani 8%, Kurd 7%, Arab 3%, Lur 2%, Baloch 2%, Turkmen 2%,
  other 1%

Religions: Shi'a Muslim 89%, Sunni Muslim 10%, Zoroastrian,
  Jewish, Christian, and Baha'i 1%

Languages: Persian and Persian dialects 58%, Turkic and Turkic
  dialects 26%, Kurdish 9%, Luri 2%, Balochi 1%, Arabic 1%, Turkish
  1%, other 2%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 72.1%
  male: 78.4%
  female: 65.8% (1994 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Islamic Republic of Iran
  conventional short form: Iran
  local long form: Jomhuri-ye Eslami-ye Iran
  local short form: Iran

Data code: IR

Government type: theocratic republic

Capital: Tehran

Administrative divisions: 25 provinces (ostanha, singular--ostan);
  Ardabil, Azarbayjan-e Gharbi, Azarbayjan-e Sharqi, Bushehr, Chahar
  Mahall va Bakhtiari, Esfahan, Fars, Gilan, Hamadan, Hormozgan, Ilam,
  Kerman, Kermanshahan, Khorasan, Khuzestan, Kohkiluyeh va Buyer
  Ahmadi, Kordestan, Lorestan, Markazi, Mazandaran, Semnan, Sistan va
  Baluchestan, Tehran, Yazd, Zanjan
  note: there may be three new provinces named Golestan, Qom, and
  Qazvin

Independence: 1 April 1979 (Islamic Republic of Iran proclaimed)

National holiday: Islamic Republic Day, 1 April (1979)

Constitution: 2-3 December 1979; revised 1989 to expand powers of
  the presidency and eliminate the prime ministership

Legal system: the Constitution codifies Islamic principles of
  government

Suffrage: 15 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Leader of the Islamic Revolution Ayatollah Ali
  Hoseini-KHAMENEI (since 4 June 1989)
  head of government: President (Ali) Mohammad KHATAMI-Ardakani (since
  3 August 1997); First Vice President Hasan Ebrahim HABIBI (since NA
  August 1989)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers selected by the president with
  legislative approval
  elections: leader of the Islamic Revolution appointed for life by
  the Assembly of Experts; president elected by popular vote for a
  four-year term; election last held 23 May 1997 (next to be held NA
  May 2001)
  election results: (Ali) Mohammad KHATAMI-Ardakani elected president;
  percent of vote--(Ali) Mohammad KHATAMI-Ardakani 69%

Legislative branch: unicameral Islamic Consultative Assembly or
  Majles-e-Shura-ye-Eslami (270 seats; members elected by popular vote
  to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 8 March and 19 April 1996 (next to be held NA
  March 2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: since President KHATAMI's election
  in May 1997, several political parties have been licensed including
  Executives of Construction, Islamic Iran Solidarity Party, and
  Islamic Partnership Front; other important political groupings are:
  MAHDAVI-KARUBI and Mohammad Asqar MUSAVI-KHOINIHA]; Islamic

Political pressure groups and leaders: groups that generally
  support the Islamic Republic include Ansar-e Hizballah, Mojahedin of
  the Islamic Revolution, Muslim Students Following the Line of the
  Imam, and the Islamic Coalition Association; opposition groups
  include the Liberation Movement of Iran and the Nation of Iran
  party; armed political groups that have been almost completely
  repressed by the government include Mojahedin-e Khalq Organization
  (MEK), People's Fedayeen, Democratic Party of Iranian Kurdistan; the
  Society for the Defense of Freedom

International organization participation: CCC, CP, ECO, ESCAP,
  FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note--Iran has an
  Interests Section in the Pakistani Embassy, headed by Fariborz
  JAHANSUZAN; address: Iranian Interests Section, Pakistani Embassy,
  965-4990

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; note--protecting
  power in Iran is Switzerland

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and red; the national emblem (a stylized representation of
  the word Allah) in red is centered in the white band; ALLAH AKBAR
  (God is Great) in white Arabic script is repeated 11 times along the
  bottom edge of the green band and 11 times along the top edge of the
  red band



Economy



Economy--overview: Iran's economy is a mixture of central
  planning, state ownership of oil and other large enterprises,
  village agriculture, and small-scale private trading and service
  ventures. President KHATAMI has continued to follow the market
  reform plans of former President RAFSANJANI and has indicated that
  he will pursue diversification of Iran's oil-reliant economy
  although he has made little progress toward that goal. In the early
  1990s, Iran experienced a financial crisis and was forced to
  reschedule $15 billion in debt. The strong oil market in 1996 helped
  ease financial pressures on Iran and allowed for Tehran's timely
  debt service payments. Iran's financial situation tightened in 1997
  and deteriorated further in 1998 because of lower oil prices. As a
  result Iran has begun to cut imports and fall into arrears on its
  debt payments.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$339.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -2.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$5,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: 53% (1996 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 24% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 15.4 million
  note: shortage of skilled labor

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 33%, manufacturing 21%
  (1988 est.)

Unemployment rate: more than 30% (January 1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $34.6 billion
  expenditures: $34.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $11.8
  billion (FY96/97)

Industries: petroleum, petrochemicals, textiles, cement and other
  construction materials, food processing (particularly sugar refining
  and vegetable oil production), metal fabricating, armaments

Industrial production growth rate: 5.7% (FY95/96 est.)

Electricity--production: 79.5 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 90.57%
  hydro: 9.43%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 79.5 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, rice, other grains, sugar beets,
  fruits, nuts, cotton; dairy products, wool; caviar

Exports: $12.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum 80%, carpets, fruits, nuts, hides,
  iron, steel

Exports--partners: Japan, Italy, Greece, France, Spain, South Korea

Imports: $13.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery, military supplies, metal works,
  foodstuffs, pharmaceuticals, technical services, refined oil products

Imports--partners: Germany, Italy, Japan, UAE, UK, Belgium

Debt--external: $21.9 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $116.5 million (1995)

Currency: 10 Iranian rials (IR) = 1 toman; note--domestic figures
  are generally referred to in terms of the toman

Exchange rates: Iranian rials (IR) per US$1--1,754.63 (January
  1999), 1,751.86 (1998), 1,752.92 (1997), 1,750.76 (1996), 1,747.93
  (1995), 1,748.75 (1994); black market rate: 7,000 rials per US$1
  (December 1998); note--as of May 1995, the "official rate" of 1,750
  rials per US$1 is used for imports of essential goods and services
  and for oil exports, whereas the "official export rate" of 3,000
  rials per US$1 is used for non-oil exports and imports not covered
  by the official rate

Fiscal year: 21 March--20 March



Communications



Telephones: 8,991,797 (1997 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: 25 regional telecommunications authorities created in
  1996; these authorities are responsible for implementing paging
  services and cellular systems; microwave radio relay extends
  throughout the country with the system centered in Tehran; system is
  moving toward digitization and direct-dial capability; 255
  long-distance circuits (1999 est.); 366 telephone exchanges (1995
  est.); 204,400 microwave channels (1996 est.); 230,000 cellular
  telephone subscribers (1997 est.); 3,930 pager subscribers (1995
  est.)
  international: 13,985 international circuits (1999 est.) with a plan
  to reach 14,000 by March 1999; satellite earth stations--9 Intelsat
  (with 50 terminals) and 4 Inmarsat; HF radio and microwave radio
  relay to Turkey, Azerbaijan, Pakistan, Afghanistan, Turkmenistan,
  Syria, Kuwait, Tajikistan, and Uzbekistan; submarine fiber-optic
  cable to UAE with access to Fiber-Optic Link Around the Globe
  (FLAG); Trans Asia Europe (TAE) fiber-optic line runs from
  Azerbaijan through the northern portion of Iran to Turkmenistan with
  expansion to Georgia and Azerbaijan; four Internet service providers
  as of 1997 with the number increasing (service limited to electronic
  mail to promote Iranian culture)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 72, FM 6, shortwave 5 (1998 est.)

Radios: 13 million (1999 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 28 (in addition, there are 450
  low-power repeaters, all government controlled) (1997)

Televisions: 7 million (1999 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 7,286 km
  broad gauge: 94 km 1.676-m gauge
  standard gauge: 7,192 km 1.435-m gauge (146 km electrified) (1996
  est.)

Highways:
  total: 162,000 km
  paved: 81,000 km (including 470 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 81,000 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 904 km; the Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by
  maritime traffic for about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3 m
  and is in use

Pipelines: crude oil 5,900 km; petroleum products 3,900 km;
  natural gas 4,550 km

Ports and harbors: Abadan (largely destroyed in fighting during
  1980-88 war), Ahvaz, Bandar 'Abbas, Bandar-e Anzali, Bushehr,
  Bandar-e Imam Khomeyni, Bandar-e Lengeh, Bandar-e Mahshahr, Bandar-e
  Torkaman, Chabahar (Bandar Beheshti), Jazireh-ye Khark, Jazireh-ye
  Lavan, Jazireh-ye Sirri, Khorramshahr (limited operation since
  November 1992), Now Shahr

Merchant marine:
  total: 132 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,238,293
  GRT/5,658,259 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 46, cargo 35, chemical tanker 4, combination
  bulk 1, container 5, liquefied gas tanker 1, multifunction
  large-load carrier 6, oil tanker 21, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 10, short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 288 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 110
  over 3,047 m: 38
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 18
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 25
  914 to 1,523 m: 23
  under 914 m: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 178
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 126
  under 914 m: 32 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 11 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Islamic Republic of Iran regular forces
  (includes Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces),
  Revolutionary Guards (includes Ground, Air, Navy, Qods, and
  Basij-mobilization-forces), Law Enforcement Forces

Military manpower--military age: 21 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 17,203,360 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 10,217,269 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 767,152 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $5.787 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.9% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic
  relations in 1990 but are still trying to work out written
  agreements settling outstanding disputes from their eight-year war
  concerning border demarcation, prisoners-of-war, and freedom of
  navigation and sovereignty over the Shatt al Arab waterway; Iran
  occupies two islands in the Persian Gulf claimed by the UAE: Lesser
  Tunb (called Tunb as Sughra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e
  Kuchek in Persian by Iran) and Greater Tunb (called Tunb al Kubra in
  Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg in Persian by Iran); it
  jointly administers with the UAE an island in the Persian Gulf
  claimed by the UAE (called Abu Musa in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye
  Abu Musa in Persian by Iran)--over which Iran has taken steps to
  exert unilateral control since 1992, including access restrictions
  and a military build-up on the island; the UAE has garnered
  significant diplomatic support in the region in protesting these
  Iranian actions; Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet determined among
  Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: despite substantial interdiction efforts, Iran
  remains a key transshipment point for Southwest Asian heroin to
  Europe; domestic consumption of narcotics remains a persistent
  problem and Iranian press reports estimate that there are at least
  1.2 million drug users in the country



======================================================================




@Iraq
----





Introduction



Background: Iraq lies in the lower part of the Tigris-Euphrates
  valley, the heart of one of the four great ancient civilizations.
  The area was overrun by Arab, Mongol, and Turkish conquerors and
  became a British mandate following World War I. Independence came in
  1932. Iraq's pro-Western stance ended in 1958 with the overthrow of
  the monarchy. Its subsequent turbulent history has witnessed the
  dictatorship of SADDAM Husayn, civil war with the Kurds, a bloody
  conflict with neighboring Iran, and, in 1990, an invasion of Kuwait,
  swiftly turned back by a Western coalition led by the US.
  Noncooperation with UN Security Council resolution obligations and
  the UN's inspection of Iraq's nuclear, chemical, biological, and
  long-range missile weapons programs remain major problems.



Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Persian Gulf, between Iran
  and Kuwait

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 N, 44 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 437,072 sq km
  land: 432,162 sq km
  water: 4,910 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Idaho

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,631 km
  border countries: Iran 1,458 km, Jordan 181 km, Kuwait 242 km, Saudi
  Arabia 814 km, Syria 605 km, Turkey 331 km

Coastline: 58 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: not specified
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly desert; mild to cool winters with dry, hot,
  cloudless summers; northern mountainous regions along Iranian and
  Turkish borders experience cold winters with occasionally heavy
  snows that melt in early spring, sometimes causing extensive
  flooding in central and southern Iraq

Terrain: mostly broad plains; reedy marshes along Iranian border
  in south with large flooded areas; mountains along borders with Iran
  and Turkey

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
  highest point: Gundah Zhur 3,608 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, phosphates, sulfur

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 79% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 25,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms, floods

Environment--current issues: government water control projects
  have drained most of the inhabited marsh areas east of An Nasiriyah
  by drying up or diverting the feeder streams and rivers; a once
  sizable population of Shi'a Muslims, who have inhabited these areas
  for thousands of years, has been displaced; furthermore, the
  destruction of the natural habitat poses serious threats to the
  area's wildlife populations; inadequate supplies of potable water;
  development of Tigris-Euphrates Rivers system contingent upon
  agreements with upstream riparian Turkey; air and water pollution;
  soil degradation (salination) and erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification



People



Population: 22,427,150 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 4,982,510; female 4,825,129)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 6,030,417; female 5,889,543)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 326,223; female 373,328) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.19% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 38.42 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.87 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 62.41 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 66.52 years
  male: 65.54 years
  female: 67.56 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.12 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Iraqi(s)
  adjective: Iraqi

Ethnic groups: Arab 75%-80%, Kurdish 15%-20%, Turkoman, Assyrian
  or other 5%

Religions: Muslim 97% (Shi'a 60%-65%, Sunni 32%-37%), Christian
  or other 3%

Languages: Arabic, Kurdish (official in Kurdish regions),
  Assyrian, Armenian

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 58%
  male: 70.7%
  female: 45% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Iraq
  conventional short form: Iraq
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Iraqiyah
  local short form: Al Iraq

Data code: IZ

Government type: republic

Capital: Baghdad

Administrative divisions: 18 provinces (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Al Anbar, Al Basrah, Al Muthanna, Al Qadisiyah,
  An Najaf, Arbil, As Sulaymaniyah, At Ta'mim, Babil, Baghdad, Dahuk,
  Dhi Qar, Diyala, Karbala', Maysan, Ninawa, Salah ad Din, Wasit

Independence: 3 October 1932 (from League of Nations mandate
  under British administration)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Revolution, 17 July (1968)

Constitution: 22 September 1968, effective 16 July 1970
  (provisional Constitution); new constitution drafted in 1990 but not
  adopted

Legal system: based on Islamic law in special religious courts,
  civil law system elsewhere; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President SADDAM Husayn (since 16 July 1979); Vice
  President Taha Muhyi al-Din MARUF (since 21 April 1974); Vice
  President Taha Yasin RAMADAN (since 23 March 1991)
  head of government: Prime Minister SADDAM Husayn (since 29 May
  1994); Deputy Prime Minister Tariq Mikhail AZIZ (since NA 1979);
  Deputy Prime Minister Taha Yasin RAMADAN (since NA May 1994); Deputy
  Prime Minister Muhammad Hamza al-ZUBAYDI (since NA May 1994)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  note: there is also a Revolutionary Command Council; Chairman SADDAM
  Husayn, Vice Chairman Izzat IBRAHIM al-Duri
  elections: president and vice presidents elected by a two-thirds
  majority of the Revolutionary Command Council; election last held 17
  October 1995 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: SADDAM Husayn reelected president; percent of
  vote--99%; Taha Muhyi al-Din MARUF and Taha Yasin RAMADAN elected
  vice presidents; percent of vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Majlis
  al-Watani (250 seats; 30 appointed by SADDAM Husayn to represent the
  three northern provinces of Dahuk, Arbil, and As Sulaymaniyah; 220
  elected by popular vote; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 24 March 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation

Political parties and leaders: Ba'th Party [SADDAM Husayn,
  central party leader]

Political pressure groups and leaders: any formal political
  activity must be sanctioned by the government; opposition to regime
  from Kurdish groups and southern Shi'a dissidents

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note--Iraq has an
  Interest Section in the Algerian Embassy headed by Dr. Khairi AL
  ZUBAYDI; address: Iraqi Interests Section, Algerian Embassy, 2118

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; note--the US has an
  Interests Section in the Polish Embassy in Baghdad; address: P. O.

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and black with three green five-pointed stars in a horizontal
  line centered in the white band; the phrase ALLAHU AKBAR (God is
  Great) in green Arabic script--Allahu to the right of the middle star
  and Akbar to the left of the middle star--was added in January 1991
  during the Persian Gulf crisis; similar to the flag of Syria that
  has two stars but no script and the flag of Yemen that has a plain
  white band; also similar to the flag of Egypt that has a symbolic
  eagle centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Iraq's economy has been dominated by the oil
  sector, which has traditionally provided about 95% of foreign
  exchange earnings. In the 1980s, financial problems caused by
  massive expenditures in the eight-year war with Iran and damage to
  oil export facilities by Iran led the government to implement
  austerity measures, borrow heavily, and later reschedule foreign
  debt payments; Iraq suffered economic losses of at least $100
  billion from the war. After the end of hostilities in 1988, oil
  exports gradually increased with the construction of new pipelines
  and restoration of damaged facilities. Iraq's seizure of Kuwait in
  August 1990, subsequent international economic embargoes, and
  military action by an international coalition beginning in January
  1991 drastically reduced economic activity and increased prices. The
  Iraqi Government has been unwilling to abide by UN resolutions so
  that the economic embargo could be removed. The government's
  policies of supporting large military and internal security forces
  and of allocating resources to key supporters of the regime have
  exacerbated shortages. The implementation of the UN's oil-for-food
  program in December 1996 has helped improve economic conditions. For
  the first three six-month phases of the program, Iraq was allowed to
  export $2 billion worth of oil in exchange for food, medicine, and
  other humanitarian goods. The UN allowed Iraq to export $5.2 billion
  of oil beginning with the fourth phase of the program in May 1998.
  At an average volume of 1.9 million barrels per day during the last
  half of 1998, oil exports are about three-quarters their prewar
  level. Per capita food imports have increased significantly, while
  medical supplies and health care services are steadily improving.
  Per capita output and living standards are still well below the
  prewar level, but any estimates have a wide range of error.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$52.3 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 10% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 4.4 million (1989)

Labor force--by occupation: services 48%, agriculture 30%,
  industry 22% (1989)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: petroleum, chemicals, textiles, construction
  materials, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 27.6 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 97.83%
  hydro: 2.17%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 27.6 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, rice, vegetables, dates,
  cotton; cattle, sheep

Exports: $5 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil

Exports--partners: Russia, France, China, Turkey (1998)

Imports: $3 billion (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: food, medicine, manufactures

Imports--partners: Russia, France, Jordan, Australia, China (1998)

Debt--external: very heavy relative to GDP but the exact amount is
  unknown (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $327.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Iraqi dinar (ID) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Iraqi dinars (ID) per US$1--0.3109 (fixed official
  rate since 1982); black market rate--Iraqi dinars (ID) per US$1--1,810
  (December 1998), 1,530 (December 1997), 3,000 (December 1995);
  subject to wide fluctuations

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 632,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: reconstitution of damaged telecommunication
  facilities began after the Gulf war; most damaged facilities have
  been rebuilt
  domestic: the network consists of coaxial cables and microwave radio
  relay links
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region) and 1
  Arabsat (inoperative); coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to
  Jordan, Kuwait, Syria, and Turkey; Kuwait line is probably
  nonoperational

Radio broadcast stations: AM 16, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.7 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13 (government controlled) (1997)

Televisions: 1 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,032 km
  standard gauge: 2,032 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 47,400 km
  paved: 40,764 km
  unpaved: 6,636 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,015 km; Shatt al Arab is usually navigable by
  maritime traffic for about 130 km; channel has been dredged to 3
  meters and is in use; Tigris and Euphrates Rivers have navigable
  sections for shallow-draft watercraft; Shatt al Basrah canal was
  navigable by shallow-draft craft before closing in 1991 because of
  the Persian Gulf war

Pipelines: crude oil 4,350 km; petroleum products 725 km; natural
  gas 1,360 km

Ports and harbors: Umm Qasr, Khawr az Zubayr, and Al Basrah have
  limited functionality

Merchant marine:
  total: 30 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 456,845 GRT/780,318 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 14, oil tanker 11, passenger 1, passenger-cargo
  1, refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 109 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 77
  over 3,047 m: 20
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 36
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 32
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 10
  under 914 m: 11 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Republican Guard and Special Republican
  Guard, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force, Border Guard Force,
  Internal Security Forces

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,459,998 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,058,098 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 259,915 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Iran and Iraq restored diplomatic
  relations in 1990 but are still trying to work out written
  agreements settling outstanding disputes from their eight-year war
  concerning border demarcation, prisoners-of-war, and freedom of
  navigation and sovereignty over the Shatt al Arab waterway; in
  November 1994, Iraq formally accepted the UN-demarcated border with
  Kuwait which had been spelled out in Security Council Resolutions
  687 (1991), 773 (1993), and 883 (1993); this formally ends earlier
  claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and Warbah islands although the
  government continues periodic rhetorical challenges; dispute over
  water development plans by Turkey for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers



======================================================================




@Ireland
-------





Introduction



Background: Growing Irish nationalism resulted in independence
  from the United Kingdom in 1921, with six largely Protestant
  northern counties remaining within the UK. After World War II bloody
  strife between Catholics and Protestants over the status of Northern
  Ireland cost thousands of lives. In 1998, substantial steps toward
  peace were agreed to by the British and Irish governments and the
  Roman Catholics and Protestants of Northern Ireland.



Geography



Location: Western Europe, occupying five-sixths of the island of
  Ireland in the North Atlantic Ocean, west of Great Britain

Geographic coordinates: 53 00 N, 8 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 70,280 sq km
  land: 68,890 sq km
  water: 1,390 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 360 km
  border countries: UK 360 km

Coastline: 1,448 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: not specified
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate maritime; modified by North Atlantic Current;
  mild winters, cool summers; consistently humid; overcast about half
  the time

Terrain: mostly level to rolling interior plain surrounded by
  rugged hills and low mountains; sea cliffs on west coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Carrauntoohill 1,041 m

Natural resources: zinc, lead, natural gas, barite, copper,
  gypsum, limestone, dolomite, peat, silver

Land use:
  arable land: 13%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 68%
  forests and woodland: 5%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: water pollution, especially of lakes,
  from agricultural runoff

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 94, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Endangered Species,
  Marine Life Conservation, Tropical Timber 94

Geography--note: strategic location on major air and sea routes
  between North America and northern Europe; over 40% of the
  population resides within 97 km of Dublin



People



Population: 3,632,944 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 21% (male 399,379; female 377,366)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 1,232,072; female 1,213,364)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 174,519; female 236,244) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.38% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.58 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.31 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.74 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.94 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 76.39 years
  male: 73.64 years
  female: 79.32 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.81 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Irishman(men), Irishwoman(men), Irish (collective plural)
  adjective: Irish

Ethnic groups: Celtic, English

Religions: Roman Catholic 92%, Anglican 3%, Islamic 0.11%,
  Jehovah's Witness 0.1%, Jewish 0.04%, other 4.75% (1991)

Languages: English is the language generally used, Irish (Gaelic)
  spoken mainly in areas located along the western seaboard

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98% (1981 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Ireland

Data code: EI

Government type: republic

Capital: Dublin

Administrative divisions: 26 counties; Carlow, Cavan, Clare,
  Cork, Donegal, Dublin, Galway, Kerry, Kildare, Kilkenny, Laois,
  Leitrim, Limerick, Longford, Louth, Mayo, Meath, Monaghan, Offaly,
  Roscommon, Sligo, Tipperary, Waterford, Westmeath, Wexford, Wicklow

Independence: 6 December 1921 (from UK)

National holiday: Saint Patrick's Day, 17 March

Constitution: 29 December 1937; adopted 1 July 1937 by plebiscite

Legal system: based on English common law, substantially modified
  by indigenous concepts; judicial review of legislative acts in
  Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Mary MCALEESE (since 11 November 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Bertie AHERN (since 26 June 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president with previous nomination
  by the prime minister and approval of the House of Representatives
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 31 October 1997 (next to be held NA November
  2004); prime minister nominated by the House of Representatives and
  appointed by the president
  election results: Mary MCALEESE elected president; percent of
  vote--Mary MCALEESE 44.8%, Mary BANOTTI 29.6%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Oireachtas consists
  of the Senate or Seanad Eireann (60 seats--49 elected by the
  universities and from candidates put forward by five vocational
  panels, 11 are nominated by the prime minister; members serve
  five-year terms) and the House of Representatives or Dail Eireann
  (166 seats; members are elected by popular vote on the basis of
  proportional representation to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held NA August 1997 (next to be held NA
  2002); House of Representatives--last held 6 June 1997 (next to be
  held NA 2002)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--NA; House of Representatives--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--Fianna Fail 76, Fine Gael 53, Labor Party 19,
  Progressive Democrats 4, Democratic Left 4, Greens 2, Sinn Fein 1,
  independents 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the president
  on the advice of the government (prime minister and cabinet)

Political parties and leaders: Fianna Fail [Bertie AHERN]; Labor
  note: Prime Minister AHERN heads a two-party coalition consisting of
  Fianna Fail and the Progressive Democrats; Democratic Left merged
  into the Labor Party on 1 February 1999

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  CCC, CE, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, ESA, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MTCR, NEA, NSG,
  OECD, OPCW, OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNIDO, UNIFIL,
  UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UPU, WEU (observer),
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Sean O'HUIGINN
  chancery: 2234 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, New York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Michael SULLIVAN
  embassy: 42 Elgin Road, Ballsbridge, Dublin
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), white, and orange; similar to the flag of Cote d'Ivoire,
  which is shorter and has the colors reversed--orange (hoist side),
  white, and green; also similar to the flag of Italy, which is
  shorter and has colors of green (hoist side), white, and red



Economy



Economy--overview: Ireland is a small, modern, trade-dependent
  economy with growth averaging 9.5% in 1995-98. Agriculture, once the
  most important sector, is now dwarfed by industry, which accounts
  for 39% of GDP, about 80% of exports, and employs 28% of the labor
  force. Although exports remain the primary engine for Ireland's
  robust growth, the economy is also benefiting from a rise in
  consumer spending and recovery in both construction and business
  investment. Over the past decade, the Irish government has
  implemented a series of national economic programs designed to curb
  inflation, reduce government spending, and promote foreign
  investment. Although the unemployment rate has been halved, it
  remains high, and job creation is a primary concern of government
  policy. Recent efforts have concentrated on improving workers
  qualifications and the education system. Ireland joined in launching
  the euro currency system in January 1999 along with 10 other EU
  nations.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$67.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 9.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$18,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7%
  industry: 39%
  services: 54% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.5%
  highest 10%: 27.4% (1987)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.4% (1998)

Labor force: 1.52 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 62.1%, manufacturing and
  construction 27%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 10%, utilities
  0.9% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 7.7% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $23.5 billion
  expenditures: $20.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998)

Industries: food products, brewing, textiles, clothing,
  chemicals, pharmaceuticals, machinery, transportation equipment,
  glass and crystal

Industrial production growth rate: 15.8% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 17.843 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 95.83%
  hydro: 3.99%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0.18% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 17.743 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 200 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 100 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: turnips, barley, potatoes, sugar beets,
  wheat; beef, dairy products

Exports: $60.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: chemicals, data processing equipment,
  industrial machinery, live animals, animal products (1997)

Exports--partners: EU 67% (UK 24%, Germany 12%, France 8%), US 11%
  (1997)

Imports: $43.7 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: food, animal feed, data processing
  equipment, petroleum and petroleum products, machinery, textiles,
  clothing (1997)

Imports--partners: EU 55% (UK 34%, Germany 6%, France 6%), US 15%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $11 billion (1998)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $153 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Irish pound (LIr) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Irish pounds (LIr) per US$1--0.6815 (January
  1999), 0.7014 (1998), 0.6588 (1997), 0.6248 (1996), 0.6235 (1995),
  0.6676 (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 0.78764 Irish pounds per euro; the euro will replace the
  local currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 900,000 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern digital system using cable and microwave
  radio relay
  domestic: microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 45, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.2 million (1991 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 10 (in addition, there are 36
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.025 million (1990 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,947 km
  broad gauge: 1,947 km 1.600-m gauge (38 km electrified; 485 km
  double track) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 92,500 km
  paved: 87,042 km (including 80 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 5,458 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: limited for commercial traffic

Pipelines: natural gas 225 km

Ports and harbors: Arklow, Cork, Drogheda, Dublin, Foynes,
  Galway, Limerick, New Ross, Waterford

Merchant marine:
  total: 31 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 79,284 GRT/117,652 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 28, container 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 44 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 16
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 28
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 25 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (includes Naval Service and Air Corps),
  National Police (Garda Siochana)

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 974,226 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 790,155 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 33,810 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $771 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Northern Ireland issue with the UK
  (historic peace agreement signed 10 April 1998); Rockall continental
  shelf dispute involving Denmark, Iceland, and the UK (Ireland and
  the UK have signed a boundary agreement in the Rockall area)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for and consumer of hashish
  from North Africa to the UK and Netherlands and of European-produced
  synthetic drugs; transshipment point for heroin and cocaine destined
  for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Israel
------





Introduction



Background: The territories occupied by Israel since the 1967 war
  are not included in the data below, unless otherwise noted. In
  keeping with the framework established at the Madrid Conference in
  October 1991, bilateral negotiations are being conducted between
  Israel and Palestinian representatives, and Israel and Syria, to
  achieve a permanent settlement between them. On 25 April 1982,
  Israel withdrew from the Sinai pursuant to the 1979 Israel-Egypt
  Peace treaty. Outstanding territorial and other disputes with Jordan
  were resolved in the 26 October 1994 Israel-Jordan Treaty of Peace.



Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
  Egypt and Lebanon

Geographic coordinates: 31 30 N, 34 45 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 20,770 sq km
  land: 20,330 sq km
  water: 440 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,006 km
  border countries: Egypt 255 km, Gaza Strip 51 km, Jordan 238 km,
  Lebanon 79 km, Syria 76 km, West Bank 307 km

Coastline: 273 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: to depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; hot and dry in southern and eastern desert
  areas

Terrain: Negev desert in the south; low coastal plain; central
  mountains; Jordan Rift Valley

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
  highest point: Har Meron 1,208 m

Natural resources: copper, phosphates, bromide, potash, clay,
  sand, sulfur, asphalt, manganese, small amounts of natural gas and
  crude oil

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 6%
  other: 66% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: sandstorms may occur during spring and summer

Environment--current issues: limited arable land and natural fresh
  water resources pose serious constraints; desertification; air
  pollution from industrial and vehicle emissions; groundwater
  pollution from industrial and domestic waste, chemical fertilizers,
  and pesticides

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine Life
  Conservation

Geography--note: there are 216 Israeli settlements and civilian
  land use sites in the West Bank, 42 in the Israeli-occupied Golan
  Heights, 24 in the Gaza Strip, and 29 in East Jerusalem (August 1998
  est.)



People



Population: 5,749,760 (July 1999 est.)
  note: includes about 166,000 Israeli settlers in the West Bank,
  about 19,000 in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights, about 6,000 in
  the Gaza Strip, and about 176,000 in East Jerusalem (August 1998
  est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 28% (male 822,192; female 783,905)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 1,792,062; female 1,783,755)
  65 years and over: 10% (male 244,438; female 323,408) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.81% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 19.83 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.16 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.42 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.78 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.61 years
  male: 76.71 years
  female: 80.61 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.68 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Israeli(s)
  adjective: Israeli

Ethnic groups: Jewish 80.1% (Europe/America-born 32.1%,
  Israel-born 20.8%, Africa-born 14.6%, Asia-born 12.6%), non-Jewish
  19.9% (mostly Arab) (1996 est.)

Religions: Judaism 80.1%, Islam 14.6% (mostly Sunni Muslim),
  Christian 2.1%, other 3.2% (1996 est.)

Languages: Hebrew (official), Arabic used officially for Arab
  minority, English most commonly used foreign language

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 95%
  male: 97%
  female: 93% (1992 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: State of Israel
  conventional short form: Israel
  local long form: Medinat Yisra'el
  local short form: Yisra'el

Data code: IS

Government type: republic

Capital: Jerusalem
  note: Israel proclaimed Jerusalem as its capital in 1950, but the
  US, like nearly all other countries, maintains its Embassy in Tel
  Aviv

Administrative divisions: 6 districts (mehozot, singular--mehoz);
  Central, Haifa, Jerusalem, Northern, Southern, Tel Aviv

Independence: 14 May 1948 (from League of Nations mandate under
  British administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 14 May 1948; note--Israel
  declared independence on 14 May 1948, but the Jewish calendar is
  lunar and the holiday may occur in April or May

Constitution: no formal constitution; some of the functions of a
  constitution are filled by the Declaration of Establishment (1948),
  the basic laws of the parliament (Knesset), and the Israeli
  citizenship law

Legal system: mixture of English common law, British Mandate
  regulations, and, in personal matters, Jewish, Christian, and Muslim
  legal systems; in December 1985, Israel informed the UN Secretariat
  that it would no longer accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ezer WEIZMAN (since 13 May 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Binyamin NETANYAHU (since 18 June
  1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet selected from and approved by the Knesset
  elections: president elected by the Knesset for a five-year term;
  election last held 4 March 1998 (next to be held NA March 2003);
  prime minister elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 29 May 1996 (early elections are scheduled for 17
  May 1999); note--in March 1992, the Knesset approved legislation,
  effective in 1996, which allowed for the direct election of the
  prime minister; under the new law, each voter casts two ballots--one
  for the direct election of the prime minister and one for the party
  in the Knesset; the candidate that receives the largest percentage
  of the popular vote then works to form a coalition with other
  parties to achieve a parliamentary majority of 61 seats; finally,
  the candidate must submit his or her cabinet to the Knesset for
  approval and this must be done within 45 days of the election; in
  contrast to the old system, under the new law, the prime minister's
  party need not be the single-largest party in the Knesset
  election results: Ezer WEIZMAN reelected president by the Knesset
  with a total of 63 votes, other candidate, Shaul AMOR, received 49
  votes (there were seven abstentions and one absence); Binyamin
  NETANYAHU elected prime minister; percent of vote--Binyamin NETANYAHU
  50.4%, Shimon PERES 49.5%

Legislative branch: unicameral Knesset or parliament (120 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 29 May 1996 (early elections are scheduled for
  17 May 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--Labor
  Party 34, Likud Party 32, SHAS 10, MERETZ 9, National Religious
  Party 9, Yisra'el Ba'Aliya 7, Hadash-Balad 5, Third Way 4, United
  Arab List 4, United Jewish Torah 4, Moledet 2; note--Likud, Tzomet,
  and Gesher candidates ran on a joint list

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, appointed for life by the
  president

Political parties and leaders:

Political pressure groups and leaders: Gush Emunim, Israeli
  nationalists advocating Jewish settlement on the West Bank and Gaza
  Strip; Peace Now supports territorial concessions in the West Bank
  and is critical of government's Lebanon policy

International organization participation: BSEC (observer), CCC,
  CE (observer), CERN (observer), EBRD, ECE, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, IDA, IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, OAS (observer), OPCW, OSCE (partner),
  PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Zalman SHOVAL
  chancery: 3514 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los
  Angeles, Miami, New York, Philadelphia, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edward S. WALKER, Jr.
  embassy: 71 Hayarkon Street, Tel Aviv
  mailing address: PSC 98, Unit 7228, APO AE 09830
  consulate(s) general: Jerusalem; note--an independent US mission,
  established in 1928, whose members are not accredited to a foreign
  government

Flag description: white with a blue hexagram (six-pointed linear
  star) known as the Magen David (Shield of David) centered between
  two equal horizontal blue bands near the top and bottom edges of the
  flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Israel has a technologically advanced market
  economy with substantial government participation. It depends on
  imports of crude oil, grains, raw materials, and military equipment.
  Despite limited natural resources, Israel has intensively developed
  its agricultural and industrial sectors over the past 20 years.
  Manufacturing and construction employ about 28% of Israeli workers;
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 2.6%; and services the rest.
  Israel is largely self-sufficient in food production except for
  grains. Diamonds, high-technology equipment, and agricultural
  products (fruits and vegetables) are leading exports. Israel usually
  posts sizable current account deficits, which are covered by large
  transfer payments from abroad and by foreign loans. Roughly half of
  the government's external debt is owed to the US, which is its major
  source of economic and military aid. The influx of Jewish immigrants
  from the former USSR topped 750,000 during the period 1989-98,
  bringing the population of Israel from the former Soviet Union to
  one million, one-sixth of the total population and adding scientific
  and professional expertise of substantial value for the economy's
  future. The influx, coupled with the opening of new markets at the
  end of the Cold War, energized Israel's economy, which grew rapidly
  in the early 1990s. But growth began slowing in 1996 when the
  government imposed tighter fiscal and monetary policies and the
  immigration bonus petered out.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$101.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$18,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2%
  industry: 17%
  services: 81% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.8%
  highest 10%: 26.9% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.4% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.3 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: public services 31.2%, manufacturing
  20.2%, finance and business 13.1%, commerce 12.8%, construction
  7.5%, personal and other services 6.4%, transport, storage, and
  communications 6.2%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 2.6% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 8.7% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $55 billion
  expenditures: $58 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: food processing, diamond cutting and polishing,
  textiles and apparel, chemicals, metal products, military equipment,
  transport equipment, electrical equipment, potash mining,
  high-technology electronics, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5.4% (1996)

Electricity--production: 28.035 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 99.88%
  hydro: 0.12%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 27.725 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 310 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: citrus, vegetables, cotton; beef, poultry,
  dairy products

Exports: $22.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment, cut diamonds,
  chemicals, textiles and apparel, agricultural products, metals

Exports--partners: US 32%, UK, Hong Kong, Benelux, Japan,
  Netherlands (1997)

Imports: $26.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: raw materials, military equipment,
  investment goods, rough diamonds, oil, consumer goods

Imports--partners: US 19%, Benelux 12%, Germany 9%, UK 8%, Italy
  7%, Switzerland 6% (1997)

Debt--external: $18.7 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.241 billion (1994); note?$1.2 billion
  from the US (1997)

Currency: 1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1--4.2269
  (November 1998), 3.4494 (1997), 3.1917 (1996), 3.0113 (1995), 3.0111
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)



Communications



Telephones: 2.6 million (1996)

Telephone system: most highly developed system in the Middle East
  although not the largest
  domestic: good system of coaxial cable and microwave radio relay
  international: 3 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--3
  Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 45, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.25 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 24 (in addition, there are 31
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.5 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 610 km
  standard gauge: 610 km 1.435-m gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 15,464 km
  paved: 15,464 km (including 56 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1997 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 708 km; petroleum products 290 km; natural
  gas 89 km

Ports and harbors: Ashdod, Ashqelon, Elat (Eilat), Hadera, Haifa,
  Tel Aviv-Yafo

Merchant marine:
  total: 23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 736,419 GRT/855,497 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 1, container 21, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 54 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 31
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 10
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 23
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 18 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Israel Defense Forces (includes ground, naval,
  and air components), Pioneer Fighting Youth (Nahal), Frontier Guard,
  Chen (women); note--historically there have been no separate Israeli
  military services

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,474,046
  females age 15-49: 1,439,569 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,206,320
  females age 15-49: 1,173,818 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 50,737
  females: 48,546 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $8.7 billion (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 9.5% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are
  Israeli-occupied with current status subject to the
  Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement--permanent status to be
  determined through further negotiation; Golan Heights is
  Israeli-occupied; Israeli troops in southern Lebanon since June 1982

Illicit drugs: increasingly concerned about cocaine and heroin
  abuse; drugs primarily arrive in country from Lebanon



======================================================================




@Italy
-----





Introduction



Background: Italy failed to secure political unification until
  the 1860s, thus lacking the military and imperial power of Spain,
  Britain, and France. The fascist dictatorship of MUSSOLINI after
  World War I, led to the disastrous alliance with HITLER's Germany
  and defeat in World War II. Italy was a founding member of the
  European Economic Community (EEC) and joined in the growing
  political and economic unification of Western Europe, including the
  introduction of the euro in January 1999. On-going problems include
  illegal immigration, the ravages of organized crime, high
  unemployment, and the low incomes and technical standards of
  Southern Italy compared with the North.



Geography



Location: Southern Europe, a peninsula extending into the central
  Mediterranean Sea, northeast of Tunisia

Geographic coordinates: 42 50 N, 12 50 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 301,230 sq km
  land: 294,020 sq km
  water: 7,210 sq km
  note: includes Sardinia and Sicily

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Arizona

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,932.2 km
  border countries: Austria 430 km, France 488 km, Holy See (Vatican
  City) 3.2 km, San Marino 39 km, Slovenia 232 km, Switzerland 740 km

Coastline: 7,600 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: predominantly Mediterranean; Alpine in far north; hot,
  dry in south

Terrain: mostly rugged and mountainous; some plains, coastal
  lowlands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mont Blanc (Monte Bianco) 4,807 m

Natural resources: mercury, potash, marble, sulfur, dwindling
  natural gas and crude oil reserves, fish, coal

Land use:
  arable land: 31%
  permanent crops: 10%
  permanent pastures: 15%
  forests and woodland: 23%
  other: 21% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 27,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: regional risks include landslides, mudflows,
  avalanches, earthquakes, volcanic eruptions, flooding; land
  subsidence in Venice

Environment--current issues: air pollution from industrial
  emissions such as sulfur dioxide; coastal and inland rivers polluted
  from industrial and agricultural effluents; acid rain damaging
  lakes; inadequate industrial waste treatment and disposal facilities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location dominating central
  Mediterranean as well as southern sea and air approaches to Western
  Europe



People



Population: 56,735,130 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 14% (male 4,161,841; female 3,925,413)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 19,205,293; female 19,285,848)
  65 years and over: 18% (male 4,169,098; female 5,987,637) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.08% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.27 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.28 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.3 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.51 years
  male: 75.4 years
  female: 81.82 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.22 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Italian(s)
  adjective: Italian

Ethnic groups: Italian (includes small clusters of German-,
  French-, and Slovene-Italians in the north and Albanian-Italians and
  Greek-Italians in the south)

Religions: Roman Catholic 98%, other 2%

Languages: Italian, German (parts of Trentino-Alto Adige region
  are predominantly German speaking), French (small French-speaking
  minority in Valle d'Aosta region), Slovene (Slovene-speaking
  minority in the Trieste-Gorizia area)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 98%
  female: 96% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Italian Republic
  conventional short form: Italy
  local long form: Repubblica Italiana
  local short form: Italia
  former: Kingdom of Italy

Data code: IT

Government type: republic

Capital: Rome

Administrative divisions: 20 regions (regioni, singular--regione);
  Abruzzi, Basilicata, Calabria, Campania, Emilia-Romagna,
  Friuli-Venezia Giulia, Lazio, Liguria, Lombardia, Marche, Molise,
  Piemonte, Puglia, Sardegna, Sicilia, Toscana, Trentino-Alto Adige,
  Umbria, Valle d'Aosta, Veneto

Independence: 17 March 1861 (Kingdom of Italy proclaimed)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Republic, 2 June (1946)

Constitution: 1 January 1948

Legal system: based on civil law system, with ecclesiastical law
  influence; appeals treated as trials de novo; judicial review under
  certain conditions in Constitutional Court; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal (except in senatorial
  elections, where minimum age is 25)

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Oscar Luigi SCALFARO (since 28 May 1992)
  head of government: Prime Minister (referred to in Italy as the
  president of the Council of Ministers) Massimo D'ALEMA (since 27
  October 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  approved by the president
  elections: president elected by an electoral college consisting of
  both houses of Parliament and 58 regional representatives for a
  seven-year term; election last held 25 May 1992 (next to be held NA
  June 1999); prime minister appointed by the president and confirmed
  by parliament
  election results: Oscar Luigi SCALFARO elected president; percent of
  electoral college vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlamento consists
  of the Senate or Senato della Repubblica (326 seats--315 elected by
  popular vote of which 232 are directly elected and 83 are elected by
  regional proportional representation, 11 are appointed
  senators-for-life; members serve five-year terms) and the Chamber of
  Deputies or Camera dei Deputati (630 seats; 475 are directly
  elected, 155 by regional proportional representation; members serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 21 April 1996 (next to be held by NA
  April 2001); Chamber of Deputies--last held 21 April 1996 (next to be
  held by NA April 2001)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Olive Tree 157, Freedom Alliance 116, Northern League 27,
  Refounded Communists 10, regional lists 3, Social Movement-Tricolor
  Flames 1, Panella Reformers 1; Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote
  by party--NA; seats by party--Olive Tree 284, Freedom Alliance 246,
  Northern League 59, Refounded Communists 35, Southern Tyrol List 3,
  Autonomous List 2, other 1

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court or Corte Costituzionale,
  composed of 15 judges (one-third appointed by the president,
  one-third elected by Parliament, one-third elected by the ordinary
  and administrative supreme courts)

Political parties and leaders:
  MARINI]

Political pressure groups and leaders: the Roman Catholic Church;
  three major trade union confederations (Confederazione Generale
  D'ANTONI] which is Catholic centrist, and Unione Italiana del Lavoro
  manufacturers and merchants associations (Confindustria,
  Confcommercio); organized farm groups (Confcoltivatori,
  Confagricoltura)

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, BSEC (observer), CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CEI, CERN,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA, EU, FAO, G- 7, G-10, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  LAIA (observer), MINURSO, MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOGIP, UNTSO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ferdinando SALLEO
  chancery: 1601 Fuller Street NW, Washington, DC 20009 and 2700 16th
  Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New York, Los
  Angeles, Philadelphia, and San Francisco
  consulate(s): Detroit

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas M. FOGLIETTA
  embassy: Via Veneto 119/A, 00187-Rome
  mailing address: PSC 59, Box 100, APO AE 09624
  consulate(s) general: Florence, Milan, Naples

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), white, and red; similar to the flag of Ireland, which is
  longer and is green (hoist side), white, and orange; also similar to
  the flag of the Cote d'Ivoire, which has the colors reversed--orange
  (hoist side), white, and green



Economy



Economy--overview: Since World War II, the Italian economy has
  changed from one based on agriculture into a ranking industrial
  economy, with approximately the same total and per capita output as
  France and the UK. This basically capitalistic economy is still
  divided into a developed industrial north, dominated by private
  companies, and a less developed agricultural south, with large
  public enterprises and more than 20% unemployment. Most raw
  materials needed by industry and over 75% of energy requirements
  must be imported. In the second half of 1992, Rome became unsettled
  by the prospect of not qualifying to participate in EU plans for
  economic and monetary union later in the decade; thus, it finally
  began to address its huge fiscal imbalances. Subsequently, the
  government has adopted fairly stringent budgets, abandoned its
  inflationary wage indexation system, and started to scale back its
  generous social welfare programs, including pension and health care
  benefits. In December 1998, Italy adopted a budget compliant with
  the requirements of the European Monetary Union (EMU);
  representatives of government, labor, and employers agreed to an
  update of the 1993 "social pact," which has been widely credited
  with having brought Italy's inflation into conformity with EMU
  requirements. In 1999, Italy must adjust to the loss of an
  independent monetary policy, which it has used quite liberally in
  the past to help cope with external shocks. Italy also must work to
  stimulate employment, promote wage flexibility, and tackle the
  informal economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.181 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$20,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3.3%
  industry: 33%
  services: 63.7% (1994)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.9%
  highest 10%: 23.7% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 23.193 million

Labor force--by occupation: services 61%, industry 32%,
  agriculture 7% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 12.5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $559 billion
  expenditures: $589 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: tourism, machinery, iron and steel, chemicals, food
  processing, textiles, motor vehicles, clothing, footwear, ceramics

Industrial production growth rate: 0.5% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 226.707 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 80.02%
  hydro: 18.25%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 1.73%

Electricity--consumption: 264.007 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 800 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 38.1 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruits, vegetables, grapes, potatoes, sugar
  beets, soybeans, grain, olives; beef, dairy products; fish

Exports: $243 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: engineering products, textiles and clothing,
  production machinery, motor vehicles, transport equipment,
  chemicals; food, beverages and tobacco; minerals and nonferrous
  metals

Exports--partners: Germany 16.4%, France 12.2%, US 7.9%, UK 7.1%,
  Spain 5.2%, Netherlands 2.8% (1997)

Imports: $202 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: engineering products, chemicals, transport
  equipment, energy products, minerals and nonferrous metals, textiles
  and clothing; food, beverages and tobacco

Imports--partners: Germany 18.0%, France 13.2%, UK 6.7%,
  Netherlands 6.2%, US 5.0%, Belgium-Luxembourg 4.7% (1997)

Debt--external: $45 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.6 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Italian lira (Lit) = 100 centesimi

Exchange rates: Italian lire (Lit) per US$1--1,688.7 (January
  1999), 1,736.2 (1998), 1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9
  (1995), 1,612.4 (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 1,936.27 lire per euro; the euro will replace the local
  currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 25.6 million (1996 est.)

Telephone system: modern, well-developed, fast; fully automated
  telephone, telex, and data services
  domestic: high-capacity cable and microwave radio relay trunks
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (with a total of
  5 antennas--3 for Atlantic Ocean and 2 for Indian Ocean), 1 Inmarsat
  (Atlantic Ocean region), and NA Eutelsat; 21 submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 135, FM 28 (repeaters 1,840),
  shortwave 0

Radios: 45.7 million (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6,317 (consisting of 117 public
  stations with two kW of power or more, about 5,300 low-power public
  stations, and about 900 low-power private stations, mostly in local
  service) (1997)

Televisions: 17 million (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 19,272 km
  standard gauge: 17,983 km 1.435-m gauge; Italian Railways (FS)
  operates 15,942 km of the total standard gauge routes (10,889 km
  electrified)
  narrow gauge: 112 km 1.000-m gauge (112 km electrified); 1,177 km
  0.950-m gauge (19 km electrified) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 317,000 km
  paved: 317,000 km (including 9,500 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,400 km for various types of commercial traffic,
  although of limited overall value

Pipelines: crude oil 1,703 km; petroleum products 2,148 km;
  natural gas 19,400 km

Ports and harbors: Augusta (Sicily), Bagnoli, Bari, Brindisi,
  Gela, Genoa, La Spezia, Livorno, Milazzo, Naples, Porto Foxi, Porto
  Torres (Sardinia), Salerno, Savona, Taranto, Trieste, Venice

Merchant marine:
  total: 393 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,982,870
  GRT/8,413,850 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 38, cargo 46, chemical tanker 60, combination
  ore/oil 2, container 16, liquefied gas tanker 35, livestock carrier
  1, multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 84, passenger 6,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 53, short-sea passenger 28, specialized
  tanker 12, vehicle carrier 11 (1998 est.)

Airports: 136 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 97
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 33
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 17
  914 to 1,523 m: 30
  under 914 m: 12 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 39
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 19
  under 914 m: 18 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Carabinieri

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 14,142,889 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 12,200,780 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 315,952 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $21.095 billion (FY97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.9% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Italy and Slovenia made progress in
  resolving bilateral issues; Croatia and Italy made progress toward
  resolving a bilateral issue dating from World War II over property
  and ethnic minority rights

Illicit drugs: important gateway for and consumer of Latin
  American cocaine and Southwest Asian heroin entering the European
  market



======================================================================




@Jamaica
-------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, south of Cuba

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 N, 77 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 10,990 sq km
  land: 10,830 sq km
  water: 160 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,022 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; temperate interior

Terrain: mostly mountains, with narrow, discontinuous coastal
  plain

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Blue Mountain Peak 2,256 m

Natural resources: bauxite, gypsum, limestone

Land use:
  arable land: 14%
  permanent crops: 6%
  permanent pastures: 24%
  forests and woodland: 17%
  other: 39% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes (especially July to November)

Environment--current issues: deforestation; coastal waters
  polluted by industrial waste, sewage, and oil spills; damage to
  coral reefs; air pollution in Kingston results from vehicle emissions

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location between Cayman Trench and
  Jamaica Channel, the main sea lanes for Panama Canal



People



Population: 2,652,443 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 31% (male 421,127; female 402,593)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 819,956; female 828,176)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 79,747; female 100,844) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.64% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.22 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.39 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.39 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.93 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.62 years
  male: 73.22 years
  female: 78.13 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.26 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Jamaican(s)
  adjective: Jamaican

Ethnic groups: black 90.4%, East Indian 1.3%, white 0.2%, Chinese
  0.2%, mixed 7.3%, other 0.6%

Religions: Protestant 61.3% (Church of God 21.2%, Baptist 8.8%,
  Anglican 5.5%, Seventh-Day Adventist 9%, Pentecostal 7.6%, Methodist
  2.7%, United Church 2.7%, Brethren 1.1%, Jehovah's Witness 1.6%,
  Moravian 1.1%), Roman Catholic 4%, other, including some spiritual
  cults 34.7%

Languages: English, Creole

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 85%
  male: 80.8%
  female: 89.1% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Jamaica

Data code: JM

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Kingston

Administrative divisions: 14 parishes; Clarendon, Hanover,
  Kingston, Manchester, Portland, Saint Andrew, Saint Ann, Saint
  Catherine, Saint Elizabeth, Saint James, Saint Mary, Saint Thomas,
  Trelawny, Westmoreland

Independence: 6 August 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day (first Monday in August) (1962)

Constitution: 6 August 1962

Legal system: based on English common law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Howard Felix COOKE (since 1
  August 1991)
  head of government: Prime Minister Percival James PATTERSON (since
  30 March 1992) and Deputy Prime Minister Seymour MULLINGS (since NA
  1993)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of the prime
  minister; prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the
  governor general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (a 21-member body appointed by the governor general on the
  recommendations of the prime minister and the leader of the
  opposition; ruling party 13 seats, opposition eight seats) and the
  House of Representatives (60 seats; members are elected by popular
  vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 18 December 1997 (next to be held by March 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PNP
  50, JLP 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (judges appointed by the governor
  general on the advice of the prime minister)

Political parties and leaders: People's National Party or PNP [P.

Political pressure groups and leaders: Rastafarians (black
  religious/racial cultists, pan-Africanists); New Beginnings Movement
  or NBM

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC,
  CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS,
  OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Richard Leighton BERNAL
  chancery: 1520 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Stanley Louis MCLELLAND
  embassy: Jamaica Mutual Life Center, 2 Oxford Road, 3rd floor,
  Kingston
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: diagonal yellow cross divides the flag into
  four triangles--green (top and bottom) and black (hoist side and
  outer side)



Economy



Economy--overview: Key sectors in this island economy are bauxite
  (alumina and bauxite account for more than half of exports) and
  tourism. Since assuming office in 1992, Prime Minister PATTERSON has
  eliminated most price controls, streamlined tax schedules, and
  privatized government enterprises. Continued tight monetary and
  fiscal policies have helped slow inflation--although inflationary
  pressures are mounting--and stabilize the exchange rate, but have
  resulted in the slowdown of economic growth (moving from 1.5% in
  1992 to 0.5% in 1995). In 1996, GDP showed negative growth (-1.4%)
  and remained negative through 1998. Serious problems include: high
  interest rates; increased foreign competition; the weak financial
  condition of business in general resulting in receiverships or
  closures and downsizings of companies; the shift in investment
  portfolios to non-productive, short-term high yield instruments; a
  pressured, sometimes sliding, exchange rate; a widening merchandise
  trade deficit; and a growing internal debt for government bailouts
  to various ailing sectors of the economy, particularly the financial
  sector. Jamaica's medium-term prospects will depend upon encouraging
  investment in the productive sectors, maintaining a competitive
  exchange rate, stabilizing the labor environment, selling off
  reacquired firms, and implementing proper fiscal and monetary
  policies.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7.4%
  industry: 42.1%
  services: 50.5% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 34.2% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.4%
  highest 10%: 31.9% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.14 million (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: services 41%, agriculture 22.5%,
  industry 19% (1989)

Unemployment rate: 16.5% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.27 billion
  expenditures: $3.66 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $1.265 billion (FY98/99 est.)

Industries: tourism, bauxite, textiles, food processing, light
  manufactures

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 6.125 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 97.96%
  hydro: 2.04%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.125 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, bananas, coffee, citrus,
  potatoes, vegetables; poultry, goats, milk

Exports: $1.7 billion (1997)

Exports--commodities: alumina, bauxite, sugar, bananas, rum

Exports--partners: US 33.3%, EU (excluding UK and Norway) 17.1%,
  Canada 14.1%, UK 13.4%, Norway 6.1%, Caricom 3.4%

Imports: $2.8 billion (1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  construction materials, fuel, food, chemicals

Imports--partners: US 47.7%, EU (excluding UK) 12.8%, Caricom
  10.2%, Latin America 6.7%, UK 3.7% (1997)

Debt--external: $4.2 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $102.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Jamaican dollar (J$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Jamaican dollars (J$) per US$1--35.57 (December
  1998), 35.404 (1997), 37.120 (1996), 35.142 (1995), 33.086 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 350,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system: fully automatic domestic telephone network
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  3 coaxial submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 7, shortwave 0 (1997)

Radios: 1.973 million (1997)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (1997)

Televisions: 330,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 370 km
  standard gauge: 370 km 1.435-m gauge; note--207 km belong to the
  Jamaica Railway Corporation in common carrier service, but are no
  longer operational; the remaining track is privately owned and used
  to transport bauxite

Highways:
  total: 18,700 km
  paved: 13,100 km
  unpaved: 5,600 km (1997 est.)

Pipelines: petroleum products 10 km

Ports and harbors: Alligator Pond, Discovery Bay, Kingston,
  Montego Bay, Ocho Rios, Port Antonio, Rocky Point, Port Esquivel
  (Longswharf)

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,478 GRT/5,878 DWT
  ships by type: oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 36 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 11
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 25
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 23 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Jamaica Defense Force (includes Ground Forces,
  Coast Guard, and Air Wing), Jamaica Constabulary Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 715,260 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 503,667 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 26,108 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $47.9 million (FY97/98 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine from Central and
  South America to North America and Europe; illicit cultivation of
  cannabis; government has an active manual cannabis eradication
  program



======================================================================




@Jan Mayen
---------





Geography



Location: Northern Europe, island between the Greenland Sea and
  the Norwegian Sea, northeast of Iceland

Geographic coordinates: 71 00 N, 8 00 W

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
  total: 373 sq km
  land: 373 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 124.1 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 10 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: arctic maritime with frequent storms and persistent fog

Terrain: volcanic island, partly covered by glaciers

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Norwegian Sea 0 m
  highest point: Haakon VII Toppen/Beerenberg 2,277 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: dominated by the volcano Haakon VII
  Toppen/Beerenberg; volcanic activity resumed in 1970

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: barren volcanic island with some moss and grass



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there are personnel who operate the Long Range Navigation
  (Loran) C base and the weather and coastal services radio station



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Jan Mayen

Data code: JN

Dependency status: territory of Norway; administered from Oslo
  through a governor (sysselmann) resident in Longyearbyen (Svalbard);
  however, authority has been delegated to a station commander of the
  Norwegian Defense Communication Service

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Norway)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of Norway)

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Jan Mayen is a volcanic island with no
  exploitable natural resources. Economic activity is limited to
  providing services for employees of Norway's radio and
  meteorological stations located on the island.



Communications



Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA
  note: radio and meteorological station



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Norway



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Japan
-----





Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, island chain between the North Pacific
  Ocean and the Sea of Japan, east of the Korean Peninsula

Geographic coordinates: 36 00 N, 138 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 377,835 sq km
  land: 374,744 sq km
  water: 3,091 sq km
  note: includes Bonin Islands (Ogasawara-gunto), Daito-shoto,
  Minami-jima, Okino-tori-shima, Ryukyu Islands (Nansei-shoto), and
  Volcano Islands (Kazan-retto)

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than California

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 29,751 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm; between 3 nm and 12 nm in the international
  straits--La Perouse or Soya, Tsugaru, Osumi, and Eastern and Western
  Channels of the Korea or Tsushima Strait

Climate: varies from tropical in south to cool temperate in north

Terrain: mostly rugged and mountainous

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Hachiro-gata -4 m
  highest point: Fujiyama 3,776 m

Natural resources: negligible mineral resources, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 2%
  forests and woodland: 67%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 27,820 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: many dormant and some active volcanoes; about
  1,500 seismic occurrences (mostly tremors) every year; tsunamis

Environment--current issues: air pollution from power plant
  emissions results in acid rain; acidification of lakes and
  reservoirs degrading water quality and threatening aquatic life;
  Japan is one of the largest consumers of fish and tropical timber,
  contributing to the depletion of these resources in Asia and
  elsewhere

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertication, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location in northeast Asia



People



Population: 126,182,077 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 15% (male 9,697,851; female 9,242,027)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 43,405,024; female 43,023,885)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 8,686,347; female 12,126,943) (1999
  est.)

Population growth rate: 0.2% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.48 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.12 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.07 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 80.11 years
  male: 77.02 years
  female: 83.35 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.48 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Japanese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Japanese

Ethnic groups: Japanese 99.4%, other 0.6% (mostly Korean)

Religions: observe both Shinto and Buddhist 84%, other 16%
  (including Christian 0.7%)

Languages: Japanese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1970 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Japan

Data code: JA

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Tokyo

Administrative divisions: 47 prefectures; Aichi, Akita, Aomori,
  Chiba, Ehime, Fukui, Fukuoka, Fukushima, Gifu, Gumma, Hiroshima,
  Hokkaido, Hyogo, Ibaraki, Ishikawa, Iwate, Kagawa, Kagoshima,
  Kanagawa, Kochi, Kumamoto, Kyoto, Mie, Miyagi, Miyazaki, Nagano,
  Nagasaki, Nara, Niigata, Oita, Okayama, Okinawa, Osaka, Saga,
  Saitama, Shiga, Shimane, Shizuoka, Tochigi, Tokushima, Tokyo,
  Tottori, Toyama, Wakayama, Yamagata, Yamaguchi, Yamanashi

Independence: 660 BC (traditional founding by Emperor Jimmu)

National holiday: Birthday of the Emperor, 23 December (1933)

Constitution: 3 May 1947

Legal system: modeled after European civil law system with
  English-American influence; judicial review of legislative acts in
  the Supreme Court; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Emperor AKIHITO (since 7 January 1989)
  head of government: Prime Minister Keizo OBUCHI (since 30 July 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the Diet designates the
  prime minister; the constitution requires that the prime minister
  must command a parliamentary majority, therefore, following
  legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of
  a majority coalition in the House of Representatives usually becomes
  prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral Diet or Kokkai consists of the
  House of Councillors or Sangi-in (252 seats; one-half of the members
  elected every three years--76 seats of which are elected from the 47
  multi-seat prefectural districts and 50 of which are elected from a
  single nationwide list with voters casting ballots by party; members
  elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the House of
  Representatives or Shugi-in (500 seats--200 of which are elected from
  11 regional blocks on a proportional representation basis and 300 of
  which are elected from 300 single-seat districts; members elected by
  popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: House of Councillors--last held 12 July 1998 (next to be
  held NA July 2001); House of Representatives--last held 20 October
  1996 (next to be held by October 2000)
  election results: House of Councillors--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--LDP 102, DPJ 47, JCP 23, Komeito 22, SDP 13, Liberal
  Party 12, independents 26, others 7; note--the distribution of seats
  as of January 1999 is as follows--LDP 104, DPJ 56, Komeito 24, JCP
  23, SDP 14, Liberal Party 12, independents 5, others 14; House of
  Representatives--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--LDP 240,
  NFP 142, DPJ 52, JCP 26, SDP 15, Sun Party 10, others 15; note--the
  distribution of seats as of January 1999 is as follows--LDP 266, DPJ
  94, Komeito/Reform Club 52, Liberal Party 39, JCP 26, SDP 14,
  independents 5, others 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is appointed by the
  monarch after designation by the cabinet, all other justices are
  appointed by the cabinet

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Democratic Party or LDP
  president, Hirohisa FUJII, secretary general]; Japan Communist Party
  Katsuyuki ISHIDA, secretary general]
  note: subsequent to the last legislative elections, the New Frontier
  Party or NFP and the Sun Party disbanded; the DPJ was formed by
  former members of the SDP and Sakigake and, in April 1998, was
  joined by three additional parties which had formed after the NFP
  disbanded; New Peace Party and Komei merged to form Komeito in
  November 1998

International organization participation: AfDB, APEC, AsDB,
  Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE (observer), CERN (observer), CP, EBRD,
  ESCAP, FAO, G- 5, G- 7, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE (partner), PCA, UN, UN Security Council
  (temporary), UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNRWA,
  UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kunihiko SAITO
  chancery: 2520 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Hagatna (Guam), Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston,
  Chicago, Detroit, Honolulu, Houston, Kansas City (Missouri), Los
  Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York, Portland (Oregon), San
  Francisco, and Seattle
  consulate(s): Saipan (Northern Mariana Islands)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas S. FOLEY
  embassy: 10-5, Akasaka 1-chome, Minato-ku, Tokyo 107-8420
  mailing address: Unit 45004, Box 258, APO AP 96337-5004
  consulate(s) general: Naha (Okinawa), Osaka-Kobe, Sapporo
  consulate(s): Fukuoka, Nagoya

Flag description: white with a large red disk (representing the
  sun without rays) in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Government-industry cooperation, a strong work
  ethic, mastery of high technology, and a comparatively small defense
  allocation (1% of GDP) have helped Japan advance with extraordinary
  rapidity to the rank of second most powerful economy in the world.
  One notable characteristic of the economy is the working together of
  manufacturers, suppliers, and distributors in closely knit groups
  called keiretsu. A second basic feature has been the guarantee of
  lifetime employment for a substantial portion of the urban labor
  force; this guarantee is eroding. Industry, the most important
  sector of the economy, is heavily dependent on imported raw
  materials and fuels. The much smaller agricultural sector is highly
  subsidized and protected, with crop yields among the highest in the
  world. Usually self-sufficient in rice, Japan must import about 50%
  of its requirements of other grain and fodder crops. Japan maintains
  one of the world's largest fishing fleets and accounts for nearly
  15% of the global catch. For three decades overall real economic
  growth had been spectacular: a 10% average in the 1960s, a 5%
  average in the 1970s, and a 4% average in the 1980s. Growth slowed
  markedly in 1992-95 largely because of the aftereffects of
  overinvestment during the late 1980s and contractionary domestic
  policies intended to wring speculative excesses from the stock and
  real estate markets. Growth picked up to 3.9% in 1996, largely a
  reflection of stimulative fiscal and monetary policies as well as
  low rates of inflation. But in 1997-98 Japan experienced a wrenching
  recession, centered about financial difficulties in the banking
  system and real estate markets and exacerbated by rigidities in
  corporate structures and labor markets. In early 1999 output has
  started to stabilize as emergency government spending begins to take
  hold. The crowding of habitable land area and the aging of the
  population are two major long-run problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.903 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -2.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$23,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2%
  industry: 38%
  services: 60% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 67.72 million (November 1998)

Labor force--by occupation: trade and services 50%, manufacturing,
  mining, and construction 33%, utilities and communication 7%,
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 6%, government 3% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 4.4% (November 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $407 billion
  expenditures: $711 billion, including capital expenditures (public
  works only) of about $86 billion (FY99/00 est.)

Industries: among world's largest and technologically advanced
  producers of steel and nonferrous metallurgy, heavy electrical
  equipment, construction and mining equipment, motor vehicles and
  parts, electronic and telecommunication equipment, machine tools,
  automated production systems, locomotives and railroad rolling
  stock, ships, chemicals; textiles, processed foods

Industrial production growth rate: -6.9% (1998)

Electricity--production: 948.559 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 61.47%
  hydro: 8.34%
  nuclear: 29.83%
  other: 0.36% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 948.559 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, sugar beets, vegetables, fruit; pork,
  poultry, dairy products, eggs; fish

Exports: $440 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: manufactures 96% (including machinery 50%,
  motor vehicles 19%, consumer electronics 3%)

Exports--partners: US 30%, EU 18%, Southeast Asia 12%, China 5%

Imports: $319 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: manufactures 54%, foodstuffs and raw
  materials 28%, fossil fuels 16%

Imports--partners: US 24%, Southeast Asia 14%, EU 14%, China 13%

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $9.1 billion (1999)

Currency: yen (Y)

Exchange rates: yen (Y) per US$1--113.18 (January 1999), 130.91
  (1998), 120.99 (1997), 108.78 (1996), 94.06 (1995), 102.21 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 64 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international service
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--5 Intelsat (4 Pacific Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean region), and 1
  Inmarsat (Pacific and Indian Ocean regions); submarine cables to
  China, Philippines, Russia, and US (via Guam)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 318, FM 58, shortwave 0

Radios: 97 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7,549 (consisting of 6,995
  non-government and non-commercial stations, of which 95 are main
  stations of 1 kW or greater power and 6,900 are low-power stations,
  and 554 commercial stations of which 113 are main stations and 441
  are repeaters); note--in addition, US Forces are served by 3 TV
  stations and 2 TV cable stations (1997)

Televisions: 100 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 23,670.7 km
  standard gauge: 2,893.1 km 1.435-m gauge (entirely electrified)
  narrow gauge: 89.8 km 1.372-m gauge (89.8 km electrified); 20,656.8
  km 1.067-m gauge (10,383.6 km electrified); 31 km 0.762-m gauge (3.6
  km electrified) (1994)

Highways:
  total: 1.16 million km
  paved: 859,560 km (including 6,070 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 300,440 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: about 1,770 km; seagoing craft ply all coastal inland
  seas

Pipelines: crude oil 84 km; petroleum products 322 km; natural
  gas 1,800 km

Ports and harbors: Akita, Amagasaki, Chiba, Hachinohe, Hakodate,
  Higashi-Harima, Himeji, Hiroshima, Kawasaki, Kinuura, Kobe, Kushiro,
  Mizushima, Moji, Nagoya, Osaka, Sakai, Sakaide, Shimizu, Tokyo,
  Tomakomai

Merchant marine:
  total: 713 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 13,753,027
  GRT/19,311,312 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 159, cargo 54, chemical tanker 13, combination
  bulk 16, combination ore/oil 4, container 27, liquefied gas tanker
  40, oil tanker 232, passenger 10, passenger-cargo 2, refrigerated
  cargo 27, roll-on/roll-off cargo 48, short-sea passenger 13, vehicle
  carrier 68 (1998 est.)

Airports: 170 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 140
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 35
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 39
  914 to 1,523 m: 30
  under 914 m: 31 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 30
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 28 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 14 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Japan Ground Self-Defense Force (Army), Japan
  Maritime Self-Defense Force (Navy), Japan Air Self-Defense Force
  (Air Force)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 30,646,516 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 26,438,961 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 784,658 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $42.9 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.9% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, Shikotan,
  and the Habomai group occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, now
  administered by Russia, claimed by Japan; Liancourt Rocks
  (Takeshima/Tokdo) disputed with South Korea; Senkaku-shoto (Senkaku
  Islands) claimed by China and Taiwan



======================================================================




@Jarvis Island
-------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from Hawaii to the Cook Islands

Geographic coordinates: 0 22 S, 160 03 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 4.5 sq km
  land: 4.5 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about eight times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 8 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; scant rainfall, constant wind, burning sun

Terrain: sandy, coral island surrounded by a narrow fringing reef

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 7 m

Natural resources: guano (deposits worked until late 1800s)

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: the narrow fringing reef surrounding the island
  can be a maritime hazard

Environment--current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: sparse bunch grass, prostrate vines, and
  low-growing shrubs; primarily a nesting, roosting, and foraging
  habitat for seabirds, shorebirds, and marine wildlife



People



Population: uninhabited
  note: Millersville settlement on western side of island occasionally
  used as a weather station from 1935 until World War II, when it was
  abandoned; reoccupied in 1957 during the International Geophysical
  Year by scientists who left in 1958; public entry is by special-use
  permit from US Fish and Wildlife Service only and generally
  restricted to scientists and educators; visited annually by US Fish
  and Wildlife Service



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Jarvis Island

Data code: DQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC by the Fish and Wildlife Service of
  the US Department of the Interior as part of the National Wildlife
  Refuge system

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only; note--there is
  one boat landing area in the middle of the west coast and another
  near the southwest corner of the island

Transportation--note: there is a day beacon near the middle of the
  west coast



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US; visited
  annually by the US Coast Guard



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Jersey
------





Geography



Location: Western Europe, island in the English Channel,
  northwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 49 15 N, 2 10 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 116 sq km
  land: 116 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 70 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: temperate; mild winters and cool summers

Terrain: gently rolling plain with low, rugged hills along north
  coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 143 m

Natural resources: agricultural land

Land use:
  arable land: 66%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 34%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: largest and southernmost of Channel Islands;
  about 30% of population concentrated in Saint Helier



People



Population: 89,721 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 8,308; female 7,663)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 30,168; female 30,754)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 5,348; female 7,480) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.63% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.85 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.08 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.11 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 2.76 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.83 years
  male: 76.08 years
  female: 81.87 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.5 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Channel Islander(s)
  adjective: Channel Islander

Ethnic groups: UK and Norman-French descent

Religions: Anglican, Roman Catholic, Baptist, Congregational New
  Church, Methodist, Presbyterian

Languages: English (official), French (official), Norman-French
  dialect spoken in country districts

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Bailiwick of Jersey
  conventional short form: Jersey

Data code: JE

Dependency status: British crown dependency

Government type: NA

Capital: Saint Helier

Administrative divisions: none (British crown dependency)

Independence: none (British crown dependency)

National holiday: Liberation Day, 9 May (1945)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
  practice

Legal system: English law and local statute

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  head of government: Lieutenant Governor and Commander in Chief Sir
  Michael WILKES (since NA 1995) and Bailiff Philip Martin BAILHACHE
  (since NA 1995)
  cabinet: committees appointed by the Assembly of the States
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; lieutenant governor and
  bailiff appointed by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the States (57
  seats--53 elected including 12 senators popularly elected for
  six-year terms, half retiring every third year, 12 constables
  popularly elected triennially, and 29 deputies popularly elected
  triennially)
  elections: last held NA (next to be held NA)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 52

Judicial branch: Royal Court, judges elected by an electoral
  college and the bailiff

Political parties and leaders: none; all independents

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (British crown
  dependency)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (British crown
  dependency)

Flag description: white with the diagonal red cross of Saint
  Patrick (patron saint of Ireland) extending to the corners of the
  flag



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is based largely on financial
  services, agriculture, and tourism. Potatoes, cauliflower, tomatoes,
  and especially flowers are important export crops, shipped mostly to
  the UK. The Jersey breed of dairy cattle is known worldwide and
  represents an important export earner. Milk products go to the UK
  and other EU countries. In 1996 the finance sector accounted for
  about 60% of the island's output. Tourism, another mainstay of the
  economy, accounts for 24% of GDP. In recent years, the government
  has encouraged light industry to locate in Jersey, with the result
  that an electronics industry has developed alongside the traditional
  manufacturing of knitwear. All raw material and energy requirements
  are imported, as well as a large share of Jersey's food needs. Light
  tax and death duties make the island a popular tax haven.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 2%
  services: 93% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.7% (1996)

Labor force: 57,050 (1996)

Unemployment rate: 0.7% (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $666.9 million
  expenditures: $618.5 million, including capital expenditures of
  $128.4 million (1996 est.)

Industries: tourism, banking and finance, dairy

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 467 million kWh (1995)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh; note?much electricity supplied by
  France

Agriculture--products: potatoes, cauliflowers, tomatoes; beef,
  dairy products

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: light industrial and electrical goods,
  foodstuffs, textiles

Exports--partners: UK

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  manufactured goods, foodstuffs, mineral fuels, chemicals

Imports--partners: UK

Debt--external: none

Economic aid--recipient: none

Currency: 1 Jersey pound (LJ) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Jersey pounds (LJ) per US$1--0.6057 (January
  1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995),
  0.6529 (1994); the Jersey pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 61,447 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: 3 submarine cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 577 km (1995)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Gorey, Saint Aubin, Saint Helier

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Johnston Atoll
--------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  one-third of the way from Hawaii to the Marshall Islands

Geographic coordinates: 16 45 N, 169 30 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 2.8 sq km
  land: 2.8 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 4.7 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 10 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but generally dry; consistent northeast trade
  winds with little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: mostly flat

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Summit Peak 5 m

Natural resources: NA; guano deposits worked until depletion
  about 1890

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: no natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
  Johnston Island and Sand Island are natural islands, which have been
  expanded by coral dredging; North Island (Akau) and East Island
  (Hikina) are manmade islands formed from coral dredging; closed to
  the public; former US nuclear weapons test site; site of Johnston
  Atoll Chemical Agent Disposal System (JACADS); some low-growing
  vegetation



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there are 1,200 US military and civilian contractor personnel
  (January 1999 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Johnston Atoll

Data code: JQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC, by the US Defense Threat Reduction
  Agency (DTRA) and managed cooperatively by DTRA and the Fish and
  Wildlife Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the
  National Wildlife Refuge system

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity is limited to providing
  services to US military personnel and contractors located on the
  island. All food and manufactured goods must be imported.

Electricity--production: NAkWh
  note: there are six 25,000 kWh generators supplied by the base
  operating support contractor

Electricity--consumption: NAkWh



Communications



Telephone system: 13 outgoing and 10 incoming commercial lines;
  adequate telecommunications
  domestic: 60-channel submarine cable, 22 DSN circuits by satellite,
  Autodin with standard remote terminal, digital telephone switch,
  Military Affiliated Radio System (MARS station), UHF/VHF air-ground
  radio, a link to the Pacific Consolidated Telecommunications Network
  (PCTN) satellite
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM 5 channels; also 1 local
  volunteer FM radio station;, shortwave NA;

Television broadcast stations: commercial satellite television
  system, with 16 channels (1997)



Transportation



Ports and harbors: Johnston Island

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Jordan
------





Geography



Location: Middle East, northwest of Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 31 00 N, 36 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 89,213 sq km
  land: 88,884 sq km
  water: 329 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,619 km
  border countries: Iraq 181 km, Israel 238 km, Saudi Arabia 728 km,
  Syria 375 km, West Bank 97 km

Coastline: 26 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: mostly arid desert; rainy season in west (November to
  April)

Terrain: mostly desert plateau in east, highland area in west;
  Great Rift Valley separates East and West Banks of the Jordan River

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
  highest point: Jabal Ram 1,754 m

Natural resources: phosphates, potash, shale oil

Land use:
  arable land: 4%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 1%
  other: 85% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 630 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water
  resources; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 4,561,147 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 1,005,211; female 954,968)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 1,265,116; female 1,200,372)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 67,852; female 67,628) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.05% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 34.31 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.85 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 32.7 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.06 years
  male: 71.15 years
  female: 75.08 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.64 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Jordanian(s)
  adjective: Jordanian

Ethnic groups: Arab 98%, Circassian 1%, Armenian 1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 96%, Christian 4% (1997 est.)

Languages: Arabic (official), English widely understood among
  upper and middle classes

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 86.6%
  male: 93.4%
  female: 79.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Hashemite Kingdom of Jordan
  conventional short form: Jordan
  local long form: Al Mamlakah al Urduniyah al Hashimiyah
  local short form: Al Urdun
  former: Transjordan

Data code: JO

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Amman

Administrative divisions: 12 governorates (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Ajlun, Al 'Aqabah, Al Balqa', Al Karak, Al
  Mafraq, 'Amman, At Tafilah, Az Zarqa', Irbid, Jarash, Ma'an, Madaba

Independence: 25 May 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under
  British administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 May (1946)

Constitution: 8 January 1952

Legal system: based on Islamic law and French codes; judicial
  review of legislative acts in a specially provided High Tribunal;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King ABDULLAH II (since 7 February 1999)
  head of government: Prime Minister Fayez TARAWNEH (since 20 August
  1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister in consultation
  with the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Majlis
  al-'Umma consists of the Senate (a 40-member body appointed by the
  monarch from designated categories of public figures; members serve
  four-year terms) and the House of Representatives (80 seats; members
  elected by popular vote on the basis of proportional representation
  to serve four-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 4 November 1997 (next
  to be held NA November 2001)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--National Constitutional Party 2, Arab Land
  Party 1, independents 75, other 2
  note: the House of Representatives has been convened and dissolved
  by the monarch several times since 1974; in November 1989 the first
  parliamentary elections in 22 years were held

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation

Political parties and leaders: Al-Ahrar (Freedom) Party [Dr.
  Ahmad ZO'BI, secretary general]; Arab Ba'th Progressive Party
  Ishaq al-FARHAN, secretary general]; Jordanian Arab Constitutional
  MAJALI, secretary general]; National Democratic Public Movement
  HNEIDI, secretary general]

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACC, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, MONUA, NAM, OIC,
  OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG,
  UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Marwan Jamil MUASHIR
  chancery: 3504 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William BURNS
  embassy: Jabel Amman, Amman
  mailing address: P. O. Box 354, Amman 11118 Jordan; APO AE 09892-0200

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top),
  white, and green with a red isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side bearing a small white seven-pointed star; the seven points on
  the star represent the seven fundamental laws of the Koran



Economy



Economy--overview: Jordan is a small Arab country with inadequate
  supplies of water and other natural resources such as oil and coal.
  Jordan benefited from increased Arab aid during the oil boom of the
  late 1970s and early 1980s, when its annual real GNP growth averaged
  more than 10%. In the remainder of the 1980s, however, reductions in
  both Arab aid and worker remittances slowed real economic growth to
  an average of roughly 2% per year. Imports--mainly oil, capital
  goods, consumer durables, and food--outstripped exports, with the
  difference covered by aid, remittances, and borrowing. In mid-1989,
  the Jordanian Government began debt-rescheduling negotiations and
  agreed to implement an IMF-supported program designed to gradually
  reduce the budget deficit and implement badly needed structural
  reforms. The Persian Gulf crisis that began in August 1990, however,
  aggravated Jordan's already serious economic problems, forcing the
  government to shelve the IMF program, stop most debt payments, and
  suspend rescheduling negotiations. Aid from Gulf Arab states, worker
  remittances, and trade contracted; and refugees flooded the country,
  producing serious balance-of-payments problems, stunting GDP growth,
  and straining government resources. The economy rebounded in 1992,
  largely due to the influx of capital repatriated by workers
  returning from the Gulf, but recovery was uneven. A preliminary
  agreement with the IMF in early 1999 will provide new loans over the
  next three years. Sluggish growth, along with debt, poverty, and
  unemployment are fundamental ongoing economic problems.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$15.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 30%
  services: 64% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: 30% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.4%
  highest 10%: 34.7% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.15 million
  note: in addition, there are 300,000 foreign workers (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 11.4%, commerce, restaurants,
  and hotels 10.5%, construction 10%, transport and communications
  8.7%, agriculture 7.4%, other services 52% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 15% official rate; note--actual rate is 25%-30%
  (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.8 billion
  expenditures: $3 billion, including capital expenditures of $672
  million (1999 est.)

Industries: phosphate mining, petroleum refining, cement, potash,
  light manufacturing

Industrial production growth rate: -3.4% (1996)

Electricity--production: 5.52 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 99.64%
  hydro: 0.36%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.52 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, citrus, tomatoes, melons,
  olives; sheep, goats, poultry

Exports: $1.5 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: phosphates, fertilizers, potash,
  agricultural products, manufactures

Exports--partners: Iraq, India, Saudi Arabia, EU, Indonesia, UAE,
  Syria, Ethiopia

Imports: $3.9 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: crude oil, machinery, transport equipment,
  food, live animals, manufactured goods

Imports--partners: EU, Iraq, US, Japan, Turkey, Malaysia, Syria,
  China

Debt--external: $7.5 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.097 billion (1995); note?received $320
  million from ODA in 1998 (est.)

Currency: 1 Jordanian dinar (JD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Jordanian dinars (JD) per US$1--0.7090 (January
  1999-1996), 0.7005 (1995), 0.6987 (1994), 0.6928 (1993)
  note: since May 1989, the dinar has been pegged to a basket of
  currencies

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 425,000 (1998)

Telephone system:
  domestic: microwave radio relay, coaxial and fiber-optic cable, and
  cellular; Jordan has two cellular telephone providers (with
  approximately 50,000 subscribers in 1998), ten data service
  providers, and four Internet service providers (with approximately
  8,000 subscribers in 1998)
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat, 1 Arabsat, and
  29 land and maritime Inmarsat terminals (1996); coaxial cable,
  fiber-optic cable, and microwave radio relay to Iraq, Saudi Arabia,
  Syria, and Israel; building a Red Sea Fiber-Optic Link Around the
  Globe (FLAG) fiber-optic submarine cable link and planning to update
  links with Saudi Arabia and Israel to fiber-optic cable; 4,000
  international circuits (1998 est.); participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 7, shortwave 1 (1998 est.)

Radios: 1.1 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8 (in addition, there are
  approximately 42 repeaters and 1 TV receive-only satellite link)
  (1997)

Televisions: 350,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 677 km
  narrow gauge: 677 km 1.050-m gauge; note--an additional 110 km
  stretch of the old Hejaz railroad is out of use (1998 est.)

Highways:
  total: 8,000 km
  paved: 8,000 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1998 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 209 km

Ports and harbors: Al 'Aqabah

Merchant marine:
  total: 7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 42,746 GRT/59,100 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 2, container 1, livestock carrier 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 17 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 9
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Jordanian Armed Forces (JAF; includes Royal
  Jordanian Land Force, Royal Naval Force, and Royal Jordanian Air
  Force); Badiya (irregular) Border Guards; Ministry of the Interior's
  Public Security Force (falls under JAF only in wartime or crisis
  situations)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,113,998 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 793,002 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 49,954 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $608.9 million (FY 98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 7.8% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Juan de Nova Island
-------------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Mozambique Channel,
  about one-third of the way between Madagascar and Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 17 03 S, 42 45 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 4.4 sq km
  land: 4.4 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about seven times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 24.1 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 12 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to depth the of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 10 m

Natural resources: guano deposits and other fertilizers

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 90%
  other: 10%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: periodic cyclones

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: wildlife sanctuary



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Juan de Nova Island
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ile Juan de Nova

Data code: JU

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (possession of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Railways:
  total: NA km; short line going to a jetty

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Madagascar



======================================================================




@Kazakhstan
----------





Introduction



Background: As a republic within the USSR (1920-91), Kazakhstan
  suffered greatly from Stalinist purges, from environmental damage,
  and saw the ethnic Russian portion of its population rise to 37%
  while other non-Kazakhs made up almost 20%. Current issues include
  the pace of market reform and privatization; fair and free elections
  and democratic reform; ethnic differences between Russians and
  Kazakhs; environmental problems; and how to convert the country's
  abundant energy resources into a better standard of living.



Geography



Location: Central Asia, northwest of China

Geographic coordinates: 48 00 N, 68 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 2,717,300 sq km
  land: 2,669,800 sq km
  water: 47,500 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than four times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 12,012 km
  border countries: China 1,533 km, Kyrgyzstan 1,051 km, Russia 6,846
  km, Turkmenistan 379 km, Uzbekistan 2,203 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)
  note: Kazakhstan borders the Aral Sea, now split into two bodies of
  water (1,070 km), and the Caspian Sea (1,894 km)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: continental, cold winters and hot summers, arid and
  semiarid

Terrain: extends from the Volga to the Altai Mountains and from
  the plains in western Siberia to oases and desert in Central Asia

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Vpadina Kaundy -132 m
  highest point: Zhengis Shingy (Pik Khan-Tengri) 6,995 m

Natural resources: major deposits of petroleum, natural gas,
  coal, iron ore, manganese, chrome ore, nickel, cobalt, copper,
  molybdenum, lead, zinc, bauxite, gold, uranium

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 11%
  permanent pastures: 57%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 16% (1996 est.)

Irrigated land: 22,000 sq km (1996 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes in the south, mudslides around Almaty

Environment--current issues: radioactive or toxic chemical sites
  associated with its former defense industries and test ranges are
  found throughout the country and pose health risks for humans and
  animals; industrial pollution is severe in some cities; because the
  two main rivers which flowed into the Aral Sea have been diverted
  for irrigation, it is drying up and leaving behind a harmful layer
  of chemical pesticides and natural salts; these substances are then
  picked up by the wind and blown into noxious dust storms; pollution
  in the Caspian Sea; soil pollution from overuse of agricultural
  chemicals and salination from faulty irrigation practices

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 16,824,825 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 28% (male 2,432,519; female 2,359,375)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 5,279,877; female 5,580,271)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 392,934; female 779,849) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.09% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 17.16 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.34 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -7.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.5 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 58.82 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 63.39 years
  male: 57.92 years
  female: 69.13 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.09 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Kazakhstani(s)
  adjective: Kazakhstani

Ethnic groups: Kazakh (Qazaq) 46%, Russian 34.7%, Ukrainian 4.9%,
  German 3.1%, Uzbek 2.3%, Tatar 1.9%, other 7.1% (1996)

Religions: Muslim 47%, Russian Orthodox 44%, Protestant 2%, other
  7%

Languages: Kazakh (Qazaq) (state language) 40%, Russian
  (official, used in everyday business) 66%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 96% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Kazakhstan
  conventional short form: Kazakhstan
  local long form: Qazaqstan Respublikasy
  local short form: none
  former: Kazakh Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: KZ

Government type: republic

Capital: Astana
  note: the government moved from Almaty to Astana in December 1998

Administrative divisions: 14 oblystar (singular--oblysy) and 3
  cities (qala, singular--qalasy)*; Almaty, Almaty*, Aqmola (Astana),
  Aqtobe, Astana*, Atyrau, Batys Qazaqstan (Oral), Bayqongyr*,
  Mangghystau (Aqtau; formerly Gur'yev), Ongtustik Qazaqstan
  (Shymkent), Pavlodar, Qaraghandy, Qostanay, Qyzylorda, Shyghys
  Qazaqstan (Oskemen; formerly Ust'-Kamenogorsk), Soltustik Qazaqstan
  (Petropavl), Zhambyl (Taraz; formerly Dzhambul)
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses); in 1995 the Governments of
  Kazakhstan and Russia entered into an agreement whereby Russia would
  lease for a period of 20 years an area of 6,000 sq km enclosing the
  Bayqongyr (Baykonur) space launch facilities and the city of
  Bayqongyr (formerly Leninsk)

Independence: 16 December 1991 (from the Soviet Union)

National holiday: Day of the Republic, 25 October (1990) (date on
  which Kazakhstan declared its sovereignty)

Constitution: adopted by national referendum 30 August 1995;
  first post-independence constitution was adopted 28 January 1993

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV (chairman of the
  Supreme Soviet from 22 February 1990-91, president since 1 December
  1991)
  head of government: Prime Minister Nurlan BALGIMBAYEV (since 10
  October 1997) and First Deputy Prime Minister Uraz ZHANDOSOV (since
  20 February 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 10 January 1999, a year before it was previously
  scheduled (next to be held NA 2006); note--President NAZARBAYEV's
  previous term had been extended to 2000 by a nationwide referendum
  held 30 April 1995; prime minister and first deputy prime minister
  appointed by the president
  election results: Nursultan A. NAZARBAYEV elected president; percent
  of vote--Nursultan NAZARBAYEV 82%, Serikbolsyn ABDILDIN 12%
  note: President NAZARBAYEV expanded his presidential powers by
  decree: only he can initiate constitutional amendments, appoint and
  dismiss the government, dissolve Parliament, call referenda at his
  discretion, and appoint administrative heads of regions and cities

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (47 seats; 7 senators are appointed by the president; other members
  are popularly elected, two from each oblast and Almaty, to serve
  four-year terms) and the Majilis (67 seats; members are popularly
  elected to serve four-year terms); note--with the oblasts being
  reduced to 14, the Senate will eventually be reduced to 37
  elections: Senate--(indirect) last held 5 December 1995 (next to be
  held NA 1999); Majilis--last held 9 December and 23 December 1995
  (next to be held NA 1999)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--party members 13, no party affiliation 34, of which
  "independent" state officials 25, nominated by the president 7,
  elected by popular vote 15; Majilis--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--PUP 24, December National Democratic Party 12,
  Kazakhstan Agrarian Union 5, Confederation of Kazakh Trade Unions 5,
  KPK 2, independents and others 19

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (44 members); Constitutional
  Council (7 members)

Political parties and leaders: People's Unity Party or PUP (was

Political pressure groups and leaders: Independent Trade Union
  chairman]

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EAPC,
  EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, OAS (observer),
  OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Bolat K. NURGALIYEV
  chancery: 1401 16th Street, NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Richard H. JONES
  embassy: 99/97A Furmanova Street, Almaty, Republic of Kazakhstan
  480091
  mailing address: American Embassy Almaty, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7030

Flag description: sky blue background representing the endless
  sky and a gold sun with 32 rays soaring above a golden steppe eagle
  in the center; on the hoist side is a "national ornamentation" in
  yellow



Economy



Economy--overview: Kazakhstan, the second largest of the former
  Soviet republics in territory, possesses enormous untapped fossil
  fuel reserves as well as plentiful supplies of other minerals and
  metals. It also has considerable agricultural potential with its
  vast steppe lands accommodating both livestock and grain production.
  Kazakhstan's industrial sector rests on the extraction and
  processing of these natural resources and also on a relatively large
  machine building sector specializing in construction equipment,
  tractors, agricultural machinery, and some defense items. The
  breakup of the USSR and the collapse of demand for Kazakhstan's
  traditional heavy industry products have resulted in a sharp
  contraction of the economy since 1991, with the steepest annual
  decline occurring in 1994. In 1995-97 the pace of the government
  program of economic reform and privatization quickened, resulting in
  a substantial shifting of assets into the private sector. The
  December 1996 signing of the Caspian Pipeline Consortium agreement
  to build a new pipeline from western Kazakhstan's Tengiz oil field
  to the Black Sea increases prospects for substantially larger oil
  exports in several years. Kazakhstan's economy turned downward in
  1998 with a 2.5% decline in GDP growth due to slumping oil prices
  and the August financial crisis in Russia. 1999 will also be a
  difficult year.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$52.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -2.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 11.5%
  industry: 32.6%
  services: 55.9% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.1%
  highest 10%: 24.9% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 8.8 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 27%, agriculture and forestry
  23%, other 50% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 13.7% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.9 billion
  expenditures: $4.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: oil, coal, iron ore, manganese, chromite, lead, zinc,
  copper, titanium, bauxite, gold, silver, phosphates, sulfur, iron
  and steel, nonferrous metal, tractors and other agricultural
  machinery, electric motors, construction materials; much of
  industrial capacity is shut down and/or is in need of repair

Industrial production growth rate: -2.1% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 52 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 86.3%
  hydro: 13.6%
  nuclear: 0.1%
  other: 0% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 64.34 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1.75 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 8.5 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain (mostly spring wheat), cotton; wool,
  livestock

Exports: $6.3 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: oil, ferrous and nonferrous metals,
  chemicals, grain, wool, meat, coal

Exports--partners: Russia, UK, Ukraine, Uzbekistan, Netherlands,
  China, Italy, Germany (1997)

Imports: $7.4 billion (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and parts, industrial materials,
  oil and gas, consumer goods

Imports--partners: Russia, Ukraine, US, Uzbekistan, Turkey, UK,
  Germany, South Korea (1997)

Debt--external: $3.1 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $409.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Kazakhstani tenge = 100 tiyn

Exchange rates: tenges per US$1--85.2 (February 1999), 78.30
  (1998), 75.44 (1997), 67.30 (1996), 60.95 (1995), 35.54 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2 million (1997)

Telephone system: service is poor
  domestic: landline and microwave radio relay; AMPS standard cellular
  systems are available in most of Kazakhstan
  international: international traffic with other former Soviet
  republics and China carried by landline and microwave radio relay
  and with other countries by satellite and through 8 international
  telecommunications circuits at the Moscow international gateway
  switch; satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat and a new digital
  satellite earth station established at Almaty; a third satellite
  earth station at Atyrau provides teleconnectivity to the AT&T
  network via Intelsat; cable connected by the Trans-Asia-Europe
  Fiber-Optic Line

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: 4.088 million (with multiple speakers for program
  diffusion 6.082 million)

Television broadcast stations: 20 (of which at least eight are
  government stations and at least 12 are private stations--seven of
  those are satellite TV relay stations) (1997)

Televisions: 4.75 million



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 14,400 km in common carrier service; does not include
  industrial lines
  broad gauge: 14,400 km 1.520-m gauge (3,299 km electrified) (1997)

Highways:
  total: 141,000 km
  paved: 104,200 km
  unpaved: 36,800 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 3,900 km on the Syrdariya (Syr Darya) and Ertis
  (Irtysh)

Pipelines: crude oil 2,850 km; refined products 1,500 km; natural
  gas 3,480 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Aqtau (Shevchenko), Atyrau (Gur'yev), Oskemen
  (Ust-Kamenogorsk), Pavlodar, Semey (Semipalatinsk)

Airports: 10 (1997 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 9
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1997 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1997 est.)



Military



Military branches: General Purpose Forces (Army), Air Force,
  Border Guards, Navy, Republican Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,450,258 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,550,645 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 155,767 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $232.4 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet
  determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and
  Turkmenistan; Russia leases approximately 6,000 sq km of territory
  enclosing the Baykonur Cosmodrome

Illicit drugs: significant illicit cultivation of cannabis and
  limited cultivation of opium poppy and ephedra (for the drug
  ephedrone); limited government eradication program; cannabis
  consumed largely in the CIS; used as transshipment point for illicit
  drugs to Russia, North America, and Western Europe from Southwest
  Asia



======================================================================




@Kenya
-----





Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean, between
  Somalia and Tanzania

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 582,650 sq km
  land: 569,250 sq km
  water: 13,400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Nevada

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,446 km
  border countries: Ethiopia 830 km, Somalia 682 km, Sudan 232 km,
  Tanzania 769 km, Uganda 933 km

Coastline: 536 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical along coast to arid in interior

Terrain: low plains rise to central highlands bisected by Great
  Rift Valley; fertile plateau in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Kenya 5,199 m

Natural resources: gold, limestone, soda ash, salt barites,
  rubies, fluorspar, garnets, wildlife

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 37%
  forests and woodland: 30%
  other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 660 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring drought in northern and eastern
  regions; flooding during rainy seasons

Environment--current issues: water pollution from urban and
  industrial wastes; degradation of water quality from increased use
  of pesticides and fertilizers; deforestation; soil erosion;
  desertification; poaching

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: the Kenyan Highlands comprise one of the most
  successful agricultural production regions in Africa; glaciers on
  Mt. Kenya; unique physiography supports abundant and varied wildlife
  of scientific and economic value



People



Population: 28,808,658 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 6,244,321; female 6,104,181)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 7,845,083; female 7,826,442)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 343,449; female 445,182) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.59% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 30.8 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.58 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 59.07 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 47.02 years
  male: 46.56 years
  female: 47.49 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.88 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Kenyan(s)
  adjective: Kenyan

Ethnic groups: Kikuyu 22%, Luhya 14%, Luo 13%, Kalenjin 12%,
  Kamba 11%, Kisii 6%, Meru 6%, other African 15%, non-African (Asian,
  European, and Arab) 1%

Religions: Protestant 38%, Roman Catholic 28%, indigenous beliefs
  26%, Muslim 7%, other 1%

Languages: English (official), Swahili (official), numerous
  indigenous languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 78.1%
  male: 86.3%
  female: 70% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Kenya
  conventional short form: Kenya
  former: British East Africa

Data code: KE

Government type: republic

Capital: Nairobi

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces and 1 area*; Central,
  Coast, Eastern, Nairobi Area*, North Eastern, Nyanza, Rift Valley,
  Western

Independence: 12 December 1963 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 December (1963)

Constitution: 12 December 1963, amended as a republic 1964;
  reissued with amendments 1979, 1983, 1986, 1988, 1991, 1992, and 1997

Legal system: based on English common law, tribal law, and
  Islamic law; judicial review in High Court; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations; constitutional amendment of 1982
  making Kenya a de jure one-party state repealed in 1991

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI (since 14
  October 1978); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  head of government: President Daniel Toroitich arap MOI (since 14
  October 1978); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote from among the members
  of the National Assembly for a five-year term; election last held 29
  December 1997 (next to be held by early 2003); vice president
  appointed by the president
  election results: President Daniel T. arap MOI reelected; percent of
  vote--Daniel T. arap MOI (KANU) 40.12%, Mwai KIBAKI (DP) 31.09%,
  Raila ODINGA (NDP) 10.2%, Michael WAMALWA (FORD-Kenya) 8.29%,
  Charity NGILU (SDP) 7.71%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Bunge (222
  seats, 12 appointed by the president, 210 members elected by popular
  vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 29 December 1997 (next to be held between 1
  December 2002 and 30 April 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--KANU
  107, FORD-A 1, FORD-K 17, FORD-People 3, DP 39, NDP 21, SDP 15,
  SAFINA 5, smaller parties 2; seats appointed by the president--KANU
  6, FORD-Kenya 1, DP 2, SDP 1, NDP 1, SAFINA 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, chief justice is appointed by
  the president; High Court

Political parties and leaders:
  Toroitich arap MOI]
  SHIKUKU, chairman]; Forum for the Restoration of Democracy-Kenya or
  MWANDAWIRO, secretary general]

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Convention
  Executive Council or NCEC, a proreform coalition of political
  Catholic and other Christian churches; human rights groups; labor
  unions; Muslim organizations; Protestant National Council of

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC,
  EADB, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  MINURSO, MONUA, NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UN Security Council (temporary),
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMOP, UNOMIL, UNOMSIL, UNPREDEP,
  UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Samuel K. CHEMAI
  chancery: 2249 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Prudence B. BUSHNELL
  embassy: USAID Building, The Crescent, Parklands, Nairobi (temporary
  location)
  mailing address: P. O. Box 30137, Box 21A, Unit 64100, APO AE 09831

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top),
  red, and green; the red band is edged in white; a large warrior's
  shield covering crossed spears is superimposed at the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Since 1993, the government of Kenya has
  implemented a program of economic liberalization and reform. Steps
  have included the removal of import licensing and price controls,
  removal of foreign exchange controls, fiscal and monetary restraint,
  and reduction of the public sector through privatizing publicly
  owned companies and downsizing the civil service. With the support
  of the World Bank, IMF, and other donors, these reforms have led to
  a turnaround in economic performance following a period of negative
  growth in the early 1990s. Kenya's real GDP grew at 5% in 1995 and
  4% in 1996, and inflation remained under control. Growth slowed in
  1997-98. Political violence damaged the tourist industry, and the
  IMF allowed Kenya's Enhanced Structural Adjustment Program to lapse
  due to the government's failure to enact reform conditions and to
  adequately address public sector corruption. Moreover, El Nino rains
  destroyed crops and damaged an already crumbling infrastructure in
  1997 and 1998. Long-term barriers to development include electricity
  shortages, the government's continued and inefficient dominance of
  key sectors, endemic corruption, and the country's high population
  growth rate.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$43.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,550 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 29%
  industry: 17%
  services: 54% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 42% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.2%
  highest 10%: 47.7% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.5% (1998)

Labor force: 9.2 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 75%-80%, nonagriculture
  20%-25%

Unemployment rate: 50% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.6 billion
  expenditures: $2.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: small-scale consumer goods (plastic, furniture,
  batteries, textiles, soap, cigarettes, flour), agricultural products
  processing; oil refining, cement; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.8% (1995)

Electricity--production: 3.81 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 10.5%
  hydro: 81.63%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 7.87% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3.985 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 175 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, tea, corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruit,
  vegetables; dairy products, beef, pork, poultry, eggs

Exports: $2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: tea 18%, coffee 15%, petroleum products
  (1995)

Exports--partners: Uganda 16.1%, Tanzania 12.8%, UK 10.4%, Germany
  7.5% (1996)

Imports: $3.05 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transportation equipment 31%,
  consumer goods 13%, petroleum products 12% (1995)

Imports--partners: UK 13.2%, UAE 8.2%, South Africa 7.6%, Germany
  7.4% (1996)

Debt--external: $6.45 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $642.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Kenyan shilling (KSh) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Kenyan shillings (KSh) per US$1--61.802 (January
  1999), 60.367 (1998), 58.732 (1997), 57.115 (1996), 51.430 (1995),
  56.051 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 383,676 (1997); 3,077 cellular telephone subscribers
  (1998)

Telephone system:
  domestic: primarily microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth stations--4 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 24, FM 7, shortwave 2

Radios: 5 million

Television broadcast stations: 8 (of which six are
  government-controlled and two are commercial) (1997)

Televisions: 500,000



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,652 km
  narrow gauge: 2,652 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 63,800 km
  paved: 8,868 km
  unpaved: 54,932 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: part of the Lake Victoria system is within the
  boundaries of Kenya

Pipelines: petroleum products 483 km

Ports and harbors: Kisumu, Lamu, Mombasa

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,883 GRT/6,255 DWT
  ships by type: oil tanker 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 232 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 21
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 14 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 211
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 113
  under 914 m: 83 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary General
  Service Unit of the Police

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 7,094,151 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,397,008 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $197 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.9% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: administrative boundary with Sudan does
  not coincide with international boundary

Illicit drugs: widespread harvesting of small, wild plots of
  marijuana and qat (chat); transit country for South Asian heroin
  destined for Europe and, sometimes, North America; Indian
  methaqualone also transits on way to South Africa



======================================================================




@Kingman Reef
------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, reef in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from Hawaii to American Samoa

Geographic coordinates: 6 24 N, 162 24 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 1 sq km
  land: 1 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but moderated by prevailing winds

Terrain: low and nearly level

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 1 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1996)

Natural hazards: wet or awash most of the time, maximum elevation
  of about 1 meter makes Kingman Reef a maritime hazard

Environment--current issues: none

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: barren coral atoll with deep interior lagoon;
  closed to the public



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Kingman Reef

Data code: KQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC by the US Navy; however, it is
  awash the majority of the time, so it is not usable and is
  uninhabited

Capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: lagoon was used as a halfway station between Hawaii and
  American Samoa by Pan American Airways for flying boats in 1937 and
  1938



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Kiribati
--------





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the Pacific Ocean,
  straddling the equator, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to
  Australia; note--on 1 January 1995, Kiribati unilaterally moved the
  International Date Line from the middle of the country to include
  its easternmost islands and make it the same day throughout the
  country

Geographic coordinates: 1 25 N, 173 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 717 sq km
  land: 717 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes three island groups--Gilbert Islands, Line Islands,
  Phoenix Islands

Area--comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,143 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine, hot and humid, moderated by trade winds

Terrain: mostly low-lying coral atolls surrounded by extensive
  reefs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Banaba 81 m

Natural resources: phosphate (production discontinued in 1979)

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: 51%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: 3%
  other: 46% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons can occur any time, but usually
  November to March; occasional tornadoes

Environment--current issues: heavy pollution in lagoon of south
  Tarawa atoll due to heavy migration mixed with traditional practices
  such as lagoon latrines and open-pit dumping; ground water at risk

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertication, Endangered
  Species, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: 20 of the 33 islands are inhabited; Banaba (Ocean
  Island) in Kiribati is one of the three great phosphate rock islands
  in the Pacific Ocean--the others are Makatea in French Polynesia and
  Nauru



People



Population: 85,501 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 1.78% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.13 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.53 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.77 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 48.22 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 62.88 years
  male: 61.02 years
  female: 64.98 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.09 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: I-Kiribati (singular and plural)
  adjective: I-Kiribati

Ethnic groups: Micronesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 53%, Protestant (Congregational) 41%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist, Baha'i, Church of God, Mormon 6% (1985 est.)

Languages: English (official), Gilbertese

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Kiribati
  conventional short form: Kiribati
  note: pronounced kir-ih-bahss
  former: Gilbert Islands

Data code: KR

Government type: republic

Capital: Tarawa

Administrative divisions: 3 units; Gilbert Islands, Line Islands,
  Phoenix Islands
  note: in addition, there are 6 districts (Banaba, Central Gilberts,
  Line Islands, Northern Gilberts, Southern Gilberts, Tarawa) and 21
  island councils--one for each of the inhabited islands (Abaiang,
  Abemama, Aranuka, Arorae, Banaba, Beru, Butaritari, Kanton,
  Kiritimati, Kuria, Maiana, Makin, Marakei, Nikunau, Nonouti, Onotoa,
  Tabiteuea, Tabuaeran, Tamana, Tarawa, Teraina)

Independence: 12 July 1979 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 July (1979)

Constitution: 12 July 1979

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President (Beretitenti) Teburoro TITO (since 1
  October 1994); Vice President (Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti) Tewareka
  TENTOA (since 12 October 1994); note--the president is both the chief
  of state and head of government
  head of government: President (Beretitenti) Teburoro TITO (since 1
  October 1994); Vice President (Kauoman-ni-Beretitenti) Tewareka
  TENTOA (since 12 October 1994); note--the president is both the chief
  of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of the House of Assembly, includes the president, vice president,
  attorney general, and up to eight other ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  note--the House of Assembly chooses the presidential candidates from
  among their members and then those candidates compete in a general
  election; election last held 27 November 1998 (next to be held by NA
  November 2002); vice president appointed by the president
  election results: Teburoro TITO reelected president; percent of
  vote--Teburoro TITO 52.3%, Dr. Harry TONG 45.8%, Amberoti NIKORA
  1.9%, Taberannang TIMEON 0%

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly or Maneaba Ni
  Maungatabu (41 seats; 39 elected by popular vote, one ex officio
  member, and one nominated to represent Banaba; members serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 23 September 1998 (next to be held by NA
  September 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Maneaban Te Mauri Party 14, National Progressive Party 11,
  independents 14

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, judges at all levels are
  appointed by the president; High Court, judges at all levels are
  appointed by the president; 26 Magistrates' courts, judges at all
  levels are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: National Progressive Party [Teatao
  note: there is no tradition of formally organized political parties
  in Kiribati; they more closely resemble factions or interest groups
  because they have no party headquarters, formal platforms, or party
  structures

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IMF, Intelsat
  (nonsignatory user), Interpol, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU,
  WHO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Kiribati does not have an
  embassy in the US; there is an honorary consulate in Honolulu

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Kiribati; the ambassador to the Marshall Islands is
  accredited to Kiribati

Flag description: the upper half is red with a yellow frigate
  bird flying over a yellow rising sun, and the lower half is blue
  with three horizontal wavy white stripes to represent the ocean



Economy



Economy--overview: A remote country of 33 scattered coral atolls,
  Kiribati has few national resources. Commercially viable phosphate
  deposits were exhausted at the time of independence from the UK in
  1979. Copra and fish now represent the bulk of production and
  exports. The economy has fluctuated widely in recent years. Economic
  development is constrained by a shortage of skilled workers, weak
  infrastructure, and remoteness from international markets. The
  financial sector is at an early stage of development as is the
  expansion of private sector initiatives. Foreign financial aid,
  largely from the UK and Japan, is a critical supplement to GDP,
  equal to 25%-50% of GDP in recent years. Remittances from workers
  abroad account for more than $5 million each year.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$62 million (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.9% (1996 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$800 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14%
  industry: 7%
  services: 79% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.6% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 7,870 economically active, not including subsistence
  farmers (1985 est.)

Unemployment rate: 2%; underemployment 70% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $33.3 million
  expenditures: $47.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: fishing, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: 0.7% (1992 est.)

Electricity--production: 7 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 7 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: copra, taro, breadfruit, sweet potatoes,
  vegetables; fish

Exports: $6.7 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: copra 62%, seaweed, fish

Exports--partners: US, Australia, NZ (1996)

Imports: $37.4 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment,
  miscellaneous manufactured goods, fuel

Imports--partners: Australia 46%, Fiji, Japan, NZ, US (1996)

Debt--external: $7.2 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $15.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1--1.5853 (January
  1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995),
  1.3667 (1994)

Fiscal year: NA



Communications



Telephones: 1,400 (1984 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)
  note: Kiribati is being linked to the Pacific Ocean Cooperative
  Telecommunications Network, which should improve telephone service

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 15,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 0 (1988)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 670 km (1996 est.)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Waterways: small network of canals, totaling 5 km, in Line Islands

Ports and harbors: Banaba, Betio, English Harbor, Kanton

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 passenger-cargo (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,291
  GRT/1,295 DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 21 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 17
  914 to 1,523 m: 12
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular military forces; Police Force
  (carries out law enforcement functions and paramilitary duties;
  small police posts are on all islands)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: Kiribati does not have military forces; defense
  assistance is provided by Australia and NZ



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Korea, North
------------





Introduction



Background: At the end of World War II, the US and the Soviet
  Union agreed that US troops would accept the surrender of Japanese
  forces south of the 38th parallel and the Soviet Union would do so
  in the north. In 1948, the UN proposed nationwide elections; after
  P'yongyang's refusal to allow UN inspectors in the north, elections
  were held in the south and the Republic of Korea was established.
  The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established the
  following month in the north. Communist North Korean forces invaded
  South Korea in 1950. US and other UN forces intervened to defend the
  South and Chinese forces intervened on behalf of the North. After a
  bitter three-year war, an armistice was signed in 1953, establishing
  a military demarcation line near the 38th parallel. The North's
  heavy investment in military forces has produced an army of 1
  million troops equipped with thousands of tanks and artillery
  pieces. Despite growing economic hardships, North Korea continues to
  devote a significant portion of its scarce resources to the military.



Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, northern half of the Korean Peninsula
  bordering the Korea Bay and the Sea of Japan, between China and
  South Korea

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 127 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 120,540 sq km
  land: 120,410 sq km
  water: 130 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Mississippi

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,673 km
  border countries: China 1,416 km, South Korea 238 km, Russia 19 km

Coastline: 2,495 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  note: military boundary line 50 nm in the Sea of Japan and the
  exclusive economic zone limit in the Yellow Sea where all foreign
  vessels and aircraft without permission are banned

Climate: temperate with rainfall concentrated in summer

Terrain: mostly hills and mountains separated by deep, narrow
  valleys; coastal plains wide in west, discontinuous in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sea of Japan 0 m
  highest point: Paektu-san 2,744 m

Natural resources: coal, lead, tungsten, zinc, graphite,
  magnesite, iron ore, copper, gold, pyrites, salt, fluorspar,
  hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 14%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 61%
  other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 14,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: late spring droughts often followed by severe
  flooding; occasional typhoons during the early fall

Environment--current issues: localized air pollution attributable
  to inadequate industrial controls; water pollution; inadequate
  supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Environmental Modification, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of
  the Sea

Geography--note: strategic location bordering China, South Korea,
  and Russia; mountainous interior is isolated, nearly inaccessible,
  and sparsely populated



People



Population: 21,386,109 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 26% (male 2,800,748; female 2,666,207)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 7,143,969; female 7,447,147)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 412,161; female 915,877) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.45% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.37 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.92 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.45 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 25.52 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.07 years
  male: 67.41 years
  female: 72.86 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.3 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Korean(s)
  adjective: Korean

Ethnic groups: racially homogeneous; there is a small Chinese
  community and a few ethnic Japanese

Religions: Buddhism and Confucianism, some Christianity and
  syncretic Chondogyo
  note: autonomous religious activities now almost nonexistent;
  government-sponsored religious groups exist to provide illusion of
  religious freedom

Languages: Korean

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write Korean
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 99% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Democratic People's Republic of Korea
  conventional short form: North Korea
  local long form: Choson-minjujuui-inmin-konghwaguk
  local short form: none
  note: the North Koreans generally use the term "Choson" to refer to
  their country
  abbreviation: DPRK

Data code: KN

Government type: Communist state; one-man dictatorship

Capital: P'yongyang

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (do, singular and plural)
  and 3 special cities* (si, singular and plural); Chagang-do (Chagang
  Province), Hamgyong-bukto (North Hamgyong Province), Hamgyong-namdo
  (South Hamgyong Province), Hwanghae-bukto (North Hwanghae Province),
  Hwanghae-namdo (South Hwanghae Province), Kaesong-si* (Kaesong
  City), Kangwon-do (Kangwon Province), Namp'o-si* (Namp'o City),
  P'yongan-bukto (North P'yongan Province), P'yongan-namdo (South
  P'yongan Province), P'yongyang-si* (P'yongyang City), Yanggang-do
  (Yanggang Province)

Independence: 9 September 1948, Democratic People's Republic of
  Korea (DPRK) Foundation Day
  note: 15 August 1945, date of independence from the Japanese and
  celebrated in North Korea as National Liberation Day

National holiday: Foundation Day, 9 September (1948)

Constitution: adopted 1948, completely revised 27 December 1972,
  revised again in April 1992 and September 1998

Legal system: based on German civil law system with Japanese
  influences and Communist legal theory; no judicial review of
  legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: KIM Chong-il; note--in September 1998, KIM Chong-il
  was reelected Chairman of the National Defense Commission, a
  position accorded the nation's "highest administrative authority";
  KIM Young-nam was named President of the Supreme People's Assembly
  Presidium and given the responsibility of representing the state and
  receiving diplomatic credentials
  head of government: Premier HONG Song-nam (since 5 September 1998)
  cabinet: renamed DPRK Cabinet (naegak) on 5 September 1998; was
  previously called the State Administrative Council; Cabinet members,
  except for the Minister of People's Armed Forces, are appointed by
  the Supreme People's Assembly
  elections: premier elected by the Supreme People's Assembly
  election results: NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme People's Assembly or
  Ch'oego Inmin Hoeui (687 seats; members elected by popular vote to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 26 July 1998 (next to be held NA)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--the
  KWP approves a single list of candidates who are elected without
  opposition; minor parties hold a few seats

Judicial branch: Central Court, judges are elected by the Supreme
  People's Assembly

Political parties and leaders: major party--Korean Workers' Party
  chairwoman]

International organization participation: ESCAP, FAO, ICAO, ICRM,
  IFAD, IFRCS, IHO, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ISO, ITU,
  NAM, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; note--North Korea has a
  Permanent Mission to the UN in New York, headed by YI Hyong-chol

Diplomatic representation from the US: none

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red
  (triple width), and blue; the red band is edged in white; on the
  hoist side of the red band is a white disk with a red five-pointed
  star



Economy



Economy--overview: North Korea is the world's most centrally
  planned economy. Agricultural land is collectivized, state-owned
  industry produces nearly all manufactured goods, and heavy and
  military industries have long been developed at the expense of light
  and consumer industries. Open-air markets since 1995 have gained
  increasing importance in the distribution of food and consumer goods
  but private production remains extremely limited. Total economic
  output has fallen steadily since 1991--perhaps by as much as
  one-half--when the country's economic ties to the Soviet Union and
  Eastern Bloc collapsed. The slide has also been fueled by serious
  energy shortages, aging industrial facilities, and a lack of
  maintenance and new investment. The leadership has tried to maintain
  a high level of military spending but the armed forces have
  nonetheless been affected by the general economic decline. Although
  North Korea has long depended on imports to meet food needs, serious
  fertilizer shortages in recent years have combined with structural
  constraints--such as a shortage of arable land and a short growing
  season--to reduce staple grain output to more than 1 million tons
  below what the country needs to meet even minimal demand. Widespread
  famine and disease have cost the lives of hundreds of thousands of
  North Koreans in 1994-98. The US, China, the international
  community, and nongovernmental organizations have sent aid but the
  problems remain extremely serious.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$21.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 25%
  industry: 60%
  services: 15% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 9.615 million

Labor force--by occupation: agricultural 36%, nonagricultural 64%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $19.3 billion
  expenditures: $19.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1992 est.)

Industries: military products; machine building, electric power,
  chemicals; mining (coal, iron ore, magnesite, graphite, copper,
  zinc, lead, and precious metals), metallurgy; textiles, food
  processing

Industrial production growth rate: -7% to -9% (1992 est.)

Electricity--production: 34 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 35.29%
  hydro: 64.71%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 34 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, corn, potatoes, soybeans, pulses;
  cattle, pigs, pork, eggs

Exports: $743 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: minerals, metallurgical products,
  agricultural and fishery products, manufactures (including armaments)

Exports--partners: Japan 28%, South Korea 21%, China 5%, Germany
  4%, Russia 1% (1995)

Imports: $1.83 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: petroleum, grain, coking coal, machinery and
  equipment, consumer goods

Imports--partners: China 33%, Japan 17%, Russia 5%, South Korea
  4%, Germany 3% (1995)

Debt--external: $12 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?an estimated $200 million to
  $300 million in humanitarian aid from US, South Korea, Japan, and EU
  in 1997

Currency: 1 North Korean won (Wn) = 100 chon

Exchange rates: official: North Korean won (Wn) per US$1--2.15
  (May 1994), 2.13 (May 1992), 2.14 (September 1991), 2.1 (January
  1990), 2.3 (December 1989); market: North Korean won (Wn) per
  US$1--200

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.4 million (1998 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: system is being expanded with installation of fiber-optic
  cable nationwide; access traditionally reserved for official and
  business subscribers; public access is expected to increase
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
  and 1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean Region); other international
  connections through Moscow and Beijing

Radio broadcast stations: AM 27, FM 14, shortwave 3

Radios: 4.7 million

Television broadcast stations: 38

Televisions: 2 million



Transportation



Railways:
  broad gauge: NA km
  total: 5,000 km
  standard gauge: 4,095 km 1.435-m gauge (3,500 km electrified; 159 km
  double track)
  narrow gauge: 665 km 0.762-m gauge
  dual gauge: 240 km 1.435-m and 1.600-m gauges (three rails) (1996
  est.)

Highways:
  total: 31,200 km
  paved: 1,997 km
  unpaved: 29,203 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,253 km; mostly navigable by small craft only

Pipelines: crude oil 37 km; petroleum product 180 km

Ports and harbors: Ch'ongjin, Haeju, Hungnam (Hamhung),
  Kimch'aek, Kosong, Najin, Namp'o, Sinuiju, Songnim, Sonbong
  (formerly Unggi), Ungsang, Wonsan

Merchant marine:
  total: 110 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 691,802 GRT/992,789 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 8, cargo 91, combination bulk 1, multifunction
  large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 4, passenger 2, passenger-cargo 1,
  short-sea passenger 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 49 (1994 est.) (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 22
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 15
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 27
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 12
  under 914 m: 6 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Korean People's Army (includes Army, Navy, Air
  Force), Civil Security Forces

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,768,038 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,483,188 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 177,888 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $5 billion to $7 billion
  (1997 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 25% to 33% (1997 est.)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: 33-km section of boundary with China in
  the Paektu-san (mountain) area is indefinite; Demarcation Line with
  South Korea



======================================================================




@Korea, South
------------





Introduction



Background: At the end of World War II, the US and the Soviet
  Union agreed that US troops would accept the surrender of Japanese
  forces south of the 38th parallel and the Soviet Union would do so
  in the north. In 1948, the UN proposed nationwide elections; after
  P'yongyang's refusal to allow UN inspectors in the north, elections
  were held in the south and the Republic of Korea was established.
  The Democratic People's Republic of Korea was established the
  following month in the north. Communist North Korean forces invaded
  South Korea in 1950. US and other UN forces intervened to defend the
  South and Chinese forces intervened on behalf of the North. After a
  bitter three-year war, an armistice was signed in 1953, establishing
  a military demarcation line near the 38th parallel. Thereafter,
  South Korea achieved amazing economic growth, with per capita output
  rising to 13 times the level in the North. Since late 1997, however,
  the nation has suffered widespread financial and organizational
  difficulties. Continuing tensions between North and South have
  raised concerns of provocative military actions by the North.



Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, southern half of the Korean Peninsula
  bordering the Sea of Japan and the Yellow Sea

Geographic coordinates: 37 00 N, 127 30 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 98,480 sq km
  land: 98,190 sq km
  water: 290 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Indiana

Land boundaries:
  total: 238 km
  border countries: North Korea 238 km

Coastline: 2,413 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: not specified
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm; between 3 nm and 12 nm in the Korea Strait

Climate: temperate, with rainfall heavier in summer than winter

Terrain: mostly hills and mountains; wide coastal plains in west
  and south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sea of Japan 0 m
  highest point: Halla-san 1,950 m

Natural resources: coal, tungsten, graphite, molybdenum, lead,
  hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 65%
  other: 13% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons bring high winds and floods;
  low-level seismic activity common in southwest

Environment--current issues: air pollution in large cities; water
  pollution from the discharge of sewage and industrial effluents;
  driftnet fishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification



People



Population: 46,884,800 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 22% (male 5,504,333; female 4,874,974)
  15-64 years: 71% (male 16,949,807; female 16,432,951)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 1,192,688; female 1,930,047) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 15.95 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.68 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.13 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.13 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.62 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.57 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.3 years
  male: 70.75 years
  female: 78.32 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.79 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Korean(s)
  adjective: Korean

Ethnic groups: homogeneous (except for about 20,000 Chinese)

Religions: Christianity 49%, Buddhism 47%, Confucianism 3%,
  pervasive folk religion (shamanism), Chondogyo (Religion of the
  Heavenly Way), and other 1%

Languages: Korean, English widely taught in junior high and high
  school

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99.3%
  female: 96.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Korea
  conventional short form: South Korea
  local long form: Taehan-min'guk
  local short form: none
  note: the South Koreans generally use the term "Han-guk" to refer to
  their country
  abbreviation: ROK

Data code: KS

Government type: republic

Capital: Seoul

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (do, singular and plural)
  and 6 special cities* (gwangyoksi, singular and plural); Cheju-do,
  Cholla-bukto, Cholla-namdo, Ch'ungch'ong-bukto, Ch'ungch'ong-namdo,
  Inch'on-gwangyoksi*, Kangwon-do, Kwangju-gwangyoksi*, Kyonggi-do,
  Kyongsang-bukto, Kyongsang-namdo, Pusan-gwangyoksi*,
  Soul-t'ukpyolsi*, Taegu-gwangyoksi*, Taejon-gwangyoksi*

Independence: 15 August 1945, date of liberation from Japanese
  colonial rule

National holiday: Liberation Day, 15 August (1945)

Constitution: 25 February 1988

Legal system: combines elements of continental European civil law
  systems, Anglo-American law, and Chinese classical thought

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President KIM Dae-jung (since 25 February 1998)
  head of government: Prime Minister KIM Chong-p'il (since 3 March
  1998)
  cabinet: State Council appointed by the president on the prime
  minister's recommendation
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a single five-year
  term; election last held 18 December 1997 (next to be held by 18
  December 2002); prime minister appointed by the president; deputy
  prime ministers appointed by the president on the prime minister's
  recommendation
  election results: KIM Dae-jung elected president; percent of
  vote--KIM Dae-jung (NCNP) 40.3%, YI Hoe-chang (GNP) 38.7%, YI In-che
  (NPP) 19.2%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Kukhoe (299
  seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 11 April 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NKP
  139, NCNP 79, ULD 50, DP 15, independents 16; note--the distribution
  of seats as of February 1999 was GNP 137, NCNP 105, ULD 53,
  independents 4

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed by the
  president subject to the consent of the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Grand National Party or GNP [CHO
  president]
  note: subsequent to the legislative election of April 1996 the
  following parties disbanded--New Korea Party or NKP and Democratic
  Party or DP; New People's Party or NPP merged with the NCNP in
  August 1998

Political pressure groups and leaders: Korean National Council of
  Churches; National Democratic Alliance of Korea; National Federation
  of Student Associations; National Federation of Farmers'
  Associations; National Council of Labor Unions; Federation of Korean
  Trade Unions; Korean Veterans' Association; Federation of Korean
  Industries; Korean Traders Association; Korean Confederation of
  Trade Unions

International organization participation: AfDB, APEC, AsDB, BIS,
  CCC, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IEA (observer), IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNMOGIP, UNOMIG, UNU, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador YI Hong-ku
  chancery: 2450 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Agana (Guam), Anchorage, Atlanta, Boston,
  Chicago, Honolulu, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New York, San
  Francisco, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Stephen W. BOSWORTH
  embassy: 82 Sejong-Ro, Chongro-ku, Seoul
  mailing address: American Embassy, Unit 15550, APO AP 96205-0001

Flag description: white with a red (top) and blue yin-yang symbol
  in the center; there is a different black trigram from the ancient I
  Ching (Book of Changes) in each corner of the white field



Economy



Economy--overview: As one of the Four Dragons of East Asia, South
  Korea has achieved an incredible record of growth. Three decades ago
  its GDP per capita was comparable with levels in the poorer
  countries of Africa and Asia. Today its GDP per capita is seven
  times India's, 13 times North Korea's, and already near the lesser
  economies of the European Union. This success through the late 1980s
  was achieved by a system of close government business ties,
  including directed credit, import restrictions, sponsorship of
  specific industries, and a strong labor effort. The government
  promoted the import of raw materials and technology at the expense
  of consumer goods and encouraged savings and investment over
  consumption. The Asian financial crisis of 1997-98 exposed certain
  longstanding weaknesses in South Korea's development model,
  including high debt/equity ratios, massive foreign borrowing, and an
  undisciplined financial sector. By the end of 1998 it had recovered
  financial stability, rebuilding foreign exchange reserves to record
  levels by running a current account surplus of $40 billion. As of
  December 1998, the first tentative signs of a rebound in the economy
  emerged, and most forecasters expect GDP growth to turn positive at
  least in the second half of 1999. Seoul has also made a positive
  start on a program to get the country's largest business groups to
  swap subsidiaries to promote specialization, and the administration
  has directed many of the mid-sized conglomerates into debt-workout
  programs with creditor banks. Challenges for the future include
  cutting redundant staff, which reaches 20%-30% at most firms and
  maintaining the impetus for structural reform.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$584.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -6.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$12,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 43%
  services: 51% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.5% (1998)

Labor force: 20 million

Labor force--by occupation: services and other 52%, mining and
  manufacturing 27%, agriculture, fishing, forestry 21% (1991)

Unemployment rate: 7.9% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $100.4 billion
  expenditures: $100.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: electronics, automobile production, chemicals,
  shipbuilding, steel, textiles, clothing, footwear, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: 3.1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 194.163 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 61.18%
  hydro: 2.65%
  nuclear: 36.17%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 194.163 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, root crops, barley, vegetables,
  fruit; cattle, pigs, chickens, milk, eggs; fish

Exports: $133 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: electronic and electrical equipment,
  machinery, steel, automobiles, ships; textiles, clothing, footwear;
  fish

Exports--partners: US 17%, EU 13%, Japan 12% (1995)

Imports: $94 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery, electronics and electronic
  equipment, oil, steel, transport equipment, textiles, organic
  chemicals, grains

Imports--partners: US 22%, Japan 21%, EU 13% (1995)

Debt--external: $154 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 South Korean won (W) = 100 chun (theoretical)

Exchange rates: South Korean won (W) per US$1--1,174.00 (January
  1999), 1,401.44 (1998), 951.29 (1997), 804.45 (1996), 771.27 (1995),
  803.45 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 16.6 million (1993)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international services
  domestic: NA
  international: fiber-optic submarine cable to China; satellite earth
  stations--3 Intelsat (2 Pacific Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean) and 1
  Inmarsat (Pacific Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 79, FM 46, shortwave 0

Radios: 42 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 121 (in addition, there are 850
  relay stations and eight-channel American Forces Korea Network)
  (1997)

Televisions: 9.3 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 6,240 km
  standard gauge: 6,240 km 1.435-m gauge (525 km electrified) (1998
  est.)

Highways:
  total: 63,500 km
  paved: 46,800 km (including 1,720 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 16,700 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 1,609 km; use restricted to small native craft

Pipelines: petroleum products 455 km; note--additionally, there is
  a parallel petroleum, oils, and lubricants (POL) pipeline being
  completed

Ports and harbors: Chinhae, Inch'on, Kunsan, Masan, Mokp'o,
  P'ohang, Pusan, Tonghae-hang, Ulsan, Yosu

Merchant marine:
  total: 442 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,212,089
  GRT/8,161,845 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 106, cargo 133, chemical tanker 36, combination
  bulk 5, container 52, liquefied gas tanker 13, multifunction
  large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 56, passenger 3, refrigerated cargo
  22, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 1, specialized
  tanker 3, vehicle carrier 9 (1998 est.)

Airports: 103 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 68
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 18
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
  914 to 1,523 m: 13
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 35
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 32 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 200 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Marine Corps, National
  Maritime Police (Coast Guard)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 13,954,916 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 8,890,144 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 400,468 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $9.9 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.2% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Demarcation Line with North Korea;
  Liancourt Rocks (Takeshima/Tokdo) claimed by Japan



======================================================================




@Kuwait
------





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Persian Gulf, between Iraq
  and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 29 30 N, 45 45 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 17,820 sq km
  land: 17,820 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
  total: 464 km
  border countries: Iraq 242 km, Saudi Arabia 222 km

Coastline: 499 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: dry desert; intensely hot summers; short, cool winters

Terrain: flat to slightly undulating desert plain

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 306 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, shrimp, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 8%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 92% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: sudden cloudbursts are common from October to
  April; they bring inordinate amounts of rain which can damage roads
  and houses; sandstorms and dust storms occur throughout the year,
  but are most common between March and August

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water
  resources; some of world's largest and most sophisticated
  desalination facilities provide much of the water; air and water
  pollution; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Desertification, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Endangered Species, Marine
  Dumping

Geography--note: strategic location at head of Persian Gulf



People



Population: 1,991,115 (July 1999 est.)
  note: includes 1,220,935 non-nationals (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 32% (male 343,461; female 285,129)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 850,689; female 468,618)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 26,593; female 16,625) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.88% (1999 est.)
  note: this rate reflects the continued post-Gulf crisis return of
  expatriates

Birth rate: 20.45 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 2.31 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 20.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.2 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.82 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.6 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.58 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.26 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.15 years
  male: 75.11 years
  female: 79.3 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.34 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Kuwaiti(s)
  adjective: Kuwaiti

Ethnic groups: Kuwaiti 45%, other Arab 35%, South Asian 9%,
  Iranian 4%, other 7%

Religions: Muslim 85% (Sunni 45%, Shi'a 40%), Christian, Hindu,
  Parsi, and other 15%

Languages: Arabic (official), English widely spoken

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 78.6%
  male: 82.2%
  female: 74.9% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: State of Kuwait
  conventional short form: Kuwait
  local long form: Dawlat al Kuwayt
  local short form: Al Kuwayt

Data code: KU

Government type: nominal constitutional monarchy

Capital: Kuwait

Administrative divisions: 5 governorates (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Al Ahmadi, Al Farwaniyah, Al 'Asimah, Al
  Jahra', Hawalli

Independence: 19 June 1961 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 25 February (1950)

Constitution: approved and promulgated 11 November 1962

Legal system: civil law system with Islamic law significant in
  personal matters; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: adult males who have been naturalized for 30 years or
  more or have resided in Kuwait since before 1920 and their male
  descendants at age 21
  note: only 10% of all citizens are eligible to vote; in 1996,
  naturalized citizens who do not meet the pre-1920 qualification but
  have been naturalized for 30 years were eligible to vote for the
  first time

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Amir JABIR al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah (since 31
  December 1977)
  head of government: Prime Minister and Crown Prince SAAD al-Abdallah
  al-Salim Al Sabah (since 8 February 1978); First Deputy Prime
  Minister SABAH al-Ahmad al-Jabir Al Sabah (since 17 October 1992);
  Second Deputy Prime Minister SALIM al-Sabah al-Salim Al Sabah (since
  7 October 1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister and
  approved by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and
  deputy prime ministers appointed by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Majlis
  al-Umma (50 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 7 October 1996 (next to be held approximately
  October 2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 50;
  note--all cabinet ministers are also ex officio members of the
  National Assembly

Judicial branch: High Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: several political groups
  act as de facto parties: Bedouins, merchants, Sunni and Shi'a
  activists, and secular leftists and nationalists

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, BDEAC, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU,
  NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador MUHAMMAD al-Sabah al-Salim Al SABAH
  chancery: 2940 Tilden Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James A. LAROCCO
  embassy: Bayan, near the Bayan palace, Kuwait City
  mailing address: P.O. Box 77 Safat, 13001 Safat, Kuwait; Unit 69000,
  APO AE 09880-9000

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and red with a black trapezoid based on the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: Kuwait is a small and relatively open economy
  with proved crude oil reserves of about 94 billion barrels--10% of
  world reserves. Petroleum accounts for nearly half of GDP, 90% of
  export revenues, and 75% of government income. Kuwait lacks water
  and has practically no arable land, thus preventing development of
  agriculture. With the exception of fish, it depends almost wholly on
  food imports. About 75% of potable water must be distilled or
  imported. The economy improved moderately in 1994-97, but in 1998
  suffered from the large decline in world oil prices. The Kuwaiti
  cabinet approved a reform package in January 1999, including
  reducing subsidies and increasing taxes on large consumer goods.
  Nevertheless, Kuwait anticipates continuing budget deficits for the
  next few years. Kuwait is attracting foreign oil companies to
  develop fields in the northern part of the country.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$43.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 0%
  industry: 55%
  services: 45% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 1.1 million (1996 est.)
  note: 68% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
  (July 1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: government and social services 50%,
  services 40%, industry and agriculture 10% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 1.8% (official 1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $8.1 billion
  expenditures: $14.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY98/99 budget est.)

Industries: petroleum, petrochemicals, desalination, food
  processing, construction materials, salt, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 23 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 23 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: practically no crops; fish

Exports: $14.3 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: oil and refined products, fertilizers

Exports--partners: Japan 24%, India 16%, US 13%, South Korea 11%,
  Singapore 8% (1997)

Imports: $7.8 billion (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: food, construction materials, vehicles and
  parts, clothing

Imports--partners: US 22%, Japan 15%, UK 13%, Germany 8%, Italy 6%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $7.3 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $27.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Kuwaiti dinar (KD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: Kuwaiti dinars (KD) per US$1--0.3018 (January
  1999), 0.3047 (1998), 0.3033 (1997), 0.2994 (1996), 0.2984 (1995),
  0.2976 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 408,000 (1998)

Telephone system: the civil network suffered some damage as a
  result of the Gulf war, but most of the telephone exchanges were
  left intact and, by the end of 1994, domestic and international
  telecommunications had been restored to normal operation; the
  quality of service is excellent
  domestic: new telephone exchanges provide a large capacity for new
  subscribers; trunk traffic is carried by microwave radio relay,
  coaxial cable, open wire and fiber-optic cable; a cellular telephone
  system operates throughout Kuwait (with approximately 150,000
  subscribers in 1996) and the country is well supplied with pay
  telephones; approximately 15,000 Internet subscribers in 1996
  international: coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Saudi
  Arabia; satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean, 2
  Indian Ocean), 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean), and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 720,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13 (in addition, there are several
  satellite channels) (1997)

Televisions: 800,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 4,450 km
  paved: 3,587 km
  unpaved: 863 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 877 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural
  gas 165 km

Ports and harbors: Ash Shu'aybah, Ash Shuwaykh, Kuwait, Mina'
  'Abd Allah, Mina' al Ahmadi, Mina' Su'ud

Merchant marine:
  total: 49 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,509,061 GRT/4,046,739
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 10, container 6, liquefied gas tanker
  7, livestock carrier 3, oil tanker 22 (1998 est.)

Airports: 8 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Police Force,
  National Guard, Coast Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 718,061 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 425,126 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 20,854 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.7035 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 7.9% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: in November 1994, Iraq formally accepted
  the UN-demarcated border with Kuwait which had been spelled out in
  Security Council Resolutions 687 (1991), 773 (1993), and 883 (1993);
  this formally ends earlier claims to Kuwait and to Bubiyan and
  Warbah islands; ownership of Qaruh and Umm al Maradim islands
  disputed by Saudi Arabia



======================================================================




@Kyrgyzstan
----------





Introduction



Background: A country of incredible natural beauty and proud
  nomadic traditions, Kyrgyzstan became part of the Russian empire in
  1864. In the Czarist and Soviet periods, Russian managers and
  technicians were sent to Kyrgyzstan and have recently made up more
  than one-fifth of the population. Many Russians have been returning
  home since Kyrgyzstan gained its independence in 1991 when the USSR
  collapsed. Privatization of state-owned enterprises, expansion of
  democracy and political freedoms, and inter-ethnic relations are
  current issues.



Geography



Location: Central Asia, west of China

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 75 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 198,500 sq km
  land: 191,300 sq km
  water: 7,200 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than South Dakota

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,878 km
  border countries: China 858 km, Kazakhstan 1,051 km, Tajikistan 870
  km, Uzbekistan 1,099 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: dry continental to polar in high Tien Shan; subtropical
  in southwest (Fergana Valley); temperate in northern foothill zone

Terrain: peaks of Tien Shan and associated valleys and basins
  encompass entire nation

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Kara-Darya 132 m
  highest point: Jengish Chokusu (Pik Pobedy) 7,439 m

Natural resources: abundant hydroelectric potential; significant
  deposits of gold and rare earth metals; locally exploitable coal,
  oil, and natural gas; other deposits of nepheline, mercury, bismuth,
  lead, and zinc

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 44%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 45% (1993 est.)
  note: Kyrgyzstan has the world's largest natural growth walnut forest

Irrigated land: 9,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: water pollution; many people get
  their water directly from contaminated streams and wells; as a
  result, water-borne diseases are prevalent; increasing soil salinity
  from faulty irrigation practices

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 4,546,055 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 804,502; female 788,076)
  15-64 years: 59% (male 1,308,145; female 1,362,140)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 105,442; female 177,750) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.68% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.83 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.74 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.28 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.59 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 75.92 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 63.57 years
  male: 59.25 years
  female: 68.1 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.63 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Kyrgyzstani(s)
  adjective: Kyrgyzstani

Ethnic groups: Kirghiz 52.4%, Russian 18%, Uzbek 12.9%, Ukrainian
  2.5%, German 2.4%, other 11.8%

Religions: Muslim 75%, Russian Orthodox 20%, other 5%

Languages: Kirghiz (Kyrgyz)--official language, Russian?official
  language
  note: in March 1996, the Kyrgyzstani legislature amended the
  constitution to make Russian an official language, along with
  Kirghiz, in territories and work places where Russian-speaking
  citizens predominate

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 99%
  female: 96% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kyrgyz Republic
  conventional short form: Kyrgyzstan
  local long form: Kyrgyz Respublikasy
  local short form: none
  former: Kirghiz Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: KG

Government type: republic

Capital: Bishkek

Administrative divisions: 6 oblasttar (singular--oblast) and 1
  city* (singular--shaar); Bishkek Shaary*, Chuy Oblasty (Bishkek),
  Jalal-Abad Oblasty, Naryn Oblasty, Osh Oblasty, Talas Oblasty,
  Ysyk-Kol Oblasty (Karakol)
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 31 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: National Day, 2 December; Independence Day, 31
  August (1991)

Constitution: adopted 5 May 1993
  note: amendment proposed by President AKAYEV and passed in a
  national referendum on 10 February 1996 significantly expands the
  powers of the president at the expense of the legislature

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Askar AKAYEV (since 28 October 1990)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jumabek IBRAIMOV (since NA
  December 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  elections last held 24 December 1995 (next to be held NA 2000);
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Askar AKAYEV reelected president; percent of
  vote--Askar AKAYEV 75%; note--elections were held early which gave the
  two opposition candidates little time to campaign; AKAYEV may have
  orchestrated the "deregistration" of two other candidates, one of
  whom was a major rival

Legislative branch: bicameral Supreme Council or Zhogorku Kenesh
  consists of the Assembly of People's Representatives (70 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and
  the Legislative Assembly (35 seats; members are elected by popular
  vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Assembly of People's Representatives--last held 5 February
  1995 (next to be held NA 2000); Legislative Assembly--last held 5
  February 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: Assembly of People's Representatives--percent of
  vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA; note--not all of the 70 seats
  were filled at the 5 February 1995 elections; as a result, run-off
  elections were held at later dates; the assembly meets twice yearly;
  Legislative Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA;
  note--not all of the 35 seats were filled at the 5 February 1995
  elections; as a result, run-off elections were held at later dates
  note: the legislature became bicameral for the 5 February 1995
  elections

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed for 10-year
  terms by the Supreme Council on recommendation of the president;
  Constitutional Court; Higher Court of Arbitration

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party or PSD
  JEKSHEYEV, chairman]; National Unity Democratic Movement or DDNE
  MASALIYEV, chairman]; Kyrgyzstan Erkin Party (Democratic Movement of

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Unity Democratic
  Movement; Council of Free Trade Unions; Union of Entrepreneurs;

International organization participation: AsDB, CIS, EAPC, EBRD,
  ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UNOMSIL, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Bakyt ABDRISAYEV
  chancery: 1732 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Anne M. SIGMUND
  embassy: 171 Prospect Mira, 720016 Bishkek
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: red field with a yellow sun in the center
  having 40 rays representing the 40 Kirghiz tribes; on the obverse
  side the rays run counterclockwise, on the reverse, clockwise; in
  the center of the sun is a red ring crossed by two sets of three
  lines, a stylized representation of the roof of the traditional
  Kirghiz yurt



Economy



Economy--overview: Kyrgyzstan is a small, poor, mountainous
  country with a predominantly agricultural economy. Cotton, wool, and
  meat are the main agricultural products and exports. Industrial
  exports include gold, mercury, uranium, and hydropower. Kyrgyzstan
  has been one of the most progressive countries of the former Soviet
  Union in carrying out market reforms. Following a successful
  stabilization program, which lowered inflation from 88% in 1994 to
  15% for 1997, attention is turning toward stimulating growth. Much
  of the government's stock in enterprises has been sold. Drops in
  production have been severe since the breakup of the Soviet Union in
  December 1991, but by mid-1995 production began to recover and
  exports began to increase. Pensioners, unemployed workers, and
  government workers with salary arrears continue to suffer. Foreign
  assistance played a substantial role in the country's economic
  turnaround in 1996-97. The government has adopted a series of
  measures to combat some of the severe economic problems such as
  excessive debt and inadequate revenue collection, encountered in
  1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$9.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 47%
  industry: 12%
  services: 41% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 40% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.7%
  highest 10%: 26.2% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 18.4% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.7 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and forestry 40%, industry
  and construction 19%, other 41% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 6% 1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $225 million
  expenditures: $308 million, including capital expenditures of $11
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: small machinery, textiles, food processing, cement,
  shoes, sawn logs, refrigerators, furniture, electric motors, gold,
  rare earth metals

Industrial production growth rate: 14% (1998 est.)
  note: the gold industry spurted in 1998 giving industry as a whole a
  boost on a small base while the rest of the economy, including
  agriculture, lagged

Electricity--production: 13.49 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 9.56%
  hydro: 90.44%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 10.92 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 6.32 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 3.75 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: tobacco, cotton, potatoes, vegetables,
  grapes, fruits and berries; sheep, goats, cattle, wool

Exports: $630 million (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: cotton, wool, meat, tobacco; gold, mercury,
  uranium, hydropower; machinery; shoes

Exports--partners: China, UK, FSU

Imports: $670 million (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: grain, lumber, industrial products, ferrous
  metals, fuel, machinery, textiles, footwear

Imports--partners: Turkey, Cuba, US, Germany

Debt--external: $935 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $329.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Kyrgyzstani som (KGS) = 100 tyiyn

Exchange rates: soms (KGS) per US$1--30.25 (February 1999), 20.838
  (1998), 17.362 (1997), 12.810 (1996), 10.822 (1995), 10.842 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 356,000 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: poorly developed; about 100,000 unsatisfied
  applications for household telephones
  domestic: principally microwave radio relay; one cellular provider,
  probably only limited to Bishkek region
  international: connections with other CIS countries by landline or
  microwave radio relay and with other countries by leased connections
  with Moscow international gateway switch and by satellite; satellite
  earth stations--1 Intersputnik and 1 Intelsat; connected
  internationally by the Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber-Optic Line

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note--one
  state-run radio broadcast station

Radios: 825,000 (radio receiver systems with multiple speakers
  for program diffusion 748,000)

Television broadcast stations: NA (repeater stations throughout
  the country relay programs from Russia, Uzbekistan, Kazakhstan, and
  Turkey) (1997)

Televisions: 875,000



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 370 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
  lines
  broad gauge: 370 km 1.520-m gauge (1990)

Highways:
  total: 18,500 km
  paved: 16,854 km (including 140 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 1,646 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 600 km (1990)

Pipelines: natural gas 200 km

Ports and harbors: Balykchy (Ysyk-Kol or Rybach'ye)

Airports: 54 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 9
  under 914 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 40
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 32 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, National Guard, Security Forces
  (internal and border troops), Civil Defense
  note: border troops controlled by Russia

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,146,595 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 930,017 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 46,561 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $10.8 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial dispute with Tajikistan on
  southwestern boundary in Isfara Valley area

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivator of cannabis and opium
  poppy, mostly for CIS consumption; limited government eradication
  program; increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs
  to Russia and Western Europe from Southwest Asia



======================================================================




@Laos
----





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, northeast of Thailand, west of
  Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 18 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 236,800 sq km
  land: 230,800 sq km
  water: 6,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Utah

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,083 km
  border countries: Burma 235 km, Cambodia 541 km, China 423 km,
  Thailand 1,754 km, Vietnam 2,130 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical monsoon; rainy season (May to November); dry
  season (December to April)

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains; some plains and plateaus

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mekong River 70 m
  highest point: Phou Bia 2,817 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, gypsum, tin, gold,
  gemstones

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 54%
  other: 40% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,250 sq km (1993 est.)
  note: rainy season irrigation--2,169 sq km; dry season irrigation--750
  sq km (1998 est.)

Natural hazards: floods, droughts, and blight

Environment--current issues: unexploded ordnance; deforestation;
  soil erosion; a majority of the population does not have access to
  potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 5,407,453 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 1,235,797; female 1,203,520)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 1,360,991; female 1,434,378)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 78,195; female 94,572) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.74% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 39.93 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 89.32 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 54.21 years
  male: 52.63 years
  female: 55.87 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.55 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Lao(s) or Laotian(s)
  adjective: Lao or Laotian

Ethnic groups: Lao Loum (lowland) 68%, Lao Theung (upland) 22%,
  Lao Soung (highland) including the Hmong ("Meo") and the Yao (Mien)
  9%, ethnic Vietnamese/Chinese 1%

Religions: Buddhist 60%, animist and other 40%

Languages: Lao (official), French, English, and various ethnic
  languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 60%
  male: 70%
  female: 48% (1998 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Lao People's Democratic Republic
  conventional short form: Laos
  local long form: Sathalanalat Paxathipatai Paxaxon Lao
  local short form: none

Data code: LA

Government type: Communist state

Capital: Vientiane

Administrative divisions: 16 provinces (khoueng, singular and
  plural), 1 municipality* (kampheng nakhon, singular and plural), and
  1 special zone** (khetphiset, singular and plural); Attapu, Bokeo,
  Bolikhamxai, Champasak, Houaphan, Khammouan, Louangnamtha,
  Louangphabang, Oudomxai, Phongsali, Salavan, Savannakhet,
  Viangchan*, Viangchan, Xaignabouli, Xaisomboun**, Xekong, Xiangkhoang

Independence: 19 July 1949 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 2 December (1975) (proclamation
  of the Lao People's Democratic Republic)

Constitution: promulgated 14 August 1991

Legal system: based on traditional customs, French legal norms
  and procedures, and Socialist practice

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President KHAMTAI Siphandon (since 26 February
  1998); Vice President OUDOM Khattiya (since 26 February 1998)
  head of government: Prime Minister SISAVAT Keobounphan (since 26
  February 1998); Senior Deputy Prime Minister BOUNGNANG Volachit
  (since 20 April 1996); Deputy Prime Ministers KHAMPHOUI Keoboualapha
  (since 15 August 1991), CHOUMMALI Saignason (since 26 February
  1998), SOMSAVAT Lengsavad (since 26 February 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president, approved
  by the National Assembly
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a
  five-year term; election last held 21 December 1997 (next to be held
  NA 2002); prime minister appointed by the president with the
  approval of the National Assembly for a five-year term
  election results: KHAMTAI Siphandon elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (99 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms; note--by
  presidential decree, on 27 October 1997, the number of seats
  increased from 85 to 99)
  elections: last held 21 December 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--LPRP
  or LPRP-approved (independent, non-party members) 99

Judicial branch: People's Supreme Court, the president of the
  People's Supreme Court is elected by the National Assembly on the
  recommendation of the National Assembly Standing Committee, the vice
  president of the People's Supreme Court and the judges are appointed
  by the National Assembly Standing Committee

Political parties and leaders: Lao People's Revolutionary Party
  proscribed

Political pressure groups and leaders: noncommunist political
  groups proscribed; most opposition leaders fled the country in 1975

International organization participation: ACCT, AsDB, ASEAN, CP,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OPCW, PCA,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
  (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador VANG Rattanavong
  chancery: 2222 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Wendy Jean CHAMBERLIN
  embassy: Rue Bartholonie, B.P. 114, Vientiane
  mailing address: American Embassy, Box V, APO AP 96546

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), blue
  (double width), and red with a large white disk centered in the blue
  band



Economy



Economy--overview: The government of Laos?one of the few remaining
  official communist states--has been decentralizing control and
  encouraging private enterprise since 1986. The results, starting
  from an extremely low base, have been striking--growth averaged 7% in
  1988-96. Because Laos depends heavily on its trade with Thailand, it
  fell victim to the financial crisis in the region beginning in 1997.
  Laos is a landlocked country with a primitive infrastructure. It has
  no railroads, a rudimentary road system, and limited external and
  internal telecommunications. Electricity is available in only a few
  urban areas. Subsistence agriculture accounts for half of GDP and
  provides 80% of total employment. The predominant crop is glutinous
  rice. In non-drought years, Laos is self-sufficient overall in food,
  but each year flood, pests, and localized drought cause shortages in
  various parts of the country. For the foreseeable future the economy
  will continue to depend on aid from the IMF and other international
  sources; Japan is currently the largest bilateral aid donor; aid
  from the former USSR/Eastern Europe has been cut sharply. As in many
  developing countries, deforestation and soil erosion will hamper
  efforts to regain a high rate of GDP growth.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$6.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,260 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 51%
  industry: 21%
  services: 28% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 46.1% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.2%
  highest 10%: 26.4% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 112% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1 million-1.5 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 80% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5.7% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $230.2 million
  expenditures: $365.9 million, including capital expenditures of $317
  million (1996)

Industries: tin and gypsum mining, timber, electric power,
  agricultural processing, construction, garments

Industrial production growth rate: 8.9% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 900 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.04%
  hydro: 99.96%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1998)

Electricity--consumption: 287 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 640 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 27 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sweet potatoes, vegetables, corn, coffee,
  sugarcane, tobacco, cotton; water buffalo, pigs, cattle, poultry

Exports: $330 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: wood products, garments, electricity,
  coffee, tin

Exports--partners: Vietnam, Thailand, Germany, France

Imports: $630 million (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, vehicles, fuel

Imports--partners: Thailand, Japan, Vietnam, China, Singapore

Debt--external: $1.2 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $290 million (1998)

Currency: 1 new kip (NK) = 100 at

Exchange rates: new kips (NK) per US$1--4,217 (January 1999),
  3,299.21 (1998), 1,256.73 (1997), 921.14 (1996), 804.69 (1995),
  717.67 (1994)
  note: as of September 1995, a floating exchange rate policy was
  adopted

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 28,000 (1998 est.)

Telephone system: service to general public is poor but
  improving, with over 28,000 telephones currently in service and an
  additional 48,000 expected by 2001; the government relies on a
  radiotelephone network to communicate with remote areas
  domestic: radiotelephone communications
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean
  Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 5, shortwave 4 (1998)

Radios: 580,000 (1995)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1997)

Televisions: 32,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 21,716 km
  paved: 9,673.5 km
  unpaved: 12,042.5 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: about 4,587 km, primarily Mekong and tributaries;
  2,897 additional kilometers are sectionally navigable by craft
  drawing less than 0.5 m

Pipelines: petroleum products 136 km

Ports and harbors: none

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,370 GRT/3,000 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 52 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 9
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 43
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 17
  under 914 m: 25 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Lao People's Army (LPA; includes militia
  element), Lao People's Navy (LPN; includes riverine element), Air
  Force, National Police Department

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,200,664 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 648,087 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 57,047 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $77.4 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.2% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: parts of the border with Thailand are
  indefinite

Illicit drugs: world's third-largest illicit opium producer
  (estimated cultivation in 1998--26,100 hectares, a 7% decrease over
  1997; estimated potential production in 1998--140 metric tons, a 33%
  decrease over 1997); potential heroin producer; transshipment point
  for heroin and methamphetamines produced in Burma; illicit producer
  of cannabis



======================================================================




@Latvia
------





Introduction



Background: Along with most of the other small nations of Europe,
  Latvia shares a history of invasion by a succession of expansionist
  nations, e.g., Sweden, Poland, Germany, and Russia. After a brief
  period of independence between the two World Wars, Latvia was
  annexed by the USSR in 1940 under the Molotov-Ribbentrop Pact. The
  USSR recaptured Latvia from its German occupiers in 1944. Latvia
  reestablished its independence in August 1991, a few months prior to
  the collapse of the Soviet Union; the last Russian troops left in
  1994. The status of ethnic Russians, who make up 30% of the
  population, is an issue of concern to Moscow. Unemployment has
  become a growing problem and Latvia hopes to receive an invitation
  to begin EU accession talks by the end of 1999.



Geography



Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between
  Estonia and Lithuania

Geographic coordinates: 57 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 64,589 sq km
  land: 64,589 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,150 km
  border countries: Belarus 141 km, Estonia 339 km, Lithuania 453 km,
  Russia 217 km

Coastline: 531 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: maritime; wet, moderate winters

Terrain: low plain

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Gaizinkalns 312 m

Natural resources: minimal; amber, peat, limestone, dolomite

Land use:
  arable land: 27%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 46%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 160 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: air and water pollution because of a
  lack of waste conversion equipment; Gulf of Riga and Daugava River
  heavily polluted; contamination of soil and groundwater with
  chemicals and petroleum products at military bases

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 2,353,874 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 216,369; female 207,242)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 749,396; female 825,988)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 114,038; female 240,841) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.25% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 8.1 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 15.82 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -4.75 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.47 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.85 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.19 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 67.3 years
  male: 61.24 years
  female: 73.66 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.18 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Latvian(s)
  adjective: Latvian

Ethnic groups: Latvian 56.5%, Russian 30.4%, Byelorussian 4.3%,
  Ukrainian 2.8%, Polish 2.6%, other 3.4%

Religions: Lutheran, Roman Catholic, Russian Orthodox

Languages: Lettish (official), Lithuanian, Russian, other

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 100%
  male: 100%
  female: 99% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Latvia
  conventional short form: Latvia
  local long form: Latvijas Republika
  local short form: Latvija
  former: Latvian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: LG

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Riga

Administrative divisions: 26 counties (singular--rajons) and 7
  municipalities*: Aizkraukles Rajons, Aluksnes Rajons, Balvu Rajons,
  Bauskas Rajons, Cesu Rajons, Daugavpils*, Daugavpils Rajons, Dobeles
  Rajons, Gulbenes Rajons, Jekabpils Rajons, Jelgava*, Jelgavas
  Rajons, Jurmala*, Kraslavas Rajons, Kuldigas Rajons, Leipaja*,
  Liepajas Rajons, Limbazu Rajons, Ludzas Rajons, Madonas Rajons,
  Ogres Rajons, Preilu Rajons, Rezekne*, Rezeknes Rajons, Riga*, Rigas
  Rajons, Saldus Rajons, Talsu Rajons, Tukuma Rajons, Valkas Rajons,
  Valmieras Rajons, Ventspils*, Ventspils Rajons

Independence: 6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 November (1918)

Constitution: the 1991 Constitutional Law which supplements the
  1922 constitution, provides for basic rights and freedoms

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal for Latvian citizens

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Guntis ULMANIS (since 7 July 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Vilis KRISTOPANS (since 21
  November 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  appointed by the Parliament
  elections: president elected by Parliament for a four-year term
  (amended from a three-year term on 4 December 1997); election last
  held 18 June 1996 (next to be held by NA June/July 1999); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: Guntis ULMANIS elected president in the first
  round of balloting; percent of parliamentary vote--Guntis ULMANIS
  53%, Ilga KREITUSE 25%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Saeima (100 seats;
  members are elected by direct popular vote to serve four-year
  terms--amended from three-year term on 4 December 1997)
  elections: last held 3 October 1998 (next to be held NA October 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--People's Party 21%, LC
  18%, TSP 14%, TVB/LNNK 14%, Social Democrats 13%, New Party 8%;
  seats by party--People's Party 24, LC 21, TSP 16, TVB/LNNK 17, Social
  Democrats 14, New Party 8

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges' appointments are
  confirmed by Parliament

Political parties and leaders: New Party [Raimonds PAULS];
  V. IVANOV]; Christian People's Party or KTP (formerly People's Front
  ADAMSONS]

International organization participation: BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, OAS
  (observer), OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WEU
  (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ojars Eriks KALNINS
  chancery: 4325 17th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James H. HOLMES
  embassy: Raina Boulevard 7, LV-1510, Riga
  mailing address: American Embassy Riga, PSC 78, Box Riga, APO AE
  09723

Flag description: three horizontal bands of maroon (top), white
  (half-width), and maroon



Economy



Economy--overview: Developments in 1998 include an invitation to
  join the World Trade Organization (the first Baltic country
  invited), GDP growth of 3.6% (down from 6% in 1997), and reduced
  inflation at 4.7% (from 8.4% in 1997). The drop in GDP growth is
  largely attributable to the impact of Russia's financial crisis and
  reduced investment in emerging markets following the Asian financial
  troubles. Unofficial sanctions that Russia imposed in the spring
  initially hit Latvia's exporters--Russia is among Latvia's top three
  trade partners--but also prompted them to seek alternative markets.
  Latvia continued its strict fiscal and monetary policy, including
  its second balanced budget and had a 1.8% budget surplus. Its draft
  1999 budget is based on conservative projections of 2% to 4% GDP
  growth and 4.5% inflation. Unemployment climbed to 9.2% in 1998, a
  considerable increase over the 6.7% rate in 1997. Latvia continued
  to have a high current account deficit, estimated at about 9%.
  Privatization of large state utilities--especially the energy
  sector--was postponed and is unlikely to resume before late 1999. EU
  accession remains Latvia's top priority, and Latvia expects to be
  invited to start EU accession talks by the end of 1999. Continued
  troubles in the Russian and East Asian economies probably will hold
  growth to around 2.5% in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$9.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7%
  industry: 28%
  services: 65% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.3%
  highest 10%: 22.1% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.7% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.4 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 41%, agriculture and forestry
  16%, services 43% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 9.2% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.33 billion
  expenditures: $1.27 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: buses, vans, street and railroad cars, synthetic
  fibers, agricultural machinery, fertilizers, washing machines,
  radios, electronics, pharmaceuticals, processed foods, textiles;
  dependent on imports for energy, raw materials, and intermediate
  products

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 3.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 28.12%
  hydro: 71.88%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.18 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 300 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 3.28 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, sugar beets, potatoes, vegetables;
  beef, milk, eggs; fish

Exports: $1.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: wood and wood products, machinery and
  equipment, textiles, foodstuffs

Exports--partners: Russia 21%, Germany 14%, UK 14%, Sweden 8%
  (1997)

Imports: $3.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: fuels, machinery and equipment, chemicals

Imports--partners: Russia 16%, Germany 16%, Finland 10%, Sweden 8%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $212 million (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $96.2 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Latvian lat (LVL) = 100 santims

Exchange rates: lats (LVL) per US$1--0.570 (January 1999), 0.590
  (1998), 0.581 (1997), 0.551 (1996), 0.528 (1995), 0.560 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 710,848 (1997)

Telephone system: Lattelekom is 51% state owned, plans to
  privatize in 2000 to satisfy EU concerns; 50,000 people are on the
  waiting list to receive telephone service; Internet service is
  available throughout Latvia
  domestic: local--two cellular service providers; NMT-450 and GSM
  standards provide service nationwide; over 75% of population
  covered; intercity--two synchronous digital hierarchy fiber-optic
  rings form the national backbone; 11 digital switching centers, 3
  service centers
  international: Latvia has international fiber-optic connectivity to
  Belarus, Estonia, Lithuania, and an undersea fiber-optic cable to
  Sweden

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note--there
  are 25 stations of unknown type; 75% of commercial broadcasts must
  be in the Latvian language; remainder mostly in Russian and European
  languages

Radios: 1.4 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 30 (origin of TV broadcasts must
  be 40% Latvian and 40% other European languages)

Televisions: NA; note--almost 100% of the population have TV
  access, 16% have VCRs, and 20% have cable or satellite dishes (1995)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,412 km
  broad gauge: 2,379 km 1.520-m gauge (271 km electrified) (1992)
  narrow gauge: 33 km 0.750-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
  total: 55,942 km
  paved: 21,426 km
  unpaved: 34,516 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 300 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: crude oil 750 km; refined products 780 km; natural gas
  560 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Daugavpils, Liepaja, Riga, Ventspils

Merchant marine:
  total: 11 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 42,429 GRT/44,583 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 3, oil tanker 4, refrigerated cargo 3,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 50 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 36
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 27 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 14
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 10 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense
  Forces, Security Forces, Border Guard, Home Guard (Zemessardze)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 565,811 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 443,879 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 16,883 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $60 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.9% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: draft treaty delimiting the boundary with
  Russia has not been signed; ongoing talks over maritime boundary
  dispute with Lithuania (primary concern is oil exploration rights)

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for opiates and cannabis from
  Central and Southwest Asia to Western Europe and Scandinavia and
  Latin American cocaine and some synthetics from Western Europe to
  CIS; limited production of illicit amphetamines, ephedrine, and
  ecstasy for export



======================================================================




@Lebanon
-------





Introduction



Background: Lebanon has made progress toward rebuilding its
  political institutions and regaining its national sovereignty since
  the end of the devastating 16-year civil war, which ended in 1991.
  Under the Ta'if Accord--the blueprint for national reconciliation--the
  Lebanese have established a more equitable political system,
  particularly by giving Muslims a greater say in the political
  process while institutionalizing sectarian divisions in the
  government. Since the end of the civil war, the Lebanese have formed
  six cabinets, conducted two legislative elections, and held their
  first municipal elections in 35 years. Most of the militias have
  been weakened or disbanded. The Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF) has
  seized vast quantities of weapons used by the militias during the
  war and extended central government authority over about one-half of
  the country. Hizballah, the radical Shi'a party, retains its
  weapons. Foreign forces still occupy areas of Lebanon. Israel
  maintains troops in southern Lebanon and continues to support a
  proxy militia, the Army of South Lebanon (ASL), along a narrow
  stretch of territory contiguous to its border. The ASL's enclave
  encompasses this self-declared security zone and about 20 kilometers
  north to the strategic town of Jazzin. Syria maintains about 25,000
  troops in Lebanon based mainly in Beirut, North Lebanon, and the
  Bekaa Valley. Syria's deployment was legitimized by the Arab League
  during Lebanon's civil war and in the Ta'if Accord. Citing the
  continued weakness of the LAF, Beirut's requests, and failure of the
  Lebanese Government to implement all of the constitutional reforms
  in the Ta'if Accord, Damascus has so far refused to withdraw its
  troops from Lebanon.



Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
  Israel and Syria

Geographic coordinates: 33 50 N, 35 50 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 10,400 sq km
  land: 10,230 sq km
  water: 170 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.7 times the size of Connecticut

Land boundaries:
  total: 454 km
  border countries: Israel 79 km, Syria 375 km

Coastline: 225 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean; mild to cool, wet winters with hot, dry
  summers; Lebanon mountains experience heavy winter snows

Terrain: narrow coastal plain; Al Biqa' (Bekaa Valley) separates
  Lebanon and Anti-Lebanon Mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Jabal al Makmal 3,087 m

Natural resources: limestone, iron ore, salt, water-surplus state
  in a water-deficit region

Land use:
  arable land: 21%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 8%
  other: 61% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 860 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
  desertification; air pollution in Beirut from vehicular traffic and
  the burning of industrial wastes; pollution of coastal waters from
  raw sewage and oil spills

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: Nahr al Litani only major river in Near East not
  crossing an international boundary; rugged terrain historically
  helped isolate, protect, and develop numerous factional groups based
  on religion, clan, and ethnicity



People



Population: 3,562,699 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 535,596; female 515,776)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 1,084,121; female 1,196,678)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 105,133; female 125,395) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.61% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.5 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.45 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.53 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.93 years
  male: 68.34 years
  female: 73.66 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.25 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Lebanese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Lebanese

Ethnic groups: Arab 95%, Armenian 4%, other 1%

Religions: Islam 70% (5 legally recognized Islamic groups--Alawite
  or Nusayri, Druze, Isma'ilite, Shi'a, Sunni), Christian 30% (11
  legally recognized Christian groups--4 Orthodox Christian, 6
  Catholic, 1 Protestant), Judaism NEGL%

Languages: Arabic (official), French, English, Armenian widely
  understood

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 86.4%
  male: 90.8%
  female: 82.2% (1997 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Lebanese Republic
  conventional short form: Lebanon
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Lubnaniyah
  local short form: Lubnan

Data code: LE

Government type: republic

Capital: Beirut

Administrative divisions: 5 governorates (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Al Biqa', Al Janub, Ash Shamal, Bayrut, Jabal
  Lubnan

Independence: 22 November 1943 (from League of Nations mandate
  under French administration)

National holiday: Independence Day, 22 November (1943)

Constitution: 23 May 1926, amended a number of times

Legal system: mixture of Ottoman law, canon law, Napoleonic code,
  and civil law; no judicial review of legislative acts; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; compulsory for all males; authorized
  for women at age 21 with elementary education

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Emile LAHUD (since 24 November 1998)
  head of government: Prime Minister Salim al-HUSS (since 4 December
  1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet chosen by the prime minister in consultation with
  the president and members of the National Assembly; the current
  Cabinet was formed in 1998
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a six-year
  term; election last held 15 October 1998 (next to be held NA 2004);
  prime minister and deputy prime minister appointed by the president
  in consultation with the National Assembly; by custom, the president
  is a Maronite Christian, the prime minister is a Sunni Muslim, and
  the speaker of the legislature is a Shi'a Muslim
  election results: Emile LAHUD elected president; National Assembly
  vote--118 votes in favor, 0 against, 10 abstentions

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Majlis
  Alnuwab (Arabic) or Assemblee Nationale (French) (128 seats; members
  elected by popular vote on the basis of sectarian proportional
  representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held in the summer of 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA
  (one-half Christian and one-half Muslim)

Judicial branch: four Courts of Cassation (three courts for civil
  and commercial cases and one court for criminal cases);
  Constitutional Council (called for in Ta'if Accord) rules on
  constitutionality of laws; Supreme Council (hears charges against
  the president and prime minister as needed)

Political parties and leaders: political party activity is
  organized along largely sectarian lines; numerous political
  groupings exist, consisting of individual political figures and
  followers motivated by religious, clan, and economic considerations

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC,
  PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Farid ABBOUD
  chancery: 2560 28th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Detroit, New York, and Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador David SATTERFIELD
  embassy: Antelias, Beirut
  mailing address: P. O. Box 70-840, Beirut; PSC 815, Box 2, FPO AE
  09836-0002

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), white
  (double width), and red with a green and brown cedar tree centered
  in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: The 1975-91 civil war seriously damaged
  Lebanon's economic infrastructure, cut national output by half, and
  all but ended Lebanon's position as a Middle Eastern entrepot and
  banking hub. Peace has enabled the central government to restore
  control in Beirut, begin collecting taxes, and regain access to key
  port and government facilities. Economic recovery has been helped by
  a financially sound banking system and resilient small- and
  medium-scale manufacturers, with family remittances, banking
  services, manufactured and farm exports, and international aid as
  the main sources of foreign exchange. Lebanon's economy has made
  impressive gains since the launch of "Horizon 2000," the
  government's $20 billion reconstruction program in 1993. Real GDP
  grew 8% in 1994 and 7% in 1995 before Israel's Operation Grapes of
  Wrath in April 1996 stunted economic activity. During 1992-98,
  annual inflation fell from more than 100% to 5%, and foreign
  exchange reserves jumped to more than $6 billion from $1.4 billion.
  Burgeoning capital inflows have generated foreign payments
  surpluses, and the Lebanese pound has remained relatively stable.
  Progress also has been made in rebuilding Lebanon's war-torn
  physical and financial infrastructure. Solidere, a $2-billion firm,
  is managing the reconstruction of Beirut's central business
  district; the stock market reopened in January 1996; and
  international banks and insurance companies are returning. The
  government nonetheless faces serious challenges in the economic
  arena. It has had to fund reconstruction by tapping foreign exchange
  reserves and boosting borrowing. Reducing the government budget
  deficit is a major goal of the LAHUD government. The stalled peace
  process and ongoing violence in southern Lebanon could lead to wider
  hostilities that would disrupt vital capital inflows. Furthermore,
  the gap between rich and poor has widened in the 1990's, resulting
  in grassroots dissatisfaction over the skewed distribution of the
  reconstruction's benefits and leading the government to shift its
  focus from rebuilding infrastructure to improving living conditions.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$15.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 23%
  services: 73% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1 million
  note: in addition, there are as many as 1 million foreign workers
  (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 62%, industry 31%,
  agriculture 7% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 18% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $4.9 billion
  expenditures: $7.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: banking; food processing; jewelry; cement; textiles;
  mineral and chemical products; wood and furniture products; oil
  refining; metal fabricating

Industrial production growth rate: 25% (1993 est.)

Electricity--production: 8.4 billion kWh (1997 est.)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 87.72%
  hydro: 12.28%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.01 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 310 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: citrus, grapes, tomatoes, apples,
  vegetables, potatoes, olives, tobacco, hemp (hashish); sheep, goats

Exports: $711 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: foodstuffs and tobacco 20%, textiles 12%,
  chemicals 11%, metal and metal products 11%, electrical equipment
  and products 10%, jewelry 10%, paper and paper products 8% (1997)

Exports--partners: Saudi Arabia 14%, UAE 9%, France 7%, Syria 6%,
  US 6%, Kuwait 4%, Jordan 4%, Turkey 4%

Imports: $7.5 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs 29%, machinery and transport
  equipment 28%, consumer goods 18%, chemicals 9%, textiles 5%, metals
  5%, fuels 3%, agricultural foods 3% (1997)

Imports--partners: Italy 13%, US 9%, France 9%, Germany 8%,
  Switzerland 7%, Japan 4%, UK 4%, Syria 4% (1997)

Debt--external: $3 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $3.5 billion (pledges 1997-2001)

Currency: 1 Lebanese pound (LL) = 100 piasters

Exchange rates: Lebanese pounds (LL) per US$1--1,508.0 (January
  1999), 1,516.1 (1998), 1,539.5 (1997), 1,571.4 (1996), 1,621.4
  (1995), 1,680.1 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 150,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: telecommunications system severely damaged by
  civil war; rebuilding well underway
  domestic: primarily microwave radio relay and cable
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean) (erratic operations); coaxial cable to Syria;
  microwave radio relay to Syria but inoperable beyond Syria to
  Jordan; 3 submarine coaxial cables

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 3, shortwave 1
  note: government is licensing a limited number of the more than 100
  AM and FM stations operated sporadically by various factions that
  sprang up during the civil war

Radios: 2.37 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 28 (1997)

Televisions: 1.1 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 222 km
  standard gauge: 222 km 1.435-m (from Beirut to the Syrian border)

Highways:
  total: 6,270 km
  paved: 6,270 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1998 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 72 km (none in operation)

Ports and harbors: Al Batrun, Al Mina', An Naqurah, Antilyas, Az
  Zahrani, Beirut, Jubayl, Juniyah, Shikka, Sidon, Tripoli, Tyre

Merchant marine:
  total: 64 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 267,562 GRT/403,252 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 6, cargo 41, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk
  1, combination ore/oil 1, container 3, livestock carrier 6,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, vehicle carrier 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 7
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Lebanese Armed Forces (LAF; includes Army,
  Navy, and Air Force)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 925,834 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 573,093 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $445 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 5% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Israeli troops in southern Lebanon since
  June 1982; Syrian troops in northern, central, and eastern Lebanon
  since October 1976

Illicit drugs: inconsequential producer of hashish and heroin;
  some heroine and cocaine processing mostly in the Bekaa valley; a
  Lebanese/Syrian eradication campaign started in the early 1990s has
  practically eliminated the opium and cannabis crops



======================================================================




@Lesotho
-------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, an enclave of South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 29 30 S, 28 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 30,350 sq km
  land: 30,350 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 909 km
  border countries: South Africa 909 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cool to cold, dry winters; hot, wet summers

Terrain: mostly highland with plateaus, hills, and mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: junction of the Orange and Makhaleng Rivers 1,400 m
  highest point: Thabana Ntlenyana 3,482 m

Natural resources: water, agricultural and grazing land, some
  diamonds and other minerals

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 66%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 30 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: population pressure forcing
  settlement in marginal areas results in overgrazing, severe soil
  erosion, and soil exhaustion; desertification; Highlands Water
  Project controls, stores, and redirects water to South Africa

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Marine Life
  Conservation, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Endangered Species, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping

Geography--note: landlocked; surrounded by South Africa



People



Population: 2,128,950 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 40% (male 424,355; female 422,892)
  15-64 years: 56% (male 573,285; female 610,636)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 40,604; female 57,178) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.8% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 31.26 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.23 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 77.58 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 52.99 years
  male: 51.37 years
  female: 54.65 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.03 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mosotho (singular), Basotho (plural)
  adjective: Basotho

Ethnic groups: Sotho 99.7%, Europeans 1,600, Asians 800

Religions: Christian 80%, rest indigenous beliefs

Languages: Sesotho (southern Sotho), English (official), Zulu,
  Xhosa

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 71.3%
  male: 81.1%
  female: 62.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Lesotho
  conventional short form: Lesotho
  former: Basutoland

Data code: LT

Government type: parliamentary constitutional monarchy

Capital: Maseru

Administrative divisions: 10 districts; Berea, Butha-Buthe,
  Leribe, Mafeteng, Maseru, Mohales Hoek, Mokhotlong, Qacha's Nek,
  Quthing, Thaba-Tseka

Independence: 4 October 1966 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 October (1966)

Constitution: 2 April 1993

Legal system: based on English common law and Roman-Dutch law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in High Court and Court of
  Appeal; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King LETSIE III (since 7 February 1996, succeeded to
  the throne following the death of his father, King MOSHOESHOE II, on
  16 January 1996); note--King LETSIE III formerly occupied the throne
  (November 1990 to February 1995) while his father was in exile
  head of government: Prime Minister Pakalitha MOSISILI (since NA May
  1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary, but, under the terms of
  the constitution which came into effect after the March 1993
  election, the monarch is a "living symbol of national unity" with no
  executive or legislative powers; under traditional law the college
  of chiefs has the power to determine who is next in the line of
  succession, who shall serve as regent in the event that the
  successor is not of mature age, and may even depose the monarch

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (33 members--22 principal chiefs and 11 other members appointed by
  the ruling party) and the Assembly (80 seats; members elected by
  popular vote for five-year terms); note--number of seats in the
  Assembly rose from 65 to 80 in the May 1998 election
  elections: last held 23 May 1998 (next to be held in late 1999 or
  early 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--LCD 61%; seats by
  party--LCD 79, BCP 1
  note: results contested; LCD, with only 61% of the vote, won 79 out
  of 80 parliamentary seats based on a historical political consensus
  for a "winner take all" formula

Judicial branch: High Court, chief justice appointed by the
  monarch; Court of Appeal; Magistrate's Court; customary or
  traditional court

Political parties and leaders:
  MOSISILI, leader; Shakhane MOKHEHLE, secretary general]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW,
  SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dr. Eunice M. BULANE
  chancery: 2511 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Katherine H. PETERSON
  embassy: 254 Kingsway, Maseru West (Consular Section)
  mailing address: P. O. Box 333, Maseru 100, Lesotho

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side
  corner; the upper half is white, bearing the brown silhouette of a
  large shield with crossed spear and club; the lower half is a
  diagonal blue band with a green triangle in the corner



Economy



Economy--overview: Small, landlocked, and mountainous, Lesotho's
  only important natural resource is water. Its economy is based on
  subsistence agriculture, livestock, and remittances from miners
  employed in South Africa. The number of such mine workers has
  declined steadily over the past several years. In 1996 their
  remittances added about 33% to GDP compared with the addition of
  roughly 67% in 1990. A small manufacturing base depends largely on
  farm products which support the milling, canning, leather, and jute
  industries. Agricultural products are exported primarily to South
  Africa. Proceeds from membership in a common customs union with
  South Africa form the majority of government revenue. Although
  drought has decreased agricultural activity over the past few years,
  completion of a major hydropower facility in January 1998 now
  permits the sale of water to South Africa, generating royalties that
  will be an important source of income for Lesotho. The pace of
  parastatal privatization has increased in recent years. Civil
  disorder in September 1998 destroyed 80% of the commercial
  infrastructure in Maseru and two other major towns. Most firms were
  not covered by insurance, and the rebuilding of small and medium
  business will be a significant challenge in terms of both economic
  growth and employment levels.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.1 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 10% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,400 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14%
  industry: 42%
  services: 44% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 49.2% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.9%
  highest 10%: 43.4% (1986-87)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 689,000 economically active

Labor force--by occupation: 86% of resident population engaged in
  subsistence agriculture; roughly 35% of the active male wage earners
  work in South Africa

Unemployment rate: substantial unemployment and underemployment
  effecting more than half of the labor force (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $507 million
  expenditures: $487 million, including capital expenditures of $170
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: food, beverages, textiles, handicrafts; construction;
  tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 19.7% (1995)

Electricity--production: 0 kWh (1995)
  note: electricity supplied by South Africa

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 335 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 335 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, wheat, pulses, sorghum, barley;
  livestock

Exports: $200 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: manufactures 65% (clothing, footwear, road
  vehicles), wool and mohair 7%, food and live animals 7% (1996)

Exports--partners: South African Customs Union 66%, North America
  26%, EU 4% (1996)

Imports: $880 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: food; building materials, vehicles,
  machinery, medicines, petroleum products (1995)

Imports--partners: South African Customs Union 90%, Asia 6%, EU 2%
  (1995)

Debt--external: $660 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $123.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 loti (L) = 100 lisente
  note: maloti (M) is the plural form of loti

Exchange rates: maloti (M) per US$1--5.98380 (January 1999),
  5.52828 (1998), 4.60796 (1997), 4.29935 (1996), 3.62709 (1995),
  3.55080 (1994); note--the Basotho loti is at par with the South
  African rand

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 12,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: rudimentary system
  domestic: consists of a few landlines, a small microwave radio relay
  system, and a minor radiotelephone communication system
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 66,000

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: 11,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2.6 km; note--owned by, operated by, and included in the
  statistics of South Africa
  narrow gauge: 2.6 km 1.067-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 4,955 km
  paved: 887 km
  unpaved: 4,068 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 29 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 25
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Lesotho Defense Force (LDF; includes Army and
  Air Wing), Royal Lesotho Mounted Police (RLMP)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 504,442 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 271,925 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Liberia
-------





Introduction



Background: The 1995 Abuja Peace Accords ended seven years of
  civil warfare in Liberia. More than 20,000 of the estimated 33,000
  factional fighters gave up their arms to the Cease-Fire Monitoring
  Group of the Economic Community of West African States (ECOMOG).
  Free and open presidential and legislative elections were held 19
  July 1997; former faction leader, Charles TAYLOR, and his National
  Patriotic Party won overwhelming victories. The years of civil
  strife coupled with the flight of most business people disrupted
  formal economic activity. A short-lived armed clash in September
  1998 between government forces and supporters of factional leader
  Roosevelt JOHNSON and continuing uncertainty about the security
  situation have slowed the process of rebuilding the social and
  economic structure of the war-torn country. For two centuries the US
  has had uniquely close ties to Liberia and today is a major aid
  donor.



Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Cote d'Ivoire and Sierra Leone

Geographic coordinates: 6 30 N, 9 30 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 111,370 sq km
  land: 96,320 sq km
  water: 15,050 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Tennessee

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,585 km
  border countries: Guinea 563 km, Cote d'Ivoire 716 km, Sierra Leone
  306 km

Coastline: 579 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; dry winters with hot days and cool
  to cold nights; wet, cloudy summers with frequent heavy showers

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling coastal plains rising to rolling
  plateau and low mountains in northeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Wuteve 1,380 m

Natural resources: iron ore, timber, diamonds, gold

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 59%
  forests and woodland: 18%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust-laden harmattan winds blow from the Sahara
  (December to March)

Environment--current issues: tropical rain forest subject to
  deforestation; soil erosion; loss of biodiversity; pollution of
  coastal waters from oil residue and raw sewage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Desertification, Endangered Species, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation



People



Population: 2,923,725 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 656,101; female 649,389)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 775,429; female 738,904)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 50,126; female 53,776) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.92% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.49 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 11.03 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 18.77 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: evidence from UNHCR indicates Liberians are being repatriated

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 100.63 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 59.88 years
  male: 57.2 years
  female: 62.64 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.02 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Liberian(s)
  adjective: Liberian

Ethnic groups: indigenous African tribes 95% (including Kpelle,
  Bassa, Gio, Kru, Grebo, Mano, Krahn, Gola, Gbandi, Loma, Kissi, Vai,
  and Bella), Americo-Liberians 2.5% (descendants of immigrants from
  the US who had been slaves)

Religions: traditional 70%, Muslim 20%, Christian 10%

Languages: English 20% (official), about 20 tribal languages, of
  which a few can be written and are used in correspondence

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 38.3%
  male: 53.9%
  female: 22.4% (1995 est.)
  note: these figures are increasing because of the improving school
  system



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Liberia
  conventional short form: Liberia

Data code: LI

Government type: republic

Capital: Monrovia

Administrative divisions: 13 counties; Bomi, Bong, Grand Bassa,
  Grand Cape Mount, Grand Gedeh, Grand Kru, Lofa, Margibi, Maryland,
  Montserrado, Nimba, River Cess, Sinoe

Independence: 26 July 1847

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 July (1847)

Constitution: 6 January 1986

Legal system: dual system of statutory law based on
  Anglo-American common law for the modern sector and customary law
  based on unwritten tribal practices for indigenous sector

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Charles Ghankay TAYLOR (since 2 August
  1997); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Charles Ghankay TAYLOR (since 2 August
  1997); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term
  (renewable); election last held 19 July 1997 (next to be held NA
  July 2001)
  election results: Charles Ghankay TAYLOR elected president; percent
  of vote--Charles Ghankay TAYLOR (NPP) 75.3%, Ellen Johnson SIRLEAF
  (UP) 9.6%, Alhaji KROMAH (ALCOP) 4%, other 11.1%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly consists of the
  Senate (26 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year
  terms) and the House of Representatives (64 seats; members elected
  by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 19 July 1997 (next to be held in NA
  2001); House of Representatives--last held 19 July 1997 (next to be
  held in NA 2001)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--NPP 21, UP 3, ALCOP 2; House of Representatives--percent of
  vote by party--NA; seats by party--NPP 49, UP 7, ALCOP 3, Alliance of
  Political Parties 2, UPP 2, LPP 1; note--the Alliance of Political
  Parties was a coalition of the LAP and the LUP

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders:
  TAYLOR]

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, CCC, ECA,
  ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Rachel DIGGS
  chancery: 5201 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Donald
  PETTERSON
  embassy: 111 United Nations Drive, Mamba Point, Monrovia
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: 11 equal horizontal stripes of red (top and
  bottom) alternating with white; there is a white five-pointed star
  on a blue square in the upper hoist-side corner; the design was
  based on the US flag



Economy



Economy--overview: A civil war in 1989-97 has destroyed much of
  Liberia's economy, especially the infrastructure in and around
  Monrovia. Many businessmen have fled the country, taking capital and
  expertise with them. Some returned during 1997. Many will not
  return. Richly endowed with water, mineral resources, forests, and a
  climate favorable to agriculture, Liberia had been a producer and
  exporter of basic products, while local manufacturing, mainly
  foreign owned, had been small in scope. The democratically elected
  government, installed in August 1997, inherited massive
  international debts and currently relies on revenues from its
  maritime registry to provide the bulk of its foreign exchange
  earnings. The restoration of the infrastructure and the raising of
  incomes in this ravaged economy depends on the implementation of
  sound macro- and micro-economic policies of the new government,
  including the encouragement of foreign investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 30%
  industry: 36%
  services: 34%

Population below poverty line: 80%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 70%

Unemployment rate: 70%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA

Industries: rubber processing, palm oil processing, diamonds

Industrial production growth rate: 0%

Electricity--production: 480 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 480 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rubber, coffee, cocoa, rice, cassava
  (tapioca), palm oil, sugarcane, bananas; sheep, goats; timber

Exports: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: diamonds, iron ore, rubber, timber, coffee

Exports--partners: Belgium, Norway, Ukraine, Singapore (1997)

Imports: $3.65 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: fuels, chemicals, machinery, transportation
  equipment, manufactured goods; rice and other foodstuffs

Imports--partners: South Korea, Japan, Italy, Singapore (1997)

Debt--external: $2 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $122.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Liberian dollar (L$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Liberian dollars (L$) per US$1--1.0000 (officially
  fixed rate since 1940); market exchange rate: Liberian dollars (L$)
  per US$1--40 (December 1998), 50 (October 1995), 7 (January 1992);
  market rate floats against the US dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: fewer than 25,000 (1998 est.)

Telephone system: telephone and telegraph service via microwave
  radio relay network; main center is Monrovia
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 10, shortwave 0
  note: two of the FM radio stations are limited to a small area

Radios: 675,000 (1995 est.); note--10,000 windup radios were
  distributed in the country prior to the 1997 election

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are four
  low-power repeaters; the station is located in Monrovia) (1997)

Televisions: 56,000 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 480 km (328 km single track); note--three rail systems owned
  and operated by foreign steel and financial interests in conjunction
  with the Liberian Government; one of these, the Lamco Railroad,
  closed in 1989 after iron ore production ceased; the other two were
  shut down by the civil war; large sections of the rail lines have
  been dismantled; approximately 60 km of railroad track was exported
  for scrap
  standard gauge: NA km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: NA km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 10,037 km (there is major deterioration on all highways due
  to lack of maintenance since the civil war began)
  paved: 603 km
  unpaved: 9,434 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Buchanan, Greenville, Harper, Monrovia

Merchant marine:
  total: 1,651 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 59,804,012
  GRT/96,650,752 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 4, bulk 408, cargo 106, chemical tanker
  176, combination bulk 25, combination ore/oil 50, container 193,
  liquefied gas tanker 89, multifunction large-load carrier 2, oil
  tanker 413, passenger 37, refrigerated cargo 69, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 19, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 12, vehicle
  carrier 45
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 54
  countries among which are Germany 186, US 161, Norway 142, Greece
  144, Japan 124, Hong Kong 100, China 53, UK 32, Singapore 39, and
  Monaco 38 (1998 est.)

Airports: 45 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 43
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 35 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, Navy

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 667,032 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 356,825 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.4 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: increasingly a transshipment point for Southeast
  and Southwest Asian heroin and South American cocaine for the
  European and US markets



======================================================================




@Libya
-----





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea,
  between Egypt and Tunisia

Geographic coordinates: 25 00 N, 17 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,759,540 sq km
  land: 1,759,540 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Alaska

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,383 km
  border countries: Algeria 982 km, Chad 1,055 km, Egypt 1,150 km,
  Niger 354 km, Sudan 383 km, Tunisia 459 km

Coastline: 1,770 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm
  note: Gulf of Sidra closing line--32 degrees 30 minutes north

Climate: Mediterranean along coast; dry, extreme desert interior

Terrain: mostly barren, flat to undulating plains, plateaus,
  depressions

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sabkhat Ghuzayyil -47 m
  highest point: Bikku Bitti 2,267 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, gypsum

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 8%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 91% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,700 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust-laden ghibli is a southern wind
  lasting one to four days in spring and fall; dust storms, sandstorms

Environment--current issues: desertification; very limited natural
  fresh water resources; the Great Manmade River Project, the largest
  water development scheme in the world, is being built to bring water
  from large aquifers under the Sahara to coastal cities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Desertification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Law of the
  Sea



People



Population: 4,992,838 (July 1999 est.)
  note: includes 161,251 non-nationals (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 36% (male 930,661; female 891,046)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 1,545,958; female 1,437,120)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 93,726; female 94,327) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.4% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27.33 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.35 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.99 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 28.15 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.73 years
  male: 73.81 years
  female: 77.74 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.79 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Libyan(s)
  adjective: Libyan

Ethnic groups: Berber and Arab 97%, Greeks, Maltese, Italians,
  Egyptians, Pakistanis, Turks, Indians, Tunisians

Religions: Sunni Muslim 97%

Languages: Arabic, Italian, English, all are widely understood in
  the major cities

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 76.2%
  male: 87.9%
  female: 63% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Socialist People's Libyan Arab Jamahiriya
  conventional short form: Libya
  local long form: Al Jumahiriyah al Arabiyah al Libiyah ash Shabiyah
  al Ishtirakiyah
  local short form: none

Data code: LY

Government type: Jamahiriya (a state of the masses) in theory,
  governed by the populace through local councils; in fact, a military
  dictatorship

Capital: Tripoli

Administrative divisions: 25 municipalities (baladiyat,
  singular--baladiyah); Ajdabiya, Al 'Aziziyah, Al Fatih, Al Jabal al
  Akhdar, Al Jufrah, Al Khums, Al Kufrah, An Nuqat al Khams, Ash
  Shati', Awbari, Az Zawiyah, Banghazi, Darnah, Ghadamis, Gharyan,
  Misratah, Murzuq, Sabha, Sawfajjin, Surt, Tarabulus, Tarhunah,
  Tubruq, Yafran, Zlitan
  note: the 25 municipalities may have been replaced by 13 regions

Independence: 24 December 1951 (from Italy)

National holiday: Revolution Day, 1 September (1969)

Constitution: 11 December 1969, amended 2 March 1977

Legal system: based on Italian civil law system and Islamic law;
  separate religious courts; no constitutional provision for judicial
  review of legislative acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Revolutionary Leader Col. Muammar Abu Minyar
  al-QADHAFI (since 1 September 1969); note--holds no official title,
  but is de facto chief of state
  head of government: Secretary of the General People's Committee
  (Premier) Muhammad Ahmad al-MANQUSH (since NA January 1998)
  cabinet: General People's Committee established by the General
  People's Congress
  elections: national elections are indirect through a hierarchy of
  peoples' committees; head of government elected by the General
  People's Congress; election last held NA (next to be held NA)
  election results: Muhammad Ahmad al-MANQUSH elected head of
  government; percent of General People's Congress vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral General People's Congress (NA
  seats; members elected indirectly through a hierarchy of peoples'
  committees)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: various Arab nationalist
  movements with almost negligible memberships may be functioning
  clandestinely, as well as some Islamic elements

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, AMU, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO,
  ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OAU, OIC, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNITAR, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Libya does not have an
  embassy in the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US suspended all
  embassy activities in Tripoli on 2 May 1980

Flag description: plain green; green is the traditional color of
  Islam (the state religion)



Economy



Economy--overview: The socialist-oriented economy depends
  primarily upon revenues from the oil sector, which contributes
  practically all export earnings and about one-third of GDP. These
  oil revenues and a small population give Libya one of the highest
  per capita GDPs in Africa, but little of this income flows down to
  the lower orders of society. Low oil prices in 1998 cut back revenue
  sharply, and GDP growth fell by 1%. In this statist society, import
  restrictions and inefficient resource allocations have led to
  periodic shortages of basic goods and foodstuffs. The nonoil
  manufacturing and construction sectors, which account for about 20%
  of GDP, have expanded from processing mostly agricultural products
  to include the production of petrochemicals, iron, steel, and
  aluminum. Agriculture accounts for only 5% of GDP; it employs 18% of
  the labor force. Climatic conditions and poor soils severely limit
  farm output, and Libya imports about 75% of its food requirements.
  The UN sanctions imposed in April 1992 do not have a major impact on
  the economy although they have increased transaction and
  transportation costs.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$38 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 55%
  services: 40% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 24.2% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1 million

Labor force--by occupation: industry 31%, services 27%, government
  24%, agriculture 18%

Unemployment rate: 30% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $3.6 billion
  expenditures: $5.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: petroleum, food processing, textiles, handicrafts,
  cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 17 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 17 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, olives, dates, citrus,
  vegetables, peanuts; beef, eggs

Exports: $6.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil, refined petroleum products,
  natural gas

Exports--partners: Italy, Germany, Spain, France, Turkey, Greece,
  Egypt

Imports: $6.9 billion (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transport equipment, food,
  manufactured goods

Imports--partners: Italy, Germany, UK, France, Spain, Turkey,
  Tunisia, Eastern Europe

Debt--external: $4 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $8.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Libyan dinar (LD) = 1,000 dirhams

Exchange rates: Libyan dinars (LD) per US$1--0.3799 (November
  1998), 0.3891 (1997), 0.3651 (1996), 0.3532 (1995), 0.3596 (1994);
  official rate: 0.45 (December 1998)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 411,000 (1999 est.)

Telephone system: telecommunications system is being modernized;
  cellular telephone system became operational in 1996
  domestic: microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, cellular,
  tropospheric scatter, and a domestic satellite system with 14 earth
  stations
  international: satellite earth stations--4 Intelsat, NA Arabsat, and
  NA Intersputnik; submarine cables to France and Italy; microwave
  radio relay to Tunisia and Egypt; tropospheric scatter to Greece;
  participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 3, shortwave 3 (1998 est.)

Radios: 1 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 12 (in addition, there is one
  low-power repeater) (1997)

Televisions: 550,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  note: Libya has had no railroad in operation since 1965, all
  previous systems having been dismantled; current plans are to
  construct a 1.435-m standard gauge line from the Tunisian frontier
  to Tripoli and Misratah, then inland to Sabha, center of a
  mineral-rich area, but there has been no progress; other plans made
  jointly with Egypt would establish a rail line from As Sallum,
  Egypt, to Tobruk with completion set for mid-1994; no progress has
  been reported

Highways:
  total: 83,200 km
  paved: 47,590 km
  unpaved: 35,610 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: none

Pipelines: crude oil 4,383 km; petroleum products 443 km
  (includes liquefied petroleum gas or LPG 256 km); natural gas 1,947
  km

Ports and harbors: Al Khums, Banghazi, Darnah, Marsa al Burayqah,
  Misratah, Ra's Lanuf, Tobruk, Tripoli, Zuwarah

Merchant marine:
  total: 30 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 588,928 GRT/989,662 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 9, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas tanker 3,
  oil tanker 9, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4, short-sea passenger 4 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 143 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 60
  over 3,047 m: 24
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 22
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 83
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
  914 to 1,523 m: 42
  under 914 m: 19 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Command

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,372,261 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 816,186 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 62,098 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary dispute with Tunisia;
  Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in northern Niger and part of
  southeastern Algeria



======================================================================




@Liechtenstein
-------------





Geography



Location: Central Europe, between Austria and Switzerland

Geographic coordinates: 47 10 N, 9 32 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 160 sq km
  land: 160 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.9 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 76 km
  border countries: Austria 35 km, Switzerland 41 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: continental; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow or
  rain; cool to moderately warm, cloudy, humid summers

Terrain: mostly mountainous (Alps) with Rhine Valley in western
  third

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Ruggeller Riet 430 m
  highest point: Grauspitz 2,599 m

Natural resources: hydroelectric potential

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 16%
  forests and woodland: 35%
  other: 25% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: along with Uzbekistan, one of only two doubly
  landlocked countries in the world; variety of microclimatic
  variations based on elevation



People



Population: 32,057 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 3,076; female 2,949)
  15-64 years: 70% (male 11,209; female 11,247)
  65 years and over: 11% (male 1,484; female 2,092) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.08% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.23 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.33 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 5.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.23 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.11 years
  male: 75.64 years
  female: 80.69 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.6 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Liechtensteiner(s)
  adjective: Liechtenstein

Ethnic groups: Alemannic 87.5%, Italian, Turkish, and other 12.5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 80%, Protestant 7.4%, unknown 7.7%,
  other 4.9% (1996)

Languages: German (official), Alemannic dialect

Literacy:
  definition: age 10 and over can read and write
  total population: 100%
  male: 100%
  female: 100% (1981 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Principality of Liechtenstein
  conventional short form: Liechtenstein
  local long form: Fuerstentum Liechtenstein
  local short form: Liechtenstein

Data code: LS

Government type: hereditary constitutional monarchy

Capital: Vaduz

Administrative divisions: 11 communes (Gemeinden,
  singular--Gemeinde); Balzers, Eschen, Gamprin, Mauren, Planken,
  Ruggell, Schaan, Schellenberg, Triesen, Triesenberg, Vaduz

Independence: 23 January 1719 (Imperial Principality of
  Liechtenstein established)

National holiday: Assumption Day, 15 August

Constitution: 5 October 1921

Legal system: local civil and penal codes; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Prince Hans ADAM II (since 13 November 1989, assumed
  executive powers 26 August 1984); Heir Apparent Prince ALOIS von und
  zu Liechtenstein, son of the monarch (born 11 June 1968)
  head of government: Head of Government Mario FRICK (since 15
  December 1993) and Deputy Head of Government Michael RITTER (since 2
  February 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet elected by the Diet; confirmed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party in the Diet is usually
  appointed the head of government by the monarch and the leader of
  the largest minority party in the Diet is usually appointed the
  deputy head of government by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Diet or Landtag (25 seats; members
  are elected by direct popular vote under proportional representation
  to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held on 2 February 1997 (next to be held by NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--VU 50.1%, FBPL 41.3%, FL
  8.5%; seats by party - VU 13, FBPL 10, FL 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Oberster Gerichtshof; Superior
  Court or Obergericht

Political parties and leaders: Fatherland Union or VU [Dr. Oswald

International organization participation: CE, EBRD, ECE, EFTA,
  IAEA, ICRM, IFRCS, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PCA,
  UN, UNCTAD, UPU, WCL, WIPO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Liechtenstein does not have
  an embassy in the US, but is represented by the Swiss embassy in
  routine diplomatic matters

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Liechtenstein, but the US Ambassador to Switzerland is
  also accredited to Liechtenstein

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and
  red with a gold crown on the hoist side of the blue band



Economy



Economy--overview: Despite its small size and limited natural
  resources, Liechtenstein has developed into a prosperous, highly
  industrialized, free-enterprise economy with a vital financial
  service sector and living standards on a par with the urban areas of
  its large European neighbors. Low business taxes--the maximum tax
  rate is 18%--and easy incorporation rules have induced about 73,700
  holding or so-called letter box companies to establish nominal
  offices in Liechtenstein, providing 30% of state revenues. The
  country participates in a customs union with Switzerland and uses
  the Swiss franc as its national currency. It imports more than 90%
  of its energy requirements. Liechtenstein is a member of the
  European Economic Area (an organization serving as a bridge between
  European Free Trade Association (EFTA) and EU) since May 1995. The
  government is working to harmonize its economic policies with those
  of an integrated Europe.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$730 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$23,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.5% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 22,891 of which 13,847 are foreigners; 8,231 commute
  from Austria and Switzerland to work each day

Labor force--by occupation: industry, trade, and building 45%,
  services 53%, agriculture, fishing, forestry, and horticulture 2%
  (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 1.6% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $455 million
  expenditures: $435 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: electronics, metal manufacturing, textiles, ceramics,
  pharmaceuticals, food products, precision instruments, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 150 million kWh (1995)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, maize, potatoes; livestock,
  dairy products

Exports: $2.47 billion (1996)

Exports--commodities: small specialty machinery, dental products,
  stamps, hardware, pottery

Exports--partners: EU and EFTA countries 60.57% (Switzerland
  15.7%) (1995)

Imports: $917.3 million (1996)

Imports--commodities: machinery, metal goods, textiles,
  foodstuffs, motor vehicles

Imports--partners: EU countries, Switzerland (1996)

Debt--external: $0 (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: none

Currency: 1 Swiss franc, franken, or franco (SwF) = 100 centimes,
  rappen, or centesimi

Exchange rates: Swiss francs, franken, or franchi (SwF) per
  US$1--1.3837 (January 1999), 1.4498 (1998), 1.4513 (1997), 1.2360
  (1996), 1.1825 (1995), 1.3677 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 22,857 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: automatic telephone system
  domestic: NA
  international: linked to Swiss networks by cable and microwave radio
  relay

Radio broadcast stations: 1 broadcast station in Triesen
  note: linked to Swiss networks

Radios: 12,134 (1996)

Television broadcast stations: NA (linked to Swiss networks)
  (1997)

Televisions: 11,785 (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 18.5 km; note--owned, operated, and included in statistics of
  Austrian Federal Railways
  standard gauge: 18.5 km 1.435-m gauge (electrified)

Highways:
  total: 250 km
  paved: 250 km
  unpaved: 0 km

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Switzerland



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims 1,600 sq km of property in the
  Czech Republic confiscated from its royal family in 1918; the Czech
  Republic insists that restitution does not go back before February
  1948, when the communists seized power



======================================================================




@Lithuania
---------





Geography



Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, between
  Latvia and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 56 00 N, 24 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 65,200 sq km
  land: 65,200 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,273 km
  border countries: Belarus 502 km, Latvia 453 km, Poland 91 km,
  Russia (Kaliningrad) 227 km

Coastline: 99 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: transitional, between maritime and continental; wet,
  moderate winters and summers

Terrain: lowland, many scattered small lakes, fertile soil

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Juozapines/Kalnas 292 m

Natural resources: peat

Land use:
  arable land: 35%
  permanent crops: 12%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 31%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 430 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: contamination of soil and groundwater
  with petroleum products and chemicals at military bases

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 3,584,966 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 365,149; female 350,070)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 1,156,161; female 1,239,145)
  65 years and over: 13% (male 160,963; female 313,478) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.4% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.52 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.93 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.58 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.93 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.51 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.88 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.71 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.96 years
  male: 62.91 years
  female: 75.31 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.45 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Lithuanian(s)
  adjective: Lithuanian

Ethnic groups: Lithuanian 80.6%, Russian 8.7%, Polish 7%,
  Byelorussian 1.6%, other 2.1%

Religions: primarily Roman Catholic, others include Lutheran,
  Russian Orthodox, Protestant, evangelical Christian Baptist, Islam,
  Judaism

Languages: Lithuanian (official), Polish, Russian

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 98% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Lithuania
  conventional short form: Lithuania
  local long form: Lietuvos Respublika
  local short form: Lietuva
  former: Lithuanian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: LH

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Vilnius

Administrative divisions: 44 regions (rajonai, singular--rajonas)
  and 11 municipalities*: Akmenes Rajonas, Alytaus Rajonas, Alytus*,
  Anyksciu Rajonas, Birstonas*, Birzu Rajonas, Druskininkai*,
  Ignalinos Rajonas, Jonavos Rajonas, Joniskio Rajonas, Jurbarko
  Rajonas, Kaisiadoriu Rajonas, Kaunas*, Kauno Rajonas, Kedainiu
  Rajonas, Kelmes Rajonas, Klaipeda*, Klaipedos Rajonas, Kretingos
  Rajonas, Kupiskio Rajonas, Lazdiju Rajonas, Marijampole*,
  Marijampoles Rajonas, Mazeikiu Rajonas, Moletu Rajonas, Neringa*
  Pakruojo Rajonas, Palanga*, Panevezio Rajonas, Panevezys*, Pasvalio
  Rajonas, Plunges Rajonas, Prienu Rajonas, Radviliskio Rajonas,
  Raseiniu Rajonas, Rokiskio Rajonas, Sakiu Rajonas, Salcininku
  Rajonas, Siauliai*, Siauliu Rajonas, Silales Rajonas, Silutes
  Rajonas, Sirvintu Rajonas, Skuodo Rajonas, Svencioniu Rajonas,
  Taurages Rajonas, Telsiu Rajonas, Traku Rajonas, Ukmerges Rajonas,
  Utenos Rajonas, Varenos Rajonas, Vilkaviskio Rajonas, Vilniaus
  Rajonas, Vilnius*, Zarasu Rajonas

Independence: 6 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Statehood Day, 16 February (1918)

Constitution: adopted 25 October 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Valdas ADAMKUS (since 26 February 1998)
  head of government: Premier Gediminas VAGNORIUS (since 28 November
  1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  nomination of the premier
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 21 December 1997 and 5 January 1998 (next to be
  held NA 2003); premier appointed by the president on the approval of
  the Parliament
  election results: Valdas ADAMKUS elected president; percent of
  vote--Valdas ADAMKUS 50.37%, Arturas PAULAUSKAS 49.7%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Seimas (141 seats,
  71 members are directly elected by popular vote, 70 are elected by
  proportional representation; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 October and 10 November 1996 (next to be
  held NA October 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--TS 69,
  LKDP 15, LCS 15, LDDP 12, LSDP 10, DP 2, independents 12, others 6

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the
  Parliament; Court of Appeal, judges appointed by the Parliament

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Party or LKDP

Political pressure groups and leaders: Lithuanian Future Forum

International organization participation: BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, OPCW, OSCE,
  PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Stasys SAKALAUSKAS
  chancery: 2622 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: Chicago and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Keith C. SMITH
  embassy: Akmenu 6, 2600 Vilnius
  mailing address: American Embassy, Vilnius, PSC 78, Box V, APO AE
  09723

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top),
  green, and red



Economy



Economy--overview: Lithuania has benefited from its disciplined
  approach to market reform and its adherence to strict fiscal and
  monetary policies imposed by the IMF, measures that have helped
  constrain the growth of the money supply, reduce inflation to 5.1%,
  and support GDP growth of 6% in 1997 and 4.5% in 1998. Foreign
  direct investment and the privatization program maintained their
  momentum in 1998. However, the current account deficit has hovered
  around 8% to 10% of GDP annually since 1995--the result of greater
  demand for consumer goods and falling growth in exports. Reducing
  this deficit is the immediate economic challenge for 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$17.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,900 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 13%
  industry: 32%
  services: 55% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.4%
  highest 10%: 28% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.1% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.8 million

Labor force--by occupation: industry and construction 42%,
  agriculture and forestry 20%, other 38% (1997)

Unemployment rate: 6.7% (January 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.5 billion
  expenditures: $1.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: metal-cutting machine tools, electric motors,
  television sets, refrigerators and freezers, petroleum refining,
  shipbuilding (small ships), furniture making, textiles, food
  processing, fertilizers, agricultural machinery, optical equipment,
  electronic components, computers, amber

Industrial production growth rate: 4.7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 14.51 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 9.65%
  hydro: 3.03%
  nuclear: 87.32%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 9.58 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 5.23 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 300 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, potatoes, sugar beets, flax,
  vegetables; beef, milk, eggs; fish

Exports: $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment 19%, mineral
  products 16%, textiles 15%, chemicals 8%, foodstuffs 8% (1997)

Exports--partners: Russia 24%, Germany 11%, Belarus 10%, Latvia
  9%, Ukraine 9% (1997)

Imports: $5.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 30%, mineral
  products 18%, chemicals 9%, textiles 8%, foodstuffs (1997)

Imports--partners: Russia 24%, Germany 19%, Poland, Denmark,
  Finland (1997)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $228.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Lithuanian litas = 100 centas

Exchange rates: litai per US$1--4.000 (fixed rate since 1 May
  1994), 3.978 (1994), 4.344 (1993), 1.773 (1992)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.08 million (1998)

Telephone system: the Ministry of Communications and Informatics,
  Ministry of Defense, and Ministry of Internal Affairs oversee
  Lithuania's telecommunications; the national operator is Lietuvos
  Telomas; Internet is available
  domestic: local--three cellular service providers; NMT-450 and GSM
  standards provide services nationwide; 80% of customers are on the
  two GSM networks; 157,000 cellular customers; intercity--Lithuania is
  close to completing its fiber-optic backbone consisting of two small
  rings inside a larger ring
  international: Lithuania has international fiber-optic connectivity
  to Latvia, Poland, and an undersea fiber-optic cable to Sweden

Radio broadcast stations: AM 13, FM 26, shortwave 1

Radios: 1.42 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3

Televisions: NA; note--93% of the population have TV, 30% have
  cable or satellite dish, and 16% own VCRs (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,002 km
  broad gauge: 2,002 km 1.524-m gauge (122 km electrified) (1994)

Highways:
  total: 68,161 km
  paved: 60,527 km (including 410 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 7,634 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 600 km perennially navigable

Pipelines: crude oil, 105 km; natural gas 760 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Kaunas, Klaipeda

Merchant marine:
  total: 54 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 316,616 GRT/353,683 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 26, combination bulk 11, oil tanker 2, railcar
  carrier 1, refrigerated cargo 10, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1,
  short-sea passenger 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 96 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 25
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 14 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 71
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 63 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air and Air Defense
  Force, Security Forces (internal and border troops), National Guard
  (Skat)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 906,687 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 713,436 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 26,168 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $181 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.5% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: ongoing talks over maritime boundary
  dispute with Latvia (primary concern is oil exploration rights);
  1997 border agreement with Russia not yet ratified

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for opiates and other illicit
  drugs from Southwest Asia, Latin America, and Western Europe to
  Western Europe and Scandinavia



======================================================================




@Luxembourg
----------





Geography



Location: Western Europe, between France and Germany

Geographic coordinates: 49 45 N, 6 10 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 2,586 sq km
  land: 2,586 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Land boundaries:
  total: 359 km
  border countries: Belgium 148 km, France 73 km, Germany 138 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: modified continental with mild winters, cool summers

Terrain: mostly gently rolling uplands with broad, shallow
  valleys; uplands to slightly mountainous in the north; steep slope
  down to Moselle floodplain in the southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Moselle River 133 m
  highest point: Burgplatz 559 m

Natural resources: iron ore (no longer exploited)

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 21%
  other: 34%

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (including Belgium (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: air and water pollution in urban areas

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Environmental
  Modification, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 429,080 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 39,701; female 37,998)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 146,336; female 140,717)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 26,201; female 38,127) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.88% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.35 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.32 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 7.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.99 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.65 years
  male: 74.58 years
  female: 80.83 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.57 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Luxembourger(s)
  adjective: Luxembourg

Ethnic groups: Celtic base (with French and German blend),
  Portuguese, Italian, and European (guest and worker residents)

Religions: Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant and Jewish 3%

Languages: Luxembourgian, German, French, English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 100%
  male: 100%
  female: 100% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Grand Duchy of Luxembourg
  conventional short form: Luxembourg
  local long form: Grand-Duche de Luxembourg
  local short form: Luxembourg

Data code: LU

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Luxembourg

Administrative divisions: 3 districts; Diekirch, Grevenmacher,
  Luxembourg

Independence: 1839 (from the Netherlands)

National holiday: National Day, 23 June (1921) (public
  celebration of the Grand Duke's birthday)

Constitution: 17 October 1868, occasional revisions

Legal system: based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Grand Duke JEAN (since 12 November 1964); Heir
  Apparent Prince HENRI (son of the monarch, born 16 April 1955)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jean-Claude JUNCKER (since 1
  January 1995) and Vice Prime Minister Jacques F. POOS (since 21 July
  1984)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch, responsible
  to the Chamber of Deputies
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and vice
  prime minister appointed by the monarch but are responsible to the
  Chamber of Deputies

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Chambre des
  Deputes (60 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 June 1994 (next to be held by 13 June 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--CSV
  21, LSAP 17, DP 12, Action Committee for Democracy and Pension
  Rights 5, Greens 5
  note: the Council of State or Conseil d'Etat, which has 21 members
  who are appointed for life, is an advisory body whose views are
  considered by the Chamber of Deputies

Judicial branch: Superior Court of Justice or Cour Superieure de
  Justice, judges are appointed for life by the monarch;
  Administrative Court or Tribunale Administratin, judges are
  appointed for life by the monarch

Political parties and leaders: Christian Social People's Party or

Political pressure groups and leaders: group of steel companies
  representing iron and steel industry; Centrale Paysanne representing
  agricultural producers; Christian and Socialist labor unions;
  Federation of Industrialists; Artisans and Shopkeepers Federation

International organization participation: ACCT, Australia Group,
  Benelux, CCC, CE, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EIB, EMU, EU, FAO, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, MTCR, NATO, NEA, NSG, OECD, OPCW,
  OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Arlette CONZEMIUS
  chancery: 2200 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Marie MURRAY
  embassy: 22 Boulevard Emmanuel-Servais, 2535 Luxembourg City
  mailing address: American Embassy Luxembourg, Unit 1410, APO AE
  09126-1410 (official mail); American Embassy Luxembourg, PSC 9, Box
  9500, APO AE 09123 (personal mail)

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and light blue; similar to the flag of the Netherlands, which
  uses a darker blue and is shorter; design was based on the flag of
  France



Economy



Economy--overview: The stable, prosperous economy features
  moderate growth, low inflation, and low unemployment. The industrial
  sector, until recently dominated by steel, has become increasingly
  more diversified. During the past decades, growth in the financial
  sector has more than compensated for the decline in steel. Services,
  especially banking, account for a growing proportion of the economy.
  Agriculture is based on small family-owned farms. Luxembourg has
  especially close trade and financial ties to Belgium and the
  Netherlands, and as a member of the EU, enjoys the advantages of the
  open European market. It joined with 10 other EU members to launch
  the euro on 1 January 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$13.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$32,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1%
  industry: 22%
  services: 77% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.4% (1998)

Labor force: 226,500 (one-third of labor force is foreign
  workers, mostly from Portugal, Italy, France, Belgium, and Germany)
  (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 83.2%, industry 14.3%,
  agriculture 2.5% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: 3% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $5.46 billion
  expenditures: $5.44 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: banking, iron and steel, food processing, chemicals,
  metal products, engineering, tires, glass, aluminum

Industrial production growth rate: 3.3% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.158 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 90.12%
  hydro: 9.88%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.381 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 800 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 5.8 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: barley, oats, potatoes, wheat, fruits, wine
  grapes; livestock products

Exports: $7.1 billion (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: finished steel products, chemicals, rubber
  products, glass, aluminum, other industrial products

Exports--partners: Germany 28%, France 18%, Belgium 15%, UK 7%,
  Netherlands 5%

Imports: $9.4 billion (c.i.f., 1996)

Imports--commodities: minerals, metals, foodstuffs, quality
  consumer goods

Imports--partners: Belgium 38%, Germany 25%, France 11%,
  Netherlands 4%

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $65 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Luxembourg franc (LuxF) = 100 centimes; note--centimes
  no longer in use

Exchange rates: Luxembourg francs (LuxF) per US$1--34.77 (January
  1999), 36.299 (1998), 35.774 (1997), 30.962 (1996), 29.480 (1995),
  33.456 (1994); note--the Luxembourg franc is at par with the Belgian
  franc, which circulates freely in Luxembourg
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 40.3399 francs per euro; the euro will replace the local
  currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 279,736 (1997)

Telephone system: highly developed, completely automated and
  efficient system, mainly buried cables
  domestic: nationwide cellular telephone system; buried cable
  international: 3 channels leased on TAT-6 coaxial submarine cable
  (Europe to North America)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 230,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (1997)

Televisions: 100,500 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 275 km
  standard gauge: 275 km 1.435-m gauge (262 km electrified; 178 km
  double track) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 5,137 km
  paved: 5,086 km (including 123 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 51 km (1996 est.)
  note: one source lists roads 2,863 km; expressways 115 km

Waterways: 37 km; Moselle

Pipelines: petroleum products 48 km

Ports and harbors: Mertert

Merchant marine:
  total: 37 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,033,045 GRT/1,480,023
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, chemical tanker 6, liquefied gas tanker 13,
  oil tanker 6, passenger 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6, vehicle carrier
  1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, National Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 108,285 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 88,813 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 2,452 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $124 million (FY97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.8% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Macau
-----





Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, bordering the South China Sea and China

Geographic coordinates: 22 10 N, 113 33 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 21 sq km
  land: 21 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 0.34 km
  border countries: China 0.34 km

Coastline: 40 km

Maritime claims: not specified

Climate: subtropical; marine with cool winters, warm summers

Terrain: generally flat

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: Coloane Alto 174 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 98% (1998 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Ozone Layer Protection (extended from Portugal)
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: essentially urban; one causeway and two bridges
  connect the two islands of Coloane and Taipa to the peninsula on
  mainland



People



Population: 437,312 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 54,456; female 50,912)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 142,575; female 158,132)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 12,547; female 18,690) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.86% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.5 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.48 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 9.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.23 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 81.88 years
  male: 78.79 years
  female: 85.13 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.27 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Macanese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Macau

Ethnic groups: Chinese 95%, Portuguese 3%, other 2%

Religions: Buddhist 50%, Roman Catholic 15%, none and other 35%
  (1997 est.)

Languages: Portuguese, Chinese (Cantonese)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 90%
  male: 93%
  female: 86% (1981 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Macau
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ilha de Macau

Data code: MC

Dependency status: Chinese territory under Portuguese
  administration; note--scheduled to revert to China on 20 December 1999

Government type: NA

Capital: Macau

Administrative divisions: 2 districts (concelhos,
  singular--concelho); Ilhas, Macau

Independence: none (Chinese territory under Portuguese
  administration; Portugal signed an agreement with China on 13 April
  1987 to return Macau to Chinese administration on 20 December 1999;
  in the joint declaration, China promises to respect Macau's existing
  social and economic systems and lifestyle for 50 years after
  transition)

National holiday: Day of Portugal, 10 June (1580)

Constitution: 17 February 1976, Organic Law of Macau; Macau's
  future constitution, the "Basic Law", promulgated by China's
  National People's Congress on 31 March 1993, will go into effect 20
  December 1999

Legal system: Portuguese civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jorge SAMPAIO of Portugal (since 9 March
  1996)
  head of government: Governor General Vasco Joachim Rocha VIEIRA
  (since 20 March 1991)
  cabinet: Consultative Council consists of a total of 15 members--five
  appointed by the governor, two nominated by the governor, five
  elected for a four-year term (two represent administrative bodies,
  one represents moral, cultural, and welfare interests, and two
  represent economic interests), and three statutory members
  elections: Portuguese president elected by popular vote for a
  five-year term; governor general appointed by the Portuguese
  president after consultation with the Legislative Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (23 seats; 8
  elected by popular vote, 8 by indirect vote, and 7 appointed by the
  governor; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 22 September 1996 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--APPEM
  2, CODEM 1, UDM 1, UNIPRO 2, UPD 1, ANMD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, consisting of five magistrates
  including the president; lower court judges appointed for three-year
  terms by the governor

Political parties and leaders: Uniao Promotora para o Progresso
  note: there are no formal political parties, but civic associations
  are used instead

Political pressure groups and leaders: wealthy Macanese and
  Chinese representing local interests, wealthy procommunist merchants
  representing China's interests; in January 1967 the Macau Government
  acceded to Chinese demands that gave China veto power over
  administration

International organization participation: CCC, ESCAP (associate),
  IMO (associate), Interpol (subbureau), UNESCO (associate), WMO, WToO
  (associate), WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (Chinese territory
  under Portuguese administration)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US has no offices in
  Macau, and US interests are monitored by the US Consulate General in
  Hong Kong

Flag description: the flag of Portugal is used



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is based largely on tourism
  (including gambling) and textile and fireworks manufacturing.
  Efforts to diversify have spawned other small industries--toys,
  artificial flowers, and electronics. The tourist sector has
  accounted for roughly 25% of GDP, and the clothing industry has
  provided about two-thirds of export earnings; the gambling industry
  probably represents over 40% of GDP. Macau depends on China for most
  of its food, fresh water, and energy imports. Japan and Hong Kong
  are the main suppliers of raw materials and capital goods. Macau is
  scheduled to revert to Chinese administration on 20 December 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$6.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -0.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$16,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1%
  industry: 40%
  services: 59% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.5% (1997)

Labor force: 277,676 (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 28%, restaurants and hotels
  28%, other services 44%

Unemployment rate: 3.8% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.3 billion
  expenditures: $1.07 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995 est.)

Industries: clothing, textiles, toys, electronics, footwear,
  tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.125 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.522 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 3 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 400 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, vegetables

Exports: $2.14 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: textiles, clothing, toys, electronics,
  cement, footwear, machinery

Exports--partners: US 45%, EU 24%, Hong Kong 8%, China 6% (1997)

Imports: $2.075 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: raw materials, foodstuffs, capital goods,
  fuels, lubricants

Imports--partners: China 29%, Hong Kong 25%, EU 12.4%, Japan 9%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $0 (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 pataca (P) = 100 avos

Exchange rates: patacas (P) per US$1--7.74 (1998), 7.99 (1997),
  7.962 (1996), 8.034 (1993-95), 7.973 (1992); note--linked to the Hong
  Kong dollar at the rate of 1.03 patacas per Hong Kong dollar

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 200,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system: fairly modern communication facilities
  maintained for domestic and international services
  domestic: NA
  international: HF radiotelephone communication facility; access to
  international communications carriers provided via Hong Kong and
  China; satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 135,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (receives Hong Kong broadcasts)
  (1997)

Televisions: 34,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 50 km
  paved: 50 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Macau

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular military forces, Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 121,355 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 66,744 (1999 est.)

Military--note: defense is currently the responsibility of
  Portugal, but will become the responsibility of China on 20 December
  1999



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Macedonia, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
------------------------------------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, north of Greece

Geographic coordinates: 41 50 N, 22 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 25,333 sq km
  land: 24,856 sq km
  water: 477 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Vermont

Land boundaries:
  total: 748 km
  border countries: Albania 151 km, Bulgaria 148 km, Greece 228 km,
  Serbia and Montenegro 221 km (all with Serbia)

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: warm, dry summers and autumns and relatively cold
  winters with heavy snowfall

Terrain: mountainous territory covered with deep basins and
  valleys; three large lakes, each divided by a frontier line; country
  bisected by the Vardar River

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Vardar River 50 m
  highest point: Golem Korab (Majae Korabit) 2,753 m

Natural resources: chromium, lead, zinc, manganese, tungsten,
  nickel, low-grade iron ore, asbestos, sulfur, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 830 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: high seismic risks

Environment--current issues: air pollution from metallurgical
  plants

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked; major transportation corridor from
  Western and Central Europe to Aegean Sea and Southern Europe to
  Western Europe



People



Population: 2,022,604 (July 1999 est.)
  note: the Macedonian Government census of July 1994 put the
  population at 1.94 million, but ethnic allocations were likely
  undercounted

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 23% (male 243,190; female 228,491)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 680,692; female 673,923)
  65 years and over: 10% (male 88,116; female 108,192) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.64% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 15.21 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.03 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.68 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.05 years
  male: 70.93 years
  female: 75.34 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Macedonian(s)
  adjective: Macedonian

Ethnic groups: Macedonian 66%, Albanian 23%, Turkish 4%, Serb 2%,
  Gypsies 3%, other 2%

Religions: Eastern Orthodox 67%, Muslim 30%, other 3%

Languages: Macedonian 70%, Albanian 21%, Turkish 3%,
  Serbo-Croatian 3%, other 3%

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia
  conventional short form: none
  local long form: Republika Makedonija
  local short form: Makedonija
  abbreviation: FYROM

Data code: MK

Government type: emerging democracy

Capital: Skopje

Administrative divisions: 34 counties (opstinas,
  singular--opstina) Berovo, Bitola, Brod, Debar, Delcevo, Gevgelija,
  Gostivar, Kavadarci, Kicevo, Kocani, Kratovo, Kriva Palanka,
  Krusevo, Kumanovo, Murgasevo, Negotino, Ohrid, Prilep, Probistip,
  Radovis, Resen, Skopje-Centar, Skopje-Cair, Skopje-Karpos,
  Skopje-Kisela Voda, Skopje-Gazi Baba, Stip, Struga, Strumica, Sveti
  Nikole, Tetovo, Titov Veles, Valandovo, Vinica
  note: in September 1996, the Macedonian Assembly passed legislation
  changing the territorial division of the country; names of the 123
  new municipalities are not yet available

Independence: 17 September 1991 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: 8 September

Constitution: adopted 17 November 1991, effective 20 November 1991

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Kiro GLIGOROV (since 27 January 1991)
  head of government: Prime Minister Ljubco GEORGIEVSKI (since 30
  November 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the majority vote of all
  the deputies in the Assembly; note--cabinet formed by the government
  coalition parties VMRO-DPMNE, DA, and DPA
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 16 October 1994 (next to be held NA October 1999)
  election results: Kiro GLIGOROV elected president; percent of
  vote--Kiro GLIGOROV 78.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly or Sobranje (120 seats--85
  members are elected by popular vote; 35 members come from lists of
  candidates submitted by parties based on the percentage that parties
  gain from the overall vote; all serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 18 October and 1 November 1998 (next to be held
  NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--VMRO
  49, SDSM 27, PDP 14, DA 13, DPA 11, LDP 4, Socialists 1, Roma Party 1

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are elected by the
  Judicial Council; Judicial Court of the Republic, judges are elected
  by the Judicial Council

Political parties and leaders: Social-Democratic Alliance of
  president]; Internal Macedonian Revolutionary
  Organization--Democratic Party for Macedonian National Unity or

International organization participation: BIS (pending member),
  CCC, CE, CEI, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ljubica Z. ACEVSKA
  chancery: 3050 K Street, NW, Suite 210, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Christopher Robert HILL
  embassy: Bul. Ilindenska bb, 91000 Skopje
  mailing address: American Embassy Skopje, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-7120 (pouch)

Flag description: a rising yellow sun with eight rays extending
  to the edges of the red field



Economy



Economy--overview: The breakup of Yugoslavia in 1991 deprived
  Macedonia, its poorest republic, of key protected markets and large
  transfer payments from the center. Worker remittances and foreign
  aid have softened the subsequent volatile recovery period. Continued
  recovery depends on Macedonia's ability to attract investment, to
  redevelop trade ties with Greece and Serbia and Montenegro, and to
  maintain its commitment to economic liberalization. The economy can
  meet its basic food needs but depends on outside sources for all of
  its oil and gas and most of its modern machinery and parts.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,050 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 20.4%
  industry: 38.6%
  services: 41% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 591,773 (June 1994)

Labor force--by occupation: manufacturing and mining 40% (1992)

Unemployment rate: 30% (1998 est.); note--many employed workers
  are, in fact, furloughees

Budget:
  revenues: $1.06 billion
  expenditures: $1 billion, including capital expenditures of $107
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: coal, metallic chromium, lead, zinc, ferronickel,
  textiles, wood products, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 3.4% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 6.06 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 80.2%
  hydro: 19.8%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.06 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, tobacco, wheat, corn, millet, cotton,
  sesame, mulberry leaves, citrus, vegetables; beef, pork, poultry,
  mutton

Exports: $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: food, beverages, tobacco 17.0%, machinery
  and transport equipment 13.3%, other manufactured goods 58%

Exports--partners: Bulgaria, other former Yugoslav republics,
  Germany, Italy

Imports: $1.6 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 19%, chemicals 14%,
  fuels 12%

Imports--partners: other former Yugoslav republics, Germany,
  Bulgaria, Italy, Austria

Debt--external: $1.06 billion (June 1997)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $100 million (1996 est.)

Currency: 1 Macedonian denar (MKD) = 100 deni

Exchange rates: denars per US$1--52.156 (January 1999), 54.462
  (1998), 50.004 (1997), 39.981 (1996), 37.882 (1995), 43.263 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 125,000

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 350,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 136 (of which 22 are main stations
  and 114 are low-power stations) (1997)

Televisions: 327,011 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 922 km
  standard gauge: 922 km 1.435-m gauge (232 km electrified) (1997)

Highways:
  total: 10,591 km
  paved: 5,500 km (including 133 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 5,091 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: none, lake transport only

Pipelines: 0 km

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 16 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  under 914 m: 8 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 6
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces, Police
  Force

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 539,329 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 434,468 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 17,291 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $71 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute with Greece over name; in
  September 1995, Skopje and Athens signed an interim accord resolving
  their dispute over symbols and certain constitutional provisions;
  Athens also lifted its economic embargo on The Former Yugoslav
  Republic of Macedonia; the border commission formed by The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and Montenegro in April
  1996 to resolve differences in delineation of their mutual border
  has made no progress so far; Albanians in Macedonia claim
  discrimination in education, access to public-sector jobs and
  representation in government; Party for Democratic Action (DPA),
  which is now a member party of the government, calls for a rewrite
  of the constitution to declare ethnic Albanians a national group and
  allow for regional autonomy

Illicit drugs: increasing transshipment point for Southwest Asian
  heroin and hashish; minor transit point for South American cocaine
  destined for Europe



======================================================================




@Madagascar
----------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
  Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 47 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 587,040 sq km
  land: 581,540 sq km
  water: 5,500 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Arizona

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 4,828 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or 100 nm from the 2,500-m deep isobath
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical along coast, temperate inland, arid in south

Terrain: narrow coastal plain, high plateau and mountains in
  center

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Maromokotro 2,876 m

Natural resources: graphite, chromite, coal, bauxite, salt,
  quartz, tar sands, semiprecious stones, mica, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 4%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 41%
  forests and woodland: 40%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10,870 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic cyclones

Environment--current issues: soil erosion results from
  deforestation and overgrazing; desertification; surface water
  contaminated with raw sewage and other organic wastes; several
  species of flora and fauna unique to the island are endangered

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Desertification, Endangered Species, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: world's fourth-largest island; strategic location
  along Mozambique Channel



People



Population: 14,873,387 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 3,356,104; female 3,279,056)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 3,841,248; female 3,908,209)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 234,549; female 254,221) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.8% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.52 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 13.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.92 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 89.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 53.24 years
  male: 52.01 years
  female: 54.51 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.7 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Malagasy (singular and plural)
  adjective: Malagasy

Ethnic groups: Malayo-Indonesian (Merina and related Betsileo),
  Cotiers (mixed African, Malayo-Indonesian, and Arab
  ancestry--Betsimisaraka, Tsimihety, Antaisaka, Sakalava), French,
  Indian, Creole, Comoran

Religions: indigenous beliefs 52%, Christian 41%, Muslim 7%

Languages: French (official), Malagasy (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 80%
  male: 88%
  female: 73% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Madagascar
  conventional short form: Madagascar
  local long form: Republique de Madagascar
  local short form: Madagascar
  former: Malagasy Republic

Data code: MA

Government type: republic

Capital: Antananarivo

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces (faritany); Antananarivo,
  Antsiranana, Fianarantsoa, Mahajanga, Toamasina, Toliara

Independence: 26 June 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 June (1960)

Constitution: 19 August 1992 by national referendum

Legal system: based on French civil law system and traditional
  Malagasy law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Didier RATSIRAKA (since 10 February 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Tantely Rene Gabriot ANDRIANARIVO
  (since NA 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 29 December 1996 (next to be held NA 2002); prime
  minister appointed by the president from a list of candidates
  nominated by the National Assembly
  election results: Didier RATSIRAKA elected president; percent of
  vote--Didier RATSIRAKA (AREMA) 50.7%, Albert ZAFY (AFFA) 49.3%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (150 seats; members are directly elected by popular vote
  to serve four-year terms); note--the legislature is scheduled to
  become a bicameral Paliament with the establishment of a Senate;
  two-thirds of the seats of this Senate will be filled by regional
  assemblies whose members will be elected by popular vote; the
  remaining one-third of the seats will be appointed by the president;
  the total number of seats will be determined by the National
  Assembly; all members will serve four-year terms
  elections: National Assembly--last held 17 May 1998 (next to be held
  NA 2002)
  election results: National Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--AREMA 62, LEADER/Fanilo 15, AVI 14, RPSD 11, AFFA 6,
  MFM 3, AKFM/Fanavaozana 3, GRAD/Iloafo 1, Fihaonana 1, independents
  34

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme); High
  Constitutional Court (Haute Cour Constitutionnelle)

Political parties and leaders: Association for the Rebirth of
  RAKOTONIRINA]; Congress Party for Malagasy Independence or
  and Action for the Development of Madagascar or GRAD/Iloafo
  RAZANAMASY]

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Council of
  Christian Churches or FFKM; Federalist Movement

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, InOC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Biclair
  Henri ANDRIANANTOANDRO
  chancery: 2374 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Howard T.
  PERLOW
  embassy: 14-16 Rue Rainitovo, Antsahavola, Antananarivo
  mailing address: B. P. 620, Antananarivo

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  green with a vertical white band of the same width on hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: Madagascar suffers from chronic malnutrition,
  underfunded health and education facilities, a roughly 3% annual
  population growth rate, and severe loss of forest cover, accompanied
  by erosion. Agriculture, including fishing and forestry, is the
  mainstay of the economy, accounting for 32% of GDP and contributing
  more than 70% to export earnings. Industry features textile
  manufacturing and the processing of agricultural products. Growth in
  output in 1992-97 averaged less than the growth rate of the
  population. Growth has been held back by antigovernment strikes and
  demonstrations, a decline in world coffee demand, and the erratic
  commitment of the government to economic reform. Formidable
  obstacles stand in the way of Madagascar's realizing its
  considerable growth potential; the extent of government reforms,
  outside financial aid, and foreign investment will be key
  determinants.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$10.3 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$730 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 32%
  industry: 13%
  services: 55% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.3%
  highest 10%: 34.9% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.5% (1997)

Labor force: 7 million (1995)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $477 million
  expenditures: $706 million, including capital expenditures of $264
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: meat processing, soap, breweries, tanneries, sugar,
  textiles, glassware, cement, automobile assembly plant, paper,
  petroleum, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 3.8% (1993 est.)

Electricity--production: 595 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 41.18%
  hydro: 58.82%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 595 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, vanilla, sugarcane, cloves, cocoa,
  rice, cassava (tapioca), beans, bananas, peanuts; livestock products

Exports: $170 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: coffee 45%, vanilla 20%, cloves, shellfish,
  sugar, petroleum products (1995 est.)

Exports--partners: France 31.7%, Japan 15.8%, Germany 6.4%,
  Reunion 5.7% (1996)

Imports: $477 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: intermediate manufactures 30%, capital goods
  28%, petroleum 15%, consumer goods 14%, food 13% (1995 est.)

Imports--partners: France 31.0%, Iran 9.1%, South Africa 8.2%,
  Japan 5.8%, US 5.0% (1996)

Debt--external: $4.4 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $298.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Malagasy franc (FMG) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Malagasy francs (FMG) per US$1--5,468.5 (January
  1999), 5,441.4 (1998), 5,090.9 (1997), 4,061.3 (1996), 4,265.6
  (1995), 3,067.3 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 34,000 (1994)

Telephone system: system is above average for Africa
  domestic: open-wire lines, coaxial cables, microwave radio relay,
  and tropospheric scatter links
  international: submarine cable to Bahrain; satellite earth
  stations--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean) and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic
  Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 17, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.74 million (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are 36
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 280,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 883 km
  narrow gauge: 883 km 1.000-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
  total: 49,837 km
  paved: 5,781 km
  unpaved: 44,056 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: of local importance only; isolated streams and small
  portions of Lakandranon' Ampangalana (Canal des Pangalanes)

Ports and harbors: Antsiranana, Antsohimbondrona, Mahajanga,
  Toamasina, Toliara

Merchant marine:
  total: 12 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 23,311 GRT/31,533 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 6, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas tanker 1,
  oil tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 133 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 29
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 20
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 104
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 59
  under 914 m: 42 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Popular Armed Forces (includes Intervention
  Forces, Development Forces, Aeronaval Forces--includes Navy and Air
  Force), Gendarmerie, Presidential Security Regiment

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,415,726 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,027,757 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 144,779 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $29 million (1994)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1994)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims Bassas da India, Europa Island,
  Glorioso Islands, Juan de Nova Island, and Tromelin Island (all
  administered by France)

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis (cultivated and wild
  varieties) used mostly for domestic consumption; transshipment point
  for heroin



======================================================================




@Malawi
------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, east of Zambia

Geographic coordinates: 13 30 S, 34 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 118,480 sq km
  land: 94,080 sq km
  water: 24,400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Pennsylvania

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,881 km
  border countries: Mozambique 1,569 km, Tanzania 475 km, Zambia 837 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; rainy season (November to May); dry season
  (May to November)

Terrain: narrow elongated plateau with rolling plains, rounded
  hills, some mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: junction of the Shire River and international boundary
  with Mozambique 37 m
  highest point: Sapitwa 3,002 m

Natural resources: limestone, unexploited deposits of uranium,
  coal, and bauxite

Land use:
  arable land: 18%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 280 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: deforestation; land degradation;
  water pollution from agricultural runoff, sewage, industrial wastes;
  siltation of spawning grounds endangers fish populations

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 10,000,416 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 2,265,526; female 2,246,135)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 2,580,125; female 2,637,464)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 112,813; female 158,353) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.57% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 39.54 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 23.84 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 132.14 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 36.3 years
  male: 36.49 years
  female: 36.11 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.48 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Malawian(s)
  adjective: Malawian

Ethnic groups: Chewa, Nyanja, Tumbuko, Yao, Lomwe, Sena, Tonga,
  Ngoni, Ngonde, Asian, European

Religions: Protestant 55%, Roman Catholic 20%, Muslim 20%,
  traditional indigenous beliefs

Languages: English (official), Chichewa (official), other
  languages important regionally

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 56.4%
  male: 71.9%
  female: 41.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Malawi
  conventional short form: Malawi
  former: Nyasaland

Data code: MI

Government type: multiparty democracy

Capital: Lilongwe

Administrative divisions: 24 districts; Blantyre, Chikwawa,
  Chiradzulu, Chitipa, Dedza, Dowa, Karonga, Kasungu, Lilongwe,
  Machinga (Kasupe), Mangochi, Mchinji, Mulanje, Mwanza, Mzimba,
  Ntcheu, Nkhata Bay, Nkhotakota, Nsanje, Ntchisi, Rumphi, Salima,
  Thyolo, Zomba

Independence: 6 July 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day 6 July (1964); Republic Day 6
  July (1966)

Constitution: 18 May 1995

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court of Appeal;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May 1994);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Bakili MULUZI (since 21 May 1994);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet named by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 17 May 1994 (next to be held by May 1999)
  election results: Bakili MULUZI elected president; percent of vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (177 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 17 May 1994 (next to be held by May 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--UDF
  84, AFORD 33, MCP 55, others 5; note--because of defections and
  byelections, the distribution of seats in the National Assembly had
  changed at the end of the 1996 as follows: UDF 84, MCP 47, AFORD 34,
  independents 8, and vacant 4
  note: the constitution of 18 May 1995, in addition to reducing the
  age at which universal suffrage is conferred from 21 to 18 years,
  provided for a bicameral legislature; by 1999, in addition to the
  existing National Assembly, a Senate of 80 seats is to be elected

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Appeal; High Court (chief
  justice appointed by the president, puisne judges appointed on the
  advice of the Judicial Service Commission); magistrate's courts

Political parties and leaders:

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU,
  OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Willie CHOKANI
  chancery: 2408 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Amelia Ellen SHIPPY
  embassy: address NA, in new development area in Lilongwe
  mailing address: P. O. Box 30016, Lilongwe 3, Malawi

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of black (top),
  red, and green with a radiant, rising, red sun centered in the black
  band



Economy



Economy--overview: Landlocked Malawi ranks among the world's least
  developed countries. The economy is predominately agricultural, with
  about 90% of the population living in rural areas. Agriculture
  accounts for 45% of GDP and 90% of export revenues. The economy
  depends on substantial inflows of economic assistance from the IMF,
  the World Bank, and individual donor nations. The new government
  faces strong challenges, e.g., to spur exports, to improve
  educational and health facilities, and to deal with environmental
  problems of deforestation and erosion.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$940 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 45%
  industry: 30%
  services: 25% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: 54% (1990-91 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 83.4% (1995)

Labor force: 3.5 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 86%, wage earners 14%
  (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $530 million
  expenditures: $674 million, including capital expenditures of $129
  million (1993)

Industries: tea, tobacco, sugar, sawmill products, cement,
  consumer goods

Industrial production growth rate: 0.9% (1995)

Electricity--production: 800 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 2.5%
  hydro: 97.5%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 800 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: tobacco, sugarcane, cotton, tea, corn,
  potatoes, cassava (tapioca), sorghum, pulses; cattle, goats

Exports: $405 million (f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: tobacco, tea, sugar, coffee, peanuts, wood
  products

Exports--partners: US, South Africa, Germany, Japan

Imports: $475 million (f.o.b., 1995)

Imports--commodities: food, petroleum products, semimanufactures,
  consumer goods, transportation equipment

Imports--partners: South Africa, Zimbabwe, Japan, US, UK, Germany

Debt--external: $2.3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $416.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Malawian kwacha (MK) = 100 tambala

Exchange rates: Malawian kwachas (MK) per US$1--43.5426 (January
  1999), 31.0727 (1998), 16.4442 (1997), 15.3085 (1996), 15.2837
  (1995), 8.7364 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 43,000 (1985 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: fair system of open-wire lines, microwave radio relay
  links, and radiotelephone communications stations
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 17, shortwave 0

Radios: 1.011 million (1995)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997 est.)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 789 km
  narrow gauge: 789 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 28,400 km
  paved: 5,254 km
  unpaved: 23,146 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi); Shire River, 144 km

Ports and harbors: Chipoka, Monkey Bay, Nkhata Bay, Nkhotakota

Airports: 45 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 40
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 16
  under 914 m: 23 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (includes Air Wing and Naval Detachment),
  Police (includes paramilitary Mobile Force Unit)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,314,509 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,186,341 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $17 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.8% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute with Tanzania over the boundary
  in Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi)



======================================================================




@Malaysia
--------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, peninsula and northern one-third of
  the island of Borneo, bordering Indonesia and the South China Sea,
  south of Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 2 30 N, 112 30 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 329,750 sq km
  land: 328,550 sq km
  water: 1,200 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,669 km
  border countries: Brunei 381 km, Indonesia 1,782 km, Thailand 506 km

Coastline: 4,675 km (Peninsular Malaysia 2,068 km, East Malaysia
  2,607 km)

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation;
  specified boundary in the South China Sea
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; annual southwest (April to October) and
  northeast (October to February) monsoons

Terrain: coastal plains rising to hills and mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Gunung Kinabalu 4,100 m

Natural resources: tin, petroleum, timber, copper, iron ore,
  natural gas, bauxite

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 12%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 68%
  other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,941 sq km (1998 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding, landslides

Environment--current issues: air pollution from industrial and
  vehicular emissions; water pollution from raw sewage; deforestation;
  smoke/haze from Indonesian forest fires

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical
  Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location along Strait of Malacca and
  southern South China Sea



People



Population: 21,376,066 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 3,879,012; female 3,680,895)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 6,478,910; female 6,482,909)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 369,639; female 484,701) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.08% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.05 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.29 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: does not include illegal immigrants--large numbers from
  Indonesia and smaller numbers from the Philippines, Bangladesh,
  Burma, China, and India

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.68 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.67 years
  male: 67.62 years
  female: 73.9 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.35 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Malaysian(s)
  adjective: Malaysian

Ethnic groups: Malay and other indigenous 58%, Chinese 26%,
  Indian 7%, others 9%

Religions: Islam, Buddhism, Daoism, Hinduism, Christianity,
  Sikhism; note--in addition, Shamanism is practiced on East Malaysia

Languages: Bahasa Melayu (official), English, Chinese dialects
  (Cantonese, Mandarin, Hokkien, Hakka, Hainan, Foochow), Tamil,
  Telugu, Malalalam, Panjabi, Thai; note--in addition, in East Malaysia
  several indigenous languages are spoken, the largest of which are
  Iban and Kadazan

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 83.5%
  male: 89.1%
  female: 78.1% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Malaysia
  former: Malayan Union

Data code: MY

Government type: constitutional monarchy
  note: Malaya (what is now Peninsular Malaysia) formed 31 August
  1957; Federation of Malaysia (Malaya, Sabah, Sarawak, and Singapore)
  formed 9 July 1963 (Singapore left the federation on 9 August 1965);
  nominally headed by the paramount ruler (king) and a bicameral
  Parliament consisting of a nonelected upper house and an elected
  lower house; Peninsular Malaysian states--hereditary rulers in all
  but Melaka, Penang, Sabah, and Sarawak, where governors are
  appointed by the Malaysian Government; powers of state governments
  are limited by the federal constitution; under terms of the
  federation, Sabah and Sarawak retain certain constitutional
  prerogatives (e.g., the right to maintain their own immigration
  controls); Sabah--holds 20 seats in House of Representatives, with
  foreign affairs, defense, internal security, and other powers
  delegated to federal government; Sarawak--holds 27 seats in House of
  Representatives, with foreign affairs, defense, internal security,
  and other powers delegated to federal government

Capital: Kuala Lumpur

Administrative divisions: 13 states (negeri-negeri,
  singular--negeri) and 2 federal territories* (wilayah-wilayah
  persekutuan, singular--wilayah persekutuan); Johor, Kedah, Kelantan,
  Labuan*, Melaka, Negeri Sembilan, Pahang, Perak, Perlis, Pulau
  Pinang, Sabah, Sarawak, Selangor, Terengganu, Wilayah Persekutuan*
  note: the city of Kuala Lumpur is located within the federal
  territory of Wilayah Persekutuan; the terms therefore are not
  interchangeable

Independence: 31 August 1957 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 31 August (1957)

Constitution: 31 August 1957, amended 16 September 1963

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in the Supreme Court at request of supreme head of
  the federation; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Paramount Ruler TUANKU JA'AFAR ibni Al-Marhum Tuanku
  Abdul Rahman (since 26 April 1994) and Deputy Paramount Ruler Sultan
  TUNKU SALAHUDDIN Abdul Aziz Shah ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin
  Alam Shah (since 26 April 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Dr. MAHATHIR bin Mohamad (since
  16 July 1981); Deputy Prime Minister ABDULLAH bin Ahmad Badawi
  (since 8 January 1999)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister from among the
  members of Parliament with consent of the paramount ruler
  elections: paramount ruler and deputy paramount ruler elected by and
  from the hereditary rulers of nine of the states for five-year
  terms; election last held 4 February 1994 (next to be held NA 1999);
  prime minister designated from among the members of the House of
  Representatives; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  party that wins a plurality of seats in the House of Representatives
  becomes prime minister
  election results: TUANKU JA'AFAR ibni Al-Marhum Tuanku Abdul Rahman
  elected paramount ruler; Sultan TUNKU SALAHUDDIN Abdul Aziz Shah
  ibni Al-Marhum Sultan Hisammuddin Alam Shah elected deputy paramount
  ruler

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlimen consists of
  nonelected Senate or Dewan Negara (69 seats; 43 appointed by the
  paramount ruler, 26 appointed by the state legislatures) and the
  House of Representatives or Dewan Rakyat (192 seats; members elected
  by popular vote directly weighted toward the rural Malay population
  to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 24-25 April 1995 (next
  to be held by April 2000)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--National Front 63%, other 37%; seats by party--National Front
  162, DAP 9, PBS 8, PAS 7, Spirit of '46 6; note--subsequent to the
  election there was a change in the distribution of seats, the
  current distribution is--National Front 168, DAP 8, PAS 8, PBS 5,
  independents 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the paramount
  ruler on the advice of the prime minister

Political parties and leaders:
  Peninsular Malaysia: National Front (a confederation of 13 political
  parties dominated by United Malays National Organization or UMNO
  Sarawak: National Front, composed of the Party Pesaka Bumiputra
  note: subsequent to the election, the following parties were
  president] and Sabah United Party (Parti Bersatu Sabah) or PBS

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, C,
  CCC, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MONUA, NAM, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIL, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dato' GHAZZALI Sheikh Abdul Khalid
  chancery: 2401 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador B. Lynn PASCOE
  embassy: 376 Jalan Tun Razak, 50400 Kuala Lumpur
  mailing address: P. O. Box No. 10035, 50700 Kuala Lumpur; American
  Embassy Kuala Lumpur, APO AP 96535-8152

Flag description: 14 equal horizontal stripes of red (top)
  alternating with white (bottom); there is a blue rectangle in the
  upper hoist-side corner bearing a yellow crescent and a yellow
  fourteen-pointed star; the crescent and the star are traditional
  symbols of Islam; the design was based on the flag of the US



Economy



Economy--overview: After a decade of 8% average GDP growth, the
  Malaysian economy--severely hit by the regional financial
  crisis--declined 7% in 1998. Malaysia will likely remain in recession
  for the first half of 1999; official statistics continue to show
  anemic exports, and some private financial analysts forecast a
  further drop in GDP of 1% in 1999. Prime Minister MAHATHIR has
  imposed capital controls to protect the local currency while cutting
  interest rates to stimulate the economy. Kuala Lumpur also announced
  an expansionary budget for 1999 to combat rising unemployment.
  Malaysia continues to seek funding from domestic and international
  sources to help finance its budget deficit and recapitalize its
  weakened banking sector.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$215.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 13%
  industry: 46%
  services: 41% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 15.5% (1989 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.9%
  highest 10%: 37.9% (1989)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.3% (1998)

Labor force: 8.398 million (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: manufacturing 25%, agriculture,
  forestry, and fisheries 21%, local trade and tourism 17%, services
  12%, government 11%, construction 8% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 2.6% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $22.6 billion
  expenditures: $22 billion, including capital expenditures of $5.3
  billion (1996 est.)

Industries: Peninsular Malaysia--rubber and oil palm processing
  and manufacturing, light manufacturing industry, electronics, tin
  mining and smelting, logging and processing timber; Sabah--logging,
  petroleum production; Sarawak--agriculture processing, petroleum
  production and refining, logging

Industrial production growth rate: 14.4% (1995)

Electricity--production: 48 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 83.33%
  hydro: 16.67%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 47.977 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 174 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 151 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: Peninsular Malaysia?rubber, palm oil, rice;
  Sabah--subsistence crops, rubber, timber, coconuts, rice;
  Sarawak--rubber, pepper; timber

Exports: $74.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: electronic equipment, petroleum and
  petroleum products, palm oil, wood and wood products, rubber,
  textiles

Exports--partners: US 21%, Singapore 20%, Japan 12%, Hong Kong 5%,
  UK 4%, Thailand 4%, Germany 3% (1995)

Imports: $59.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, food

Imports--partners: Japan 27%, US 16%, Singapore 12%, Taiwan 5%,
  Germany 4%, South Korea 4% (1995)

Debt--external: $39.8 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $125 million (1995)

Currency: 1 ringgit (M$) = 100 sen

Exchange rates: ringgits (M$) per US$1--3.8000 (January 1999),
  3.9244 (1998), 2.8133 (1997), 2.5159 (1996), 2.5044 (1995), 2.6243
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2,550,957 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: international service good
  domestic: good intercity service provided on Peninsular Malaysia
  mainly by microwave radio relay; adequate intercity microwave radio
  relay network between Sabah and Sarawak via Brunei; domestic
  satellite system with 2 earth stations
  international: submarine cables to India, Hong Kong and Singapore;
  satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 1 Pacific
  Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 28, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 8.08 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 27 (of which 26 are
  government-owned and one is independent and has 15 high-power
  repeater stations to relay its programs) (1997)

Televisions: 2 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,798 km
  narrow gauge: 1,798 km 1.000-m gauge (148 km electrified) (1998 est.)

Highways:
  total: 94,500 km
  paved: 70,970 km (including 580 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 23,530 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 7,296 km (Peninsular Malaysia 3,209 km, Sabah 1,569
  km, Sarawak 2,518 km)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,307 km; natural gas 379 km

Ports and harbors: Bintulu, Kota Kinabalu, Kuantan, Kuching,
  Kudat, Labuan, Lahad Datu, Lumut, Miri, Pasir Gudang, Penang, Port
  Dickson, Port Kelang, Sandakan, Sibu, Tanjung Berhala, Tanjung
  Kidurong, Tawau

Merchant marine:
  total: 378 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,059,272
  GRT/7,428,623 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 62, cargo 128, chemical tanker 30, container 58,
  liquefied gas tanker 19, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 61,
  passenger 2, refrigerated cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6,
  specialized tanker 2, vehicle carrier 7 (1998 est.)

Airports: 115 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 32
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 11
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 83
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 74 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Malaysian Army, Royal Malaysian Navy, Royal
  Malaysian Air Force, Royal Malaysian Police Force, Marine Police,
  Sarawak Border Scouts

Military manpower--military age: 21 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,526,555 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,349,066 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 183,928 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.1 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: involved in a complex dispute over the
  Spratly Islands with China, Philippines, Taiwan, Vietnam, and
  possibly Brunei; Philippines have not fully revoked claim to Sabah
  State; two islands in dispute with Singapore; two islands in dispute
  with Indonesia

Illicit drugs: transit point for some illicit drugs going to
  Western markets; drug trafficking prosecuted vigorously and carries
  severe penalties



======================================================================




@Maldives
--------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, group of atolls in the Indian Ocean,
  south-southwest of India

Geographic coordinates: 3 15 N, 73 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 300 sq km
  land: 300 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 1.7 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 644 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; dry, northeast monsoon (November
  to March); rainy, southwest monsoon (June to August)

Terrain: flat, with white sandy beaches

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Wilingili island in the Addu
  Atoll 2.4 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 3%
  other: 84% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: low level of islands makes them very sensitive
  to sea level rise

Environment--current issues: depletion of freshwater aquifers
  threatens water supplies

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: 1,190 coral islands grouped into 26 atolls;
  archipelago of strategic location astride and along major sea lanes
  in Indian Ocean



People



Population: 300,220 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 47% (male 72,414; female 68,764)
  15-64 years: 50% (male 76,446; female 73,275)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 4,944; female 4,377) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.37% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 39.3 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.63 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.13 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 38.14 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.29 years
  male: 66.53 years
  female: 70.15 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.73 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Maldivian(s)
  adjective: Maldivian

Ethnic groups: Sinhalese, Dravidian, Arab, African

Religions: Sunni Muslim

Languages: Maldivian Divehi (dialect of Sinhala, script derived
  from Arabic), English spoken by most government officials

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 93.2%
  male: 93.3%
  female: 93% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Maldives
  conventional short form: Maldives
  local long form: Dhivehi Raajjeyge Jumhooriyyaa
  local short form: Dhivehi Raajje

Data code: MV

Government type: republic

Capital: Male

Administrative divisions: 19 atolls (atholhu, singular and
  plural) and 1 other first-order administrative division*; Alifu,
  Baa, Dhaalu, Faafu, Gaafu Alifu, Gaafu Dhaalu, Gnaviyani, Haa Alifu,
  Haa Dhaalu, Kaafu, Laamu, Lhaviyani, Maale*, Meemu, Noonu, Raa,
  Seenu, Shaviyani, Thaa, Vaavu

Independence: 26 July 1965 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 26 July (1965)

Constitution: 4 June 1968

Legal system: based on Islamic law with admixtures of English
  common law primarily in commercial matters; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11 November
  1978); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM (since 11
  November 1978); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  cabinet: Ministry of Atolls appointed by the president; note--need
  not be members of Majlis
  elections: president elected by secret ballot of the Majlis for a
  five-year term; election last held 1 October 1993 (next to be held
  NA October 1998)
  election results: President Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM reelected; percent
  of Majlis vote--Maumoon Abdul GAYOOM 92.76%

Legislative branch: unicameral Citizens' Council or Majlis (48
  seats; 40 elected by popular vote, 8 appointed by the president;
  members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 2 December 1994 (next to be held NA December
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 40

Judicial branch: High Court

Political parties and leaders: although political parties are not
  banned, none exist

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW,
  SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Maldives does not have an
  embassy in the US, but does have a Permanent Mission to the UN in
  New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Maldives; the US Ambassador to Sri Lanka is accredited to
  Maldives and makes periodic visits there

Flag description: red with a large green rectangle in the center
  bearing a vertical white crescent; the closed side of the crescent
  is on the hoist side of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism, Maldives largest industry, accounts
  for about 18% of GDP and more than 60% of the Maldives' foreign
  exchange receipts. Over 90% of government tax revenue comes from
  import duties and tourism-related taxes. About 350,000 tourists
  visited the islands in 1997. Fishing is a second leading growth
  sector. The Maldivian Government began an economic reform program in
  1989 initially by lifting import quotas and opening some exports to
  the private sector. Subsequently, it has liberalized regulations to
  allow more foreign investment. Agriculture and manufacturing
  continue to play a minor role in the economy, constrained by the
  limited availability of cultivable land and the shortage of domestic
  labor. Most staple foods must be imported. Industry, which consists
  mainly of garment production, boat building, and handicrafts,
  accounts for about 15% of GDP. Maldivian authorities worry about the
  impact of erosion and possible global warming on their low-lying
  country; 80% of the area is one meter or less above sea level.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$500 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,840 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 22%
  industry: 15%
  services: 63% (1994 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.3% (1996)

Labor force: 56,435 (1990 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: fishing industry and agriculture 25%,
  services 21%, manufacturing and construction 21%, trade,
  restaurants, and hotels 16%, transportation and communication 10%,
  other 7%

Unemployment rate: NEGL%

Budget:
  revenues: $88 million (excluding foreign grants)
  expenditures: $141 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995 est.)

Industries: fish processing, tourism, shipping, boat building,
  coconut processing, garments, woven mats, rope, handicrafts, coral
  and sand mining

Industrial production growth rate: 6.3% (1994 est.)

Electricity--production: 60 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 60 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, corn, sweet potatoes; fish

Exports: $59 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: fish, clothing

Exports--partners: Sri Lanka, US, Germany, Singapore, UK

Imports: $302 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, intermediate and capital
  goods, petroleum products

Imports--partners: Singapore, India, Sri Lanka, Hong Kong, Japan,
  Thailand

Debt--external: $179 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 rufiyaa (Rf) = 100 laari

Exchange rates: rufiyaa (Rf) per US$1--11.770 (1995-January 1999),
  11.586 (1994), 10.957 (1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 8,523 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: minimal domestic and international facilities
  domestic: inter-atoll communication primarily through HF
  transceivers and VHF/UHF telephones
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 28,284 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 7,309 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km; note--Male has 9.6 km of coral highways within the
  city (1988 est.)

Ports and harbors: Gan, Male

Merchant marine:
  total: 21 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 75,585 GRT/115,590 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 18, container 1, oil tanker 1, short-sea
  passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Security Service (paramilitary police
  force)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 66,554 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 37,086 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Mali
----





Geography



Location: Western Africa, southwest of Algeria

Geographic coordinates: 17 00 N, 4 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1.24 million sq km
  land: 1.22 million sq km
  water: 20,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 7,243 km
  border countries: Algeria 1,376 km, Burkina Faso 1,000 km, Guinea
  858 km, Cote d'Ivoire 532 km, Mauritania 2,237 km, Niger 821 km,
  Senegal 419 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical to arid; hot and dry February to June;
  rainy, humid, and mild June to November; cool and dry November to
  February

Terrain: mostly flat to rolling northern plains covered by sand;
  savanna in south, rugged hills in northeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Senegal River 23 m
  highest point: Hombori Tondo 1,155 m

Natural resources: gold, phosphates, kaolin, salt, limestone,
  uranium, bauxite, iron ore, manganese, tin, and copper deposits are
  known but not exploited

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 6%
  other: 67% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 780 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dust-laden harmattan haze common during dry
  seasons; recurring droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion;
  desertification; inadequate supplies of potable water; poaching

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 10,429,124 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 47% (male 2,482,301; female 2,460,894)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 2,447,712; female 2,708,978)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 155,178; female 174,061) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.01% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 49.5 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 18.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.87 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.89 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 119.44 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 47.5 years
  male: 46.09 years
  female: 48.96 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.96 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Malian(s)
  adjective: Malian

Ethnic groups: Mande 50% (Bambara, Malinke, Sarakole), Peul 17%,
  Voltaic 12%, Songhai 6%, Tuareg and Moor 10%, other 5%

Religions: Muslim 90%, indigenous beliefs 9%, Christian 1%

Languages: French (official), Bambara 80%, numerous African
  languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 31%
  male: 39.4%
  female: 23.1% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Mali
  conventional short form: Mali
  local long form: Republique de Mali
  local short form: Mali
  former: French Sudan

Data code: ML

Government type: republic

Capital: Bamako

Administrative divisions: 8 regions (regions, singular--region);
  Gao, Kayes, Kidal, Koulikoro, Mopti, Segou, Sikasso, Tombouctou

Independence: 22 September 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Proclamation of the
  Republic, 22 September (1960)

Constitution: adopted 12 January 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in Constitutional Court (which
  was formally established on 9 March 1994); has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Alpha Oumar KONARE (since 8 June 1992)
  head of government: Prime Minister Ibrahim Boubacar KEITA (since
  March 1994)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 11 May 1997 (next to be held May 2002); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: Alpha Oumar KONARE reelected president; percent of
  vote--Alpha Oumar KONARE 85.15%, Mamadou DIABY 4.09%, other 10.76%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (147 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 July and 3 August 1997 (next to be held in
  two rounds in 2002); note--much of the opposition boycotted the
  election
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--ADEMA
  130, PARENA 8, CDS 4, UDD 3, PDP 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy or ADEMA
  TRAORE]; National Congress for Democratic Initiative or CNID
  Movement for the Independence, Renaissance and Integration of Africa

Political pressure groups and leaders: United Movement and Fronts
  of Azawad or MFUA; Patriotic Movement of the Ghanda Koye or MPGK

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, MINURCA,
  MIPONUH, MONUA, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNOMSIL, UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Cheick Oumar DIARRAH
  chancery: 2130 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador David P. RAWSON
  embassy: Rue Rochester NY and Rue Mohamed V, Bamako
  mailing address: B. P. 34, Bamako

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), yellow, and red; uses the popular pan-African colors of
  Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: Mali is among the poorest countries in the
  world, with 65% of its land area desert or semidesert. Economic
  activity is largely confined to the riverine area irrigated by the
  Niger. About 10% of the population is nomadic and some 80% of the
  labor force is engaged in farming and fishing. Industrial activity
  is concentrated on processing farm commodities. Mali is heavily
  dependent on foreign aid and vulnerable to fluctuations in world
  prices for cotton, its main export. In 1997, the government
  continued its successful implementation of an IMF-recommended
  structural adjustment program that is helping the economy grow,
  diversify, and attract foreign investment. Mali's adherence to
  economic reform, and the 50% devaluation of the African franc in
  January 1994, has pushed up economic growth. Several multinational
  corporations increased gold mining operations in 1996-98, and the
  government anticipates that Mali will become a major Sub-Saharan
  gold exporter in the next few years. Annual growth thus may fall in
  the 5% range in 1999-2000, and inflation held to 5% or less.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$790 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 49%
  industry: 17%
  services: 34% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and fishing 80% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $730 million
  expenditures: $770 million, including capital expenditures of $320
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: minor local consumer goods production and food
  processing; construction; phosphate and gold mining

Industrial production growth rate: 0.6% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 288 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 21.88%
  hydro: 78.12%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 288 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, millet, rice, corn, vegetables,
  peanuts; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $590 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: cotton 50%, gold, livestock (1998 est.)

Exports--partners: Thailand 20%, Italy 20%, China 9%, Brazil,
  franc zone (1997)

Imports: $600 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, construction
  materials, petroleum, foodstuffs, textiles

Imports--partners: Cote d'Ivoire 19%, France 17%, other franc zone
  and EU countries (1997)

Debt--external: $3.1 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $596.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--567.81 (January 1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 11,000 (1982 est.)

Telephone system: domestic system poor but improving; provides
  only minimal service
  domestic: network consists of microwave radio relay, open wire, and
  radiotelephone communications stations; expansion of microwave radio
  relay in progress
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 2, shortwave 1

Radios: 430,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are two
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 11,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 641 km; (linked to Senegal's rail system through Kayes)
  narrow gauge: 641 km 1.000-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 15,100 km
  paved: 1,827 km
  unpaved: 13,273 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,815 km navigable

Ports and harbors: Koulikoro

Airports: 28 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 6
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 22
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, Gendarmerie, Republican
  Guard, National Guard, National Police (Surete Nationale)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,128,375 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,218,732 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $49 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Malta
-----





Geography



Location: Southern Europe, islands in the Mediterranean Sea,
  south of Sicily (Italy)

Geographic coordinates: 35 50 N, 14 35 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 320 sq km
  land: 320 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 140 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive fishing zone: 25 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry
  summers

Terrain: mostly low, rocky, flat to dissected plains; many
  coastal cliffs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Ta'Dmejrek 253 m (near Dingli)

Natural resources: limestone, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 38%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 59% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: very limited natural fresh water
  resources; increasing reliance on desalination

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: the country comprises an archipelago, with only
  the three largest islands (Malta, Ghawdex or Gozo, and Kemmuna or
  Comino) being inhabited; numerous bays provide good harbors



People



Population: 381,603 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 40,058; female 37,810)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 130,282; female 128,390)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 18,996; female 26,067) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.49% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.02 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.37 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.24 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 7.42 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.76 years
  male: 75.43 years
  female: 80.23 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.63 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Maltese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Maltese

Ethnic groups: Maltese (descendants of ancient Carthaginians and
  Phoenicians, with strong elements of Italian and other Mediterranean
  stock)

Religions: Roman Catholic 98%

Languages: Maltese (official), English (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 10 and over can read and write
  total population: 88%
  male: 88%
  female: 88% (1985)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Malta
  conventional short form: Malta
  local long form: Repubblika ta' Malta
  local short form: Malta

Data code: MT

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Valletta

Administrative divisions: none (administered directly from
  Valletta)

Independence: 21 September 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 21 September (1964)

Constitution: 1964 constitution substantially amended on 13
  December 1974

Legal system: based on English common law and Roman civil law;
  has accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ugo MIFSUD BONNICI (since 4 April 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Eddie Fenech ADAMI (since 6
  September 1998); Deputy Prime Minister Guido de MARCO (since 8
  September 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the advice of the
  prime minister
  elections: president elected by the House of Representatives for a
  five-year term; election last held NA April 1994 (next to be held by
  NA April 1999); following House of Representatives elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the president for a five-year
  term; the deputy prime minister is appointed by the president on the
  advice of the prime minister
  election results: Ugo MIFSUD BONNICI elected president; percent of
  House of Representatives vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives (usually
  65 seats; note--additional seats are given to the party with the
  largest popular vote to ensure a legislative majority; current
  total: 69 seats; members are elected by popular vote on the basis of
  proportional representation to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 5 September 1998 (next to be held by September
  2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PN 51.8%, MLP 46.9%, AD
  1.2%; seats by party--PN 35, MLP 30

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are appointed by
  the president on the advice of the prime minister; Court of Appeal,
  judges are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime
  minister

Political parties and leaders: Nationalist Party or PN [Edward

International organization participation: C, CCC, CE, EBRD, ECE,
  EU (applicant), FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Anthony
  DARMANIN
  chancery: 2017 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kathryn Haycock PROFFITT
  embassy: 2nd Floor, Development House, Saint Anne Street, Floriana,
  Malta
  mailing address: P. O. Box 535, Valletta

Flag description: two equal vertical bands of white (hoist side)
  and red; in the upper hoist-side corner is a representation of the
  George Cross, edged in red



Economy



Economy--overview: Significant resources are limestone, a
  favorable geographic location, and a productive labor force. Malta
  produces only about 20% of its food needs, has limited freshwater
  supplies, and has no domestic energy sources. The economy is
  dependent on foreign trade, manufacturing (especially electronics
  and textiles), and tourism; the state-owned Malta drydocks employs
  about 3,800 people. In 1998, almost 1 million tourists visited the
  island. Per capita GDP of roughly $13,000 places Malta in the ranks
  of the less affluent EU countries. The island is divided politically
  over the question of joining the EU. The sizable budget deficit
  remains a key concern.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$13,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 26%
  services: 71% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.8% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 148,085 (September 1996)

Labor force--by occupation: public services 34%, other services
  32%, manufacturing and construction 22%, agriculture 2% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 5% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.32 billion
  expenditures: $1.76 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: tourism; electronics, ship building and repair,
  construction; food and beverages, textiles, footwear, clothing,
  tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.425 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.425 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: potatoes, cauliflowers, grapes, wheat,
  barley, tomatoes, citrus, cut flowers, green peppers; pork, milk,
  poultry, eggs

Exports: $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  manufactures (1996)

Exports--partners: France 18%, US 15%, Germany 15%, UK 8%, Italy
  6% (1997)

Imports: $2.3 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  manufactured goods; food, drink, and tobacco

Imports--partners: Italy 20%, France 16%, UK 15%, Germany 10%, US
  8% (1997)

Debt--external: $130 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Maltese lira (LM) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Maltese liri (LM) per US$1--0.3797 (January 1999),
  0.3884 (1998), 0.3857 (1997), 0.3604 (1996), 0.3529 (1995), 0.3776
  (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 191,876 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: automatic system satisfies normal requirements
  domestic: submarine cable and microwave radio relay between islands
  international: 2 submarine cables; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 189,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 300,000 (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,582 km
  paved: 1,471 km
  unpaved: 111 km (1993 est.)

Ports and harbors: Marsaxlokk, Valletta

Merchant marine:
  total: 1,361 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 24,436,956
  GRT/40,706,665 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 370, cargo 400, chemical tanker 49, combination
  bulk 18, combination ore/oil 17, container 56, liquefied gas tanker
  2, livestock carrier 3, multifunction large-load carrier 3, oil
  tanker 302, passenger 7, refrigerated cargo 46, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 47, short-sea passenger 19, specialized tanker 4, vehicle
  carrier 18
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 49
  countries among which includes Greece 445, Russia 51, Switzerland
  45, Italy 44, Norway 40, Croatia 26, Turkey 35, Germany 32, Georgia
  23, and Monaco 24 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Armed Forces (including an air squadron, a
  maritime squadron, and the Revenue Security Corps), Maltese Police
  Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 99,067 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 78,855 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $65.5 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.7% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Malta and Tunisia are discussing the
  commercial exploitation of the continental shelf between their
  countries, particularly for oil exploration

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for hashish from North
  Africa to Western Europe



======================================================================




@Man, Isle of
------------





Geography



Location: Western Europe, island in the Irish Sea, between Great
  Britain and Ireland

Geographic coordinates: 54 15 N, 4 30 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 588 sq km
  land: 588 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than three times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 113 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: cool summers and mild winters; humid; overcast about
  half the time

Terrain: hills in north and south bisected by central valley

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Irish Sea 0 m
  highest point: Snaefell 620 m

Natural resources: lead, iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 56%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 0%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: one small islet, the Calf of Man, lies to the
  southwest, and is a bird sanctuary



People



Population: 75,686 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 6,906; female 6,597)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 24,655; female 24,604)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 5,156; female 7,768) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.71% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.43 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 11.52 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 6.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.66 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 2.45 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.79 years
  male: 74.28 years
  female: 81.47 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.67 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Manxman, Manxwoman
  adjective: Manx

Ethnic groups: Manx (Norse-Celtic descent), Briton

Religions: Anglican, Roman Catholic, Methodist, Baptist,
  Presbyterian, Society of Friends

Languages: English, Manx Gaelic

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Isle of Man

Data code: IM

Dependency status: British crown dependency

Government type: NA

Capital: Douglas

Administrative divisions: none (British crown dependency)

Independence: none (British crown dependency)

National holiday: Tynwald Day, 5 July

Constitution: 1961, Isle of Man Constitution Act

Legal system: English law and local statute

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Lord of Mann Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February
  1952), represented by Lieutenant Governor His Excellency Sir Timothy
  DAUNT (since NA 1995)
  head of government: President of the Tynwald and the Legislative
  Council Sir Charles KERRUISH (since NA 1990)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; lieutenant governor appointed
  by the monarch for a five-year term; president of theTwnwald and the
  Legislative Council elected by the Tynwald for a five-year term;
  election last held NA (next to be held NA)
  election results: Sir Charles KERRUISH elected president of the
  Legislative Council; percent of legislative vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Tynwald consists of the Legislative
  Council (a 10-member body composed of the Lord Bishop of Sodor and
  Man, a nonvoting attorney general, and 8 others named by the House
  of Keys) and the House of Keys (24 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Keys--last held 21 November 1996 (next to be held
  NA 2001)
  election results: House of Keys--percent of vote by party--NA; seats
  by party--independents 24

Judicial branch: High Court of Justice, justices are appointed by
  the Lord Chancellor of England on the nomination of the lieutenant
  governor

Political parties and leaders: there is no party system; members
  sit as independents

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (British crown
  dependency)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (British crown
  dependency)

Flag description: red with the Three Legs of Man emblem
  (Trinacria), in the center; the three legs are joined at the thigh
  and bent at the knee; in order to have the toes pointing clockwise
  on both sides of the flag, a two-sided emblem is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Offshore banking, manufacturing, and tourism
  are key sectors of the economy. The government's policy of offering
  incentives to high-technology companies and financial institutions
  to locate on the island has paid off in expanding employment
  opportunities in high-income industries. As a result, agriculture
  and fishing, once the mainstays of the economy, have declined in
  their shares of GDP. Banking and other services now contribute more
  than four fifths of GDP. Trade is mostly with the UK. The Isle of
  Man enjoys free access to EU markets.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$985 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$13,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2%
  industry: 16%
  services: 82% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 33,577 (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: manufacturing 11%, construction 10%,
  transport and communication 8%, retail distribution 9%, professional
  and scientific services 18%, public administration 6%, banking and
  finance 18%

Unemployment rate: 1% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $437.7 million
  expenditures: $432.5 million, including capital expenditures of
  $102.2 million (FY98/99 est.)

Industries: financial services, light manufacturing, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: cereals, vegetables; cattle, sheep, pigs,
  poultry

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: tweeds, herring, processed shellfish, beef,
  lamb

Exports--partners: UK

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: timber, fertilizers, fish

Imports--partners: UK

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Manx pound (LM) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Manx pounds (LM) per US$1--0.6057 (January 1999),
  0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529
  (1994)); the Manx pound is at par with the British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 46,000 (1996)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0 (receives broadcasts from the
  UK) (1997)

Televisions: 24,450 (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 52 km (27 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 640 km
  paved: 320 km
  unpaved: 320 km

Ports and harbors: Castletown, Douglas, Peel, Ramsey

Merchant marine:
  total: 148 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,161,154
  GRT/6,880,170 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 28, cargo 7, chemical tanker 14, combination
  bulk 3, container 20, liquefied gas tanker 14, oil tanker 43,
  refrigerated cargo 3, roll-on/roll-off cargo 14, vehicle carrier 2
  note: a flag of convenience registry; UK owns 8 ships, Denmark 1,
  Sweden 1, Belgium 1, and Netherlands 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Marshall Islands
----------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of atolls and reefs in the North Pacific
  Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to Papua New Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 N, 168 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 181.3 sq km
  land: 181.3 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes the atolls of Bikini, Enewetak, and Kwajalein

Area--comparative: about the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 370.4 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: wet season from May to November; hot and humid; islands
  border typhoon belt

Terrain: low coral limestone and sand islands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Likiep 10 m

Natural resources: phosphate deposits, marine products, deep
  seabed minerals

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: 60%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 40%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment--current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertication, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: two archipelagic island chains of 30 atolls and
  1,152 islands; Bikini and Enewetak are former US nuclear test sites;
  Kwajalein, the famous World War II battleground, is now used as a US
  missile test range



People



Population: 65,507 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 50% (male 16,622; female 15,957)
  15-64 years: 48% (male 16,106; female 15,386)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 677; female 759) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.86% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 45.31 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.73 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.89 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 43.38 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.81 years
  male: 63.21 years
  female: 66.5 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.67 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Marshallese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Marshallese

Ethnic groups: Micronesian

Religions: Christian (mostly Protestant)

Languages: English (universally spoken and is the official
  language), two major Marshallese dialects from the Malayo-Polynesian
  family, Japanese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 93%
  male: 100%
  female: 88% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of the Marshall Islands
  conventional short form: Marshall Islands
  former: Marshall Islands District (Trust Territory of the Pacific
  Islands)

Data code: RM

Government type: constitutional government in free association
  with the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 21
  October 1986

Capital: Majuro

Administrative divisions: 33 municipalities; Ailinginae,
  Ailinglaplap, Ailuk, Arno, Aur, Bikar, Bikini, Bokak, Ebon,
  Enewetak, Erikub, Jabat, Jaluit, Jemo, Kili, Kwajalein, Lae, Lib,
  Likiep, Majuro, Maloelap, Mejit, Mili, Namorik, Namu, Rongelap,
  Rongrik, Toke, Ujae, Ujelang, Utirik, Wotho, Wotje

Independence: 21 October 1986 (from the US-administered UN
  trusteeship)

National holiday: Proclamation of the Republic of the Marshall
  Islands, 1 May (1979)

Constitution: 1 May 1979

Legal system: based on adapted Trust Territory laws, acts of the
  legislature, municipal, common, and customary laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Imata KABUA (since 14 January 1997);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Imata KABUA (since 14 January 1997);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet selected by the president from among the members of
  Parliament
  elections: president elected by Parliament from among its own
  members for a four-year term; election last held 14 January 1997
  (next to be held NA November 1999); note--Imata KABUA elected to
  succeed and complete the term of the late President Amata KABUA
  election results: Imata KABUA elected president; percent of
  Parliament vote--63%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Nitijela (33 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 November 1995 (next to be held NA November
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA
  note: the Council of Chiefs is a 12-member body that advises on
  matters affecting customary law and practice

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; High Court

Political parties and leaders: traditionally there have been no
  formally organized political parties; what has existed more closely
  resembles factions or interest groups because they do not have party
  headquarters, formal platforms, or party structures; the following
  two "groupings" have competed in legislative balloting in recent

International organization participation: AsDB, ESCAP, G-77,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory
  user), Interpol, ITU, OPCW, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Banny DE BRUM
  chancery: 2433 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Honolulu

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Joan M. PLAISTED
  embassy: Oceanside, Mejen Weto, Long Island, Majuro
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1379, Majuro, Republic of the Marshall
  Islands 96960-1379

Flag description: blue with two stripes radiating from the lower
  hoist-side corner--orange (top) and white; there is a white star with
  four large rays and 20 small rays on the hoist side above the two
  stripes



Economy



Economy--overview: US Government assistance is the mainstay of
  this tiny island economy. Agricultural production is concentrated on
  small farms, and the most important commercial crops are coconuts,
  tomatoes, melons, and breadfruit. Small-scale industry is limited to
  handicrafts, fish processing, and copra. The tourist industry, now a
  small source of foreign exchange employing less than 10% of the
  labor force, remains the best hope for future added income. The
  islands have few natural resources, and imports far exceed exports.
  Under the terms of the Compact of Free Association, the US provides
  roughly $65 million in annual aid, equal to about 70% of GDP.
  Negotiations will get underway in 1999 for an extended agreement.
  Government downsizing, drought, a drop in construction, and the
  decline in tourism and foreign investment due to the Asian financial
  difficulties have caused GDP to fall in 1996-98.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$91 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,450 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 15%
  industry: 13%
  services: 72% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1997)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 16% (1991 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $80.1 million
  expenditures: $77.4 million, including capital expenditures of $19.5
  million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: copra, fish, tourism, craft items from shell, wood,
  and pearls, offshore banking (embryonic)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 57 million kWh (1994)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 57 million kWh (1994)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1994)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1994)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, cacao, taro, breadfruit, fruits;
  pigs, chickens

Exports: $17.5 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: fish, coconut oil, fish, trochus shells

Exports--partners: US, Japan, Australia

Imports: $71.8 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels,
  beverages and tobacco

Imports--partners: US, Japan, Australia, NZ

Debt--external: $125 million (FY96/97 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?approximately $65 million
  annually from the US

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 2,000 (1997 est.)

Telephone system: telex services
  domestic: Majuro Atoll and Ebeye and Kwajalein islands have regular,
  seven-digit, direct-dial telephones; other islands interconnected by
  shortwave radiotelephone (used mostly for government purposes)
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean);
  US Government satellite communications system on Kwajalein

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 1

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 3 (of which one is an independent
  station and two are US military stations) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km
  note: paved roads on major islands (Majuro, Kwajalein), otherwise
  stone-, coral-, or laterite-surfaced roads and tracks

Ports and harbors: Majuro

Merchant marine:
  total: 131 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,572,915
  GRT/11,208,214 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 56, cargo 5, chemical tanker 3, container 20,
  liquefied gas tanker 2, oil tanker 42, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2,
  vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes the ships of Canada
  1, China 1, Germany 1, Japan 1, and US 7 (1998 est.)

Airports: 16 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 12
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular military forces (a coast guard may
  be established); Police Force

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims US territory of Wake Atoll



======================================================================




@Martinique
----------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, north of
  Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 14 40 N, 61 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 1,100 sq km
  land: 1,060 sq km
  water: 40 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than six times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 350 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds; rainy season (June
  to October); vulnerable to devastating cyclones (hurricanes) every
  eight years on average; average temperature 17.3 degrees C; humid

Terrain: mountainous with indented coastline; dormant volcano

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Montagne Pelee 1,397 m

Natural resources: coastal scenery and beaches, cultivable land

Land use:
  arable land: 8%
  permanent crops: 8%
  permanent pastures: 17%
  forests and woodland: 44%
  other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes, flooding, and volcanic activity (an
  average of one major natural disaster every five years)

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 411,539 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 23% (male 47,933; female 46,957)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 136,058; female 138,935)
  65 years and over: 10% (male 17,530; female 24,126) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.03% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.3 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.94 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.02 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.76 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 79.27 years
  male: 76.47 years
  female: 82.13 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.8 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Martiniquais (singular and plural)
  adjective: Martiniquais

Ethnic groups: African and African-white-Indian mixture 90%,
  white 5%, East Indian, Lebanese, Chinese less than 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Hindu and pagan African 5%

Languages: French, Creole patois

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 93%
  male: 92%
  female: 93% (1982 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Department of Martinique
  conventional short form: Martinique
  local long form: Departement de la Martinique
  local short form: Martinique

Data code: MB

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Fort-de-France

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France)

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995); Prefect Dominique BELLION (since NA October 1998)
  head of government: President of the General Council Claude LISE
  (since 22 March 1992); President of the Regional Council Alfred
  MARIE-JEANNE (since NA March 1998)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
  French Ministry of Interior; the presidents of the General and
  Regional Councils are elected by the members of those councils

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General
  (45 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year
  terms) and a unicameral Regional Assembly or Conseil Regional (41
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
  elections: General Council--last held NA March 1994 (next to be held
  NA 2000); Regional Assembly--last held on NA March 1998 (next to be
  held by March 2004)
  election results: General Council--percent of vote by party--NA; seats
  by party--NA; note--the PPM won a plurality; Regional Assembly--percent
  of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA
  note: Martinique elects 2 seats to the French Senate; elections last
  held 24 September 1995 (next to be held September 1998);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PS 2; Martinique
  also elects 4 seats to the French National Assembly; elections last
  held 1 June 1997 (next to be held NA 2002); results--percent of vote
  by party--NA; seats by party--RPR 2, PS 1, independent 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR

Political pressure groups and leaders: Proletarian Action Group
  Caribbean Revolutionary Alliance or ARC; Central Union for
  League of Workers and Peasants; Association for the Protection of

International organization participation: FZ, WCL, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department
  of France)

Flag description: a light blue background is divided into four
  quadrants by a white cross; in the center of each rectangle is a
  white snake; the flag of France is used for official occasions



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is based on sugarcane, bananas,
  tourism, and light industry. Agriculture accounts for about 6% of
  GDP and the small industrial sector for 11%. Sugar production has
  declined, with most of the sugarcane now used for the production of
  rum. Banana exports are increasing, going mostly to France. The bulk
  of meat, vegetable, and grain requirements must be imported,
  contributing to a chronic trade deficit that requires large annual
  transfers of aid from France. Tourism has become more important than
  agricultural exports as a source of foreign exchange. The majority
  of the work force is employed in the service sector and in
  administration.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$4.24 billion (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,700 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 11%
  services: 83% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.9% (1990)

Labor force: 160,000

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 10%, industry 17%,
  services 73% (1997)

Unemployment rate: 24% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $775 million
  expenditures: $2.15 billion, including capital expenditures of $118
  million (1996)

Industries: construction, rum, cement, oil refining, sugar,
  tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 855 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 855 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: pineapples, avocados, bananas, flowers,
  vegetables, sugarcane

Exports: $200 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: refined petroleum products, bananas, rum,
  pineapples

Exports--partners: France 57%, Guadeloupe 31%, French Guiana (1991)

Imports: $1.6 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: petroleum products, crude oil, foodstuffs,
  construction materials, vehicles, clothing and other consumer goods

Imports--partners: France 62%, UK, Italy, Germany, Japan, US (1991)

Debt--external: $180 million (1994)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?substantial annual aid from
  France

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 209,672 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: domestic facilities are adequate
  domestic: NA
  international: microwave radio relay to Guadeloupe, Dominica, and
  Saint Lucia; satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 74,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 11 (in addition, there are nine
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 65,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 2,724 km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km (1994)

Ports and harbors: Fort-de-France, La Trinite

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: French forces (Army, Navy, Air Force),
  Gendarmerie

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine and marijuana
  bound for the US and Europe



======================================================================




@Mauritania
----------





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Senegal and Western Sahara

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 N, 12 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,030,700 sq km
  land: 1,030,400 sq km
  water: 300 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than three times the size of
  New Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,074 km
  border countries: Algeria 463 km, Mali 2,237 km, Senegal 813 km,
  Western Sahara 1,561 km

Coastline: 754 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; constantly hot, dry, dusty

Terrain: mostly barren, flat plains of the Sahara; some central
  hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sebkha de Ndrhamcha -3 m
  highest point: Kediet Ijill 910 m

Natural resources: iron ore, gypsum, fish, copper, phosphate

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 38%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 58% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 490 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind blows
  primarily in March and April; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: overgrazing, deforestation, and soil
  erosion aggravated by drought are contributing to desertification;
  very limited natural fresh water resources away from the Senegal
  which is the only perennial river

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: most of the population concentrated in the cities
  of Nouakchott and Nouadhibou and along the Senegal River in the
  southern part of the country



People



Population: 2,581,738 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 47% (male 600,901; female 600,225)
  15-64 years: 51% (male 641,481; female 678,951)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 25,156; female 35,024) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.99% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 44.1 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.2 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 76.46 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 50.48 years
  male: 47.39 years
  female: 53.65 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.35 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mauritanian(s)
  adjective: Mauritanian

Ethnic groups: mixed Maur/black 40%, Maur 30%, black 30%

Religions: Muslim 100%

Languages: Hasaniya Arabic (official), Pular, Soninke, Wolof
  (official), French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 37.7%
  male: 49.6%
  female: 26.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Islamic Republic of Mauritania
  conventional short form: Mauritania
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Islamiyah al Muritaniyah
  local short form: Muritaniyah

Data code: MR

Government type: republic

Capital: Nouakchott

Administrative divisions: 12 regions (regions, singular--region)
  and 1 capital district*; Adrar, Assaba, Brakna, Dakhlet Nouadhibou,
  Gorgol, Guidimaka, Hodh Ech Chargui, Hodh El Gharbi, Inchiri,
  Nouakchott*, Tagant, Tiris Zemmour, Trarza

Independence: 28 November 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 November (1960)

Constitution: 12 July 1991

Legal system: a combination of Shari'a (Islamic law) and modern
  law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid Ahmed TAYA (since 12
  December 1984)
  head of government: Prime Minister Cheikel Afia Ould Mohamed KHOUNA
  (since 16 November 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 12 December 1997 (next to be held NA December
  2003); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: President Col. Maaouya Ould Sid Ahmed TAYA
  reelected with 90% of the vote

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the Senate
  or Majlis al-Shuyukh (56 seats; 17 up for election every two years;
  members elected by municipal leaders to serve six-year terms) and
  the National Assembly or Majlis al-Watani (79 seats; members elected
  by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 17 April 1998 (next to be held NA 2000);
  National Assembly--last held 11 and 18 October 1996 (next to be held
  NA 2001)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--NA; National Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PRDS 71, AC 1, independents and other 7

Judicial branch: three-tier system: lower, appeals, and Supreme
  Court (Cour Supreme)

Political parties and leaders: legalized by constitution passed
  12 July 1991, however, politics continue to be tribally based;
  emerging parties include Democratic and Social Republican Party or

Political pressure groups and leaders: Mauritanian Workers Union
  MOHAMED, secretary general]

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT
  (associate), ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CAEU, CCC, ECA, ECOWAS,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO
  (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM,
  OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Ahmed Ould Khalifa OULD JIDDOU
  chancery: 2129 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Timberlake FOSTER
  embassy: Rue Abdallahi Ould Oubeid, Nouakchott
  mailing address: B. P. 222, Nouakchott

Flag description: green with a yellow five-pointed star above a
  yellow, horizontal crescent; the closed side of the crescent is
  down; the crescent, star, and color green are traditional symbols of
  Islam



Economy



Economy--overview: A majority of the population still depends on
  agriculture and livestock for a livelihood, even though most of the
  nomads and many subsistence farmers were forced into the cities by
  recurrent droughts in the 1970s and 1980s. Mauritania has extensive
  deposits of iron ore, which account for almost 50% of total exports.
  The decline in world demand for this ore, however, has led to
  cutbacks in production. The nation's coastal waters are among the
  richest fishing areas in the world, but overexploitation by
  foreigners threatens this key source of revenue. The country's first
  deepwater port opened near Nouakchott in 1986. In recent years,
  drought and economic mismanagement have resulted in a substantial
  buildup of foreign debt. The government has begun the second stage
  of an economic reform program in consultation with the World Bank,
  the IMF, and major donor countries. Short-term growth prospects are
  uncertain because of the heavy debt service burden, rapid population
  growth, and vulnerability to climatic conditions.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$4.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,890 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 26%
  industry: 31%
  services: 43% (1996)

Population below poverty line: 57% (1990 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.7%
  highest 10%: 30.4% (1988)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.7% (1996)

Labor force: 465,000 (1981 est.); 45,000 wage earners (1980)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 47%, services 29%,
  industry and commerce 14%, government 10%

Unemployment rate: 23% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $329 million
  expenditures: $265 million, including capital expenditures of $75
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: fish processing, mining of iron ore and gypsum

Industrial production growth rate: 7.2% (1994)

Electricity--production: 150 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 80%
  hydro: 20%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 150 million kWh (1996

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: dates, millet, sorghum, root crops; cattle,
  sheep; fish products

Exports: $562 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: fish and fish products, iron ore, gold

Exports--partners: Japan 22%, Italy 16%, France 14%

Imports: $552 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, consumer goods, petroleum
  products, capital goods

Imports--partners: France 30%, Algeria 10%, Spain 7%, China 6%, US
  3%

Debt--external: $2.5 billion (1995)

Economic aid--recipient: $227.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 ouguiya (UM) = 5 khoums

Exchange rates: ouguiyas (UM) per US$1--204.600 (January 1999),
  151.853 (1997), 137.222 (1996), 129.768 (1995), 123.575 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 17,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: poor system of cable and open-wire lines, minor
  microwave radio relay links, and radiotelephone communications
  stations (improvements being made)
  domestic: mostly cable and open-wire lines; a recently completed
  domestic satellite telecommunications system links Nouakchott with
  regional capitals
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
  and 2 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 1 (1998 est.)

Radios: 1 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 50,000 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 704 km (single track); note--owned and operated by government
  mining company
  standard gauge: 704 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 7,660 km
  paved: 866 km
  unpaved: 6,794 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: mostly ferry traffic on the Senegal River

Ports and harbors: Bogue, Kaedi, Nouadhibou, Nouakchott, Rosso

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 26 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 8
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
  National Guard, National Police, Presidential Guard

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 571,521 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 277,620 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $30 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.5% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Mauritius
---------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
  Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 20 17 S, 57 33 E

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 1,860 sq km
  land: 1,850 sq km
  water: 10 sq km
  note: includes Agalega Islands, Cargados Carajos Shoals (Saint
  Brandon), and Rodrigues

Area--comparative: almost 11 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 177 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, modified by southeast trade winds; warm, dry
  winter (May to November); hot, wet, humid summer (November to May)

Terrain: small coastal plain rising to discontinuous mountains
  encircling central plateau

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Piton 828 m

Natural resources: arable land, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 49%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 22%
  other: 23% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 170 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: cyclones (November to April); almost completely
  surrounded by reefs that may pose maritime hazards

Environment--current issues: water pollution

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 1,182,212 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 26% (male 156,616; female 153,698)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 398,557; female 402,674)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 28,586; female 42,081) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.18% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 18.49 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.69 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.2 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.09 years
  male: 67.21 years
  female: 74.96 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.21 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mauritian(s)
  adjective: Mauritian

Ethnic groups: Indo-Mauritian 68%, Creole 27%, Sino-Mauritian 3%,
  Franco-Mauritian 2%

Religions: Hindu 52%, Christian 28.3% (Roman Catholic 26%,
  Protestant 2.3%), Muslim 16.6%, other 3.1%

Languages: English (official), Creole, French, Hindi, Urdu,
  Hakka, Bojpoori

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 82.9%
  male: 87.1%
  female: 78.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Mauritius
  conventional short form: Mauritius

Data code: MP

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Port Louis

Administrative divisions: 9 districts and 3 dependencies*;
  Agalega Islands*, Black River, Cargados Carajos Shoals*, Flacq,
  Grand Port, Moka, Pamplemousses, Plaines Wilhems, Port Louis,
  Riviere du Rempart, Rodrigues*, Savanne

Independence: 12 March 1968 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 March (1968)

Constitution: 12 March 1968; amended 12 March 1992

Legal system: based on French civil law system with elements of
  English common law in certain areas

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Cassam UTEEM (since 1 July 1992) and Vice
  President Angidi Verriah CHETTIAR (since 28 June 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Navinchandra RAMGOOLAM (since 27
  December 1995)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: president and vice president elected by the National
  Assembly for five-year terms; election last held 28 June 1997 (next
  to be held NA 2002); prime minister and deputy prime minister
  appointed by the president and are responsible to the National
  Assembly
  election results: Cassam UTEEM reelected president and Angidi
  Verriah CHETTIAR elected vice president; percent of vote by the
  National Assembly--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (66 seats--62
  elected by popular vote, 4 appointed by the election commission from
  the losing political parties to give representation to various
  ethnic minorities; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held on 20 December 1995 (next to be held by
  December 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--MLP/MMM 65%, MSM/MMR 20%,
  other 15%; seats by party--MLP 35, MMM 25, allies of MLP and MMM on
  Rodrigues Island 2; appointed were Rodrigues Movement 2, PMSD 1,
  Hizbullah 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders:
  RAMGOOLAM]
  Paramhansa NABABSING]; Mauritian Social Democrat Party or PMSD

Political pressure groups and leaders: various labor unions

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, C,
  CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, InOC, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO,
  ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, PCA, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Chitmansing JESSERAMSING
  chancery: Suite 441, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Harold Walter GEISEL
  embassy: 4th Floor, Rogers House, John Kennedy Street, Port Louis
  mailing address: international mail: P.O. Box 544, Port Louis; US
  mail: American Embassy, Port Louis, Department of State, Washington,
  DC 20521-2450

Flag description: four equal horizontal bands of red (top), blue,
  yellow, and green



Economy



Economy--overview: Since independence in 1968, Mauritius has
  developed from a low income, agriculturally based economy to a
  middle income diversified economy with growing industrial, financial
  services, and tourist sectors. For most of the period, annual growth
  has been of the order of 5% to 6%. This remarkable achievement has
  been reflected in increased life expectancy, lowered infant
  mortality, and a much improved infrastructure. Sugarcane is grown on
  about 90% of the cultivated land area and accounts for 25% of export
  earnings. The government's development strategy centers on
  industrialization (with a view to modernization and to exports),
  agricultural diversification, and tourism. Economic performance in
  1991-98 continued strong with solid growth and low unemployment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$11.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 8%
  industry: 29%
  services: 63% (1996)

Population below poverty line: 10.6% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.8% (1997)

Labor force: 514,000 (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: construction and industry 36%,
  services 24%, agriculture and fishing 14%, trade, restaurants,
  hotels 16%, transportation and communication 7%, finance 3% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 2% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $824 million (FY94/95)
  expenditures: $1 billion, including capital expenditures of $198
  million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: food processing (largely sugar milling), textiles,
  clothing; chemicals, metal products, transport equipment,
  nonelectrical machinery; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5.8% (1992)

Electricity--production: 1.125 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 86.67%
  hydro: 13.33%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.125 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, tea, corn, potatoes, bananas,
  pulses; cattle, goats; fish

Exports: $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: clothing and textiles 55%, sugar 24% (1995)

Exports--partners: UK 34.4%, France 19.5%, US 13.0%, Germany 5.6%,
  Italy 4.0% (1996)

Imports: $2.3 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods 37%, capital equipment
  19%, foodstuffs 13%, petroleum products 8%, chemicals 7% (1995)

Imports--partners: South Africa 12.0%, France 11.1%, India 8.9%,
  UK 6.5%, Germany 4.7%, (1996)

Debt--external: $1.2 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $5.2 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Mauritian rupee (MauR) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Mauritian rupees (MauRs) per US$1--24.099 (January
  1999), 22.803 (1998), 20.561 (1997), 17.948 (1996), 17.386 (1995),
  17.960 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 107,000 (1993)

Telephone system: small system with good service
  domestic: primarily microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean);
  new microwave link to Reunion; HF radiotelephone links to several
  countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 399,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in addition, there are 11
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 242,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,860 km
  paved: 1,732 km (including 30 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 128 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Port Louis

Merchant marine:
  total: 17 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 178,846 GRT/236,308 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 6, combination bulk 2, container 6, liquefied
  gas tanker 1, refrigerated cargo 2
  note: a flag of convenience registry; India owns 1 ship (1998 est.)

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Police Force (includes the
  paramilitary Special Mobile Force or SMF, Special Support Units or
  SSU, and National Coast Guard)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 339,218 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 171,705 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $11.2 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.4% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims the Chagos Archipelago in
  UK-administered British Indian Ocean Territory; claims
  French-administered Tromelin Island

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the international
  drug trade; heroin consumption and transshipment are growing problems



======================================================================




@Mayotte
-------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Mozambique Channel,
  about one-half of the way from northern Madagascar to northern
  Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 12 50 S, 45 10 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 375 sq km
  land: 375 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 185.2 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; hot, humid, rainy season during
  northeastern monsoon (November to May); dry season is cooler (May to
  November)

Terrain: generally undulating, with deep ravines and ancient
  volcanic peaks

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Benara 660 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones during rainy season

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: part of Comoro Archipelago



People



Population: 149,336 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 47% (male 34,838; female 34,798)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 42,073; female 35,068)
  65 years and over: 1% (male 1,257; female 1,302) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 5% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 46.12 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.9 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 12.73 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.2 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.97 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 69.06 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 60.02 years
  male: 57.61 years
  female: 62.51 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.41 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mahorais (singular and plural)
  adjective: Mahoran

Ethnic groups: NA

Religions: Muslim 99%, Christian (mostly Roman Catholic)

Languages: Mahorian (a Swahili dialect), French

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territorial Collectivity of Mayotte
  conventional short form: Mayotte

Data code: MF

Dependency status: territorial collectivity of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Mamoutzou

Administrative divisions: none (territorial collectivity of
  France)

Independence: none (territorial collectivity of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by Prefect Philippe BOISADAM (since NA)
  head of government: President of the General Council Younoussa
  BAMANA (since NA 1977)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
  French Ministry of the Interior; president of the General Council
  elected by the members of the General Council for a six-year term

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General
  (19 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve three-year
  terms)
  elections: last held 23 March 1997 (next to be held NA March 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; note--only nine of the
  19 seats were subjected to voting in March 1997; after the election,
  seats by party were as follows: MPM 8, RPR 5, independents 5, PS 1
  note: Mayotte elects one member of the French Senate; elections last
  held 24 September 1995 (next to be held 24 September 2001);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--MPM 1; Mayotte
  also elects one member to the French National Assembly; elections
  last held 25 May and 1 June 1997 (next to be held as a special
  election on NA May 2002); results--percent of vote by party--UDF/FD
  51.7%, RPR 48.3%; seats by party--UDF/FD 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Tribunal Superieur d'Appel)

Political parties and leaders: Mahoran Popular Movement or MPM
  BEOUTIS]; Socialist Party or PS (local branch of French Parti
  JEAN-BAPTISTE]

International organization participation: FZ

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territorial
  collectivity of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territorial
  collectivity of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity is based primarily on the
  agricultural sector, including fishing and livestock raising.
  Mayotte is not self-sufficient and must import a large portion of
  its food requirements, mainly from France. The economy and future
  development of the island are heavily dependent on French financial
  assistance, an important supplement to GDP. Mayotte's remote
  location is an obstacle to the development of tourism.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$85 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: 38% (1991 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $73 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1991 est.)

Industries: newly created lobster and shrimp industry

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: vanilla, ylang-ylang (perfume essence),
  coffee, copra

Exports: $3.64 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: ylang-ylang (perfume essence), vanilla, copra

Exports--partners: France 80%, Comoros 15%, Reunion

Imports: $131.5 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: building materials, machinery and
  transportation equipment, metals, chemicals, rice, clothing, flour

Imports--partners: France 66%, Africa 14%, Southeast Asia 20%

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $107.7 million (1995); note?extensive
  French financial assistance

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 450

Telephone system: small system administered by French Department
  of Posts and Telecommunications
  domestic: NA
  international: microwave radio relay and HF radiotelephone
  communications to Comoros and other international connections

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 30,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1997)

Televisions: 3,500 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 93 km
  paved: 72 km
  unpaved: 21 km

Ports and harbors: Dzaoudzi

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France; small
  contingent of French forces stationed on the island



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Comoros



======================================================================




@Mexico
------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering the Caribbean Sea and the
  Gulf of Mexico, between Belize and the US and bordering the North
  Pacific Ocean, between Guatemala and the US

Geographic coordinates: 23 00 N, 102 00 W

Map references: North America

Area:
  total: 1,972,550 sq km
  land: 1,923,040 sq km
  water: 49,510 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than three times the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,538 km
  border countries: Belize 250 km, Guatemala 962 km, US 3,326 km

Coastline: 9,330 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical to desert

Terrain: high, rugged mountains; low coastal plains; high
  plateaus; desert

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Laguna Salada -10 m
  highest point: Volcan Pico de Orizaba 5,700 m

Natural resources: petroleum, silver, copper, gold, lead, zinc,
  natural gas, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 39%
  forests and woodland: 26%
  other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 61,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tsunamis along the Pacific coast, volcanoes and
  destructive earthquakes in the center and south, and hurricanes on
  the Gulf of Mexico and Caribbean coasts

Environment--current issues: natural fresh water resources scarce
  and polluted in north, inaccessible and poor quality in center and
  extreme southeast; raw sewage and industrial effluents polluting
  rivers in urban areas; deforestation; widespread erosion;
  desertification; serious air pollution in the national capital and
  urban centers along US-Mexico border

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location on southern border of US



People



Population: 100,294,036 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 17,987,500; female 17,289,875)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 29,610,813; female 31,216,342)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 1,873,986; female 2,315,520) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.73% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 24.99 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.83 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.62 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72 years
  male: 68.98 years
  female: 75.17 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.85 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mexican(s)
  adjective: Mexican

Ethnic groups: mestizo (Amerindian-Spanish) 60%, Amerindian or
  predominantly Amerindian 30%, white 9%, other 1%

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 89%, Protestant 6%

Languages: Spanish, various Mayan, Nahuatl, and other regional
  indigenous languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 89.6%
  male: 91.8%
  female: 87.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: United Mexican States
  conventional short form: Mexico
  local long form: Estados Unidos Mexicanos
  local short form: Mexico

Data code: MX

Government type: federal republic operating under a centralized
  government

Capital: Mexico

Administrative divisions: 31 states (estados, singular--estado)
  and 1 federal district* (distrito federal); Aguascalientes, Baja
  California, Baja California Sur, Campeche, Chiapas, Chihuahua,
  Coahuila de Zaragoza, Colima, Distrito Federal*, Durango,
  Guanajuato, Guerrero, Hidalgo, Jalisco, Mexico, Michoacan de Ocampo,
  Morelos, Nayarit, Nuevo Leon, Oaxaca, Puebla, Queretaro de Arteaga,
  Quintana Roo, San Luis Potosi, Sinaloa, Sonora, Tabasco, Tamaulipas,
  Tlaxcala, Veracruz-Llave, Yucatan, Zacatecas

Independence: 16 September 1810 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 16 September (1810)

Constitution: 5 February 1917

Legal system: mixture of US constitutional theory and civil law
  system; judicial review of legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory (but not
  enforced)

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon (since 1
  December 1994); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  head of government: President Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon (since 1
  December 1994); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president with consent of the
  Senate
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 21 August 1994 (next to be held in July or August
  2000)
  election results: Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon elected president;
  percent of vote--Ernesto ZEDILLO Ponce de Leon (PRI) 50.18%,
  Cuauhtemoc CARDENAS Solorzano (PRD) 17.08%, Diego FERNANDEZ DE
  CEVALLOS (PAN) 26.69%, other 6.05%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Congress or Congreso de la
  Union consists of the Senate or Camara de Senadores (128 seats; half
  are elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms, and half are
  allocated on the basis of each party's popular vote) and the Chamber
  of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (500 seats; 300 members are
  directly elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms;
  remaining 200 members are allocated on the basis of each party's
  popular vote, also for three-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 6 July 1997 for one-quarter of the
  seats; Chamber of Deputies--last held 6 July 1997 (the next
  legislative elections will coincide with the presidential election
  in July or August 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PRI 77, PAN 33, PRD 16, PVEM 1, PT 1; note--the distribution of
  seats as of May 1998 is as follows--PRI 77, PAN 31, PRD 15, PT 1,
  independents 4; Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by party--PRI
  39%, PAN 27%, PRD 26%; seats by party--PRI 239, PRD 125, PAN 121,
  PVEM 8, PT 7; note--the distribution of seats as of May 1998 is as
  follows--PRI 237, PRD 127, PAN 120, PT 7, PVEM 6, independents 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice or Corte Suprema de
  Justicia (judges are appointed by the president with consent of the
  Senate)

Political parties and leaders: recognized parties--Institutional

Political pressure groups and leaders: Roman Catholic Church;
  Confederation of Mexican Workers or CTM; Confederation of Industrial
  Chambers or CONCAMIN; Confederation of National Chambers of Commerce
  or CONCANACO; National Peasant Confederation or CNC; Revolutionary
  Workers Party or PRT; Revolutionary Confederation of Workers and
  Peasants or CROC; Regional Confederation of Mexican Workers or CROM;
  Confederation of Employers of the Mexican Republic or COPARMEX;
  National Chamber of Transformation Industries or CANACINTRA;
  Coordinator for Foreign Trade Business Organizations or COECE;
  Federation of Unions Providing Goods and Services or FESEBES;
  National Union of Workers or UNT

International organization participation: APEC, BCIE, BIS,
  Caricom (observer), CCC, CDB, EBRD, ECLAC, FAO, G-3, G-6, G-11,
  G-15, G-19, G-24, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA
  (observer), IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA, NAM (observer),
  NEA, OAS, OECD, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jesus REYES HEROLES Gonzalez Garza
  chancery: 1911 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20006
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Austin, Boston, Chicago, Dallas,
  Denver, El Paso, Houston, Laredo (Texas), Los Angeles, Miami, New
  Orleans, New York, Nogales (Arizona), Phoenix, Sacramento, San
  Antonio, San Diego, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico)
  consulate(s): Albuquerque, Brownsville (Texas), Calexico
  (California), Corpus Christi, Del Rio (Texas), Detroit, Douglas
  (Arizona), Eagle Pass (Texas), Fresno (California), McAllen (Texas),
  Midland (Texas), Orlando, Oxnard (California), Philadelphia,
  Portland (Oregon), St. Louis, Salt Lake City, San Bernardino, San
  Jose, Santa Ana (California), Seattle, Tucson

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jeffery DAVIDOW
  embassy: Paseo de la Reforma 305, Colonia Cuauhtemoc, 06500 Mexico,
  Distrito Federal
  mailing address: P. O. Box 3087, Laredo, TX 78044-3087
  consulate(s) general: Ciudad Juarez, Guadalajara, Monterrey, Tijuana
  consulate(s): Hermosillo, Matamoros, Merida, Nuevo Laredo, Nogales

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), white, and red; the coat of arms (an eagle perched on a
  cactus with a snake in its beak) is centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Mexico has a free market economy with a mixture
  of modern and outmoded industry and agriculture, increasingly
  dominated by the private sector. The number of state-owned
  enterprises in Mexico has fallen from more than 1,000 in 1982 to
  fewer than 200 in 1998. The ZEDILLO administration is privatizing
  and expanding competition in sea ports, railroads,
  telecommunications, electricity, natural gas distribution, and
  airports. A strong export sector helped to cushion the economy's
  decline in 1995 and led the recovery in 1996 and 1997. In 1998,
  private consumption became the leading driver of growth, which was
  accompanied by increased employment and higher wages. The government
  expects the economy to slow in 1999 because of low commodity prices,
  tighter international liquidity, and slacker demand for exports.
  Mexico still needs to overcome many structural problems as it
  strives to modernize its economy and raise living standards. Income
  distribution is very unequal, with the top 20% of income earners
  accounting for 55% of income. Trade with the US and Canada has
  nearly doubled since NAFTA was implemented in 1994. Mexico is
  pursuing additional trade agreements with most countries in Latin
  America and with the EU to lessen its dependence on the US.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$815.3 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$8,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 26%
  services: 68% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 27% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.8%
  highest 10%: 36.6% 1996)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 18.6% (1998)

Labor force: 37.5 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: services 28.8%, agriculture, forestry,
  hunting, and fishing 21.8%, commerce 17.1%, manufacturing 16.1%,
  construction 5.2%, public administration and national defense 4.4%,
  transportation and communications 4.1%

Unemployment rate: 2.6% (1998) urban; plus considerable
  underemployment

Budget:
  revenues: $117 billion
  expenditures: $123 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: food and beverages, tobacco, chemicals, iron and
  steel, petroleum, mining, textiles, clothing, motor vehicles,
  consumer durables, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 154.395 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 71.46%
  hydro: 20.16%
  nuclear: 4.85%
  other: 3.53% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 154.448 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1.263 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.316 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, wheat, soybeans, rice, beans, cotton,
  coffee, fruit, tomatoes; beef, poultry, dairy products; wood products

Exports: $117.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998), includes in-bond
  industries (assembly plant operations with links to US companies)

Exports--commodities: crude oil, oil products, coffee, silver,
  engines, motor vehicles, cotton, consumer electronics

Exports--partners: US 87.5%, Canada 1.3%, Japan 0.8%, Spain 0.6%,
  Chile 0.6%, Brazil 0.5% (1998 est.)

Imports: $111.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998), includes in-bond
  industries (assembly plant operations with links to US companies)

Imports--commodities: metal-working machines, steel mill products,
  agricultural machinery, electrical equipment, car parts for
  assembly, repair parts for motor vehicles, aircraft, and aircraft
  parts

Imports--partners: US 74.2%, Japan 3.7%, Germany 3.7%, Canada
  1.8%, South Korea 1.5%, Italy 1.3%, France 1.2% (1998 est.)

Debt--external: $154 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.166 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 New Mexican peso (Mex$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Mexican pesos (Mex$) per US$1--10.1104 (January
  1999), 9.1360 (1998), 7.9141 (1997), 7.5994(1996), 6.4194 (1995),
  3.3751 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 11,890,868 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed system with extensive
  microwave radio relay links; privatized in December 1990; opened to
  competition January 1997
  domestic: adequate telephone service for business and government,
  but the population is poorly served; domestic satellite system with
  120 earth stations; extensive microwave radio relay network
  international: satellite earth stations--5 Intelsat (4 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Pacific Ocean); launched Solidaridad I satellite in November
  1993 and Solidaridad II in October 1994, giving Mexico improved
  access to South America, Central America and much of the US as well
  as enhancing domestic communications; linked to Central American
  Microwave System of trunk connections

Radio broadcast stations: AM 824 (1999 est.), FM 500 (1998 est.),
  shortwave 19 (1999 est.)

Radios: 22.5 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 236 (not including repeaters)
  (1997)

Televisions: 13.1 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 31,048 km
  standard gauge: 30,958 km 1.435-m gauge (246 km electrified)
  narrow gauge: 90 km 0.914-m gauge (1998 est.)

Highways:
  total: 252,000 km
  paved: 94,248 km (including 6,740 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 157,752 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,900 km navigable rivers and coastal canals

Pipelines: crude oil 28,200 km; petroleum products 10,150 km;
  natural gas 13,254 km; petrochemical 1,400 km

Ports and harbors: Acapulco, Altamira, Coatzacoalcos, Ensenada,
  Guaymas, La Paz, Lazaro Cardenas, Manzanillo, Mazatlan, Progreso,
  Salina Cruz, Tampico, Topolobampo, Tuxpan, Veracruz

Merchant marine:
  total: 52 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 852,004 GRT/1,236,475
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 1, chemical tanker 4, container 4,
  liquefied gas tanker 7, oil tanker 28, roll-on/roll-off cargo 3,
  short-sea passenger 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1,805 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 232
  over 3,047 m: 10
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 27
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 91
  914 to 1,523 m: 78
  under 914 m: 26 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1,573
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 63
  914 to 1,523 m: 468
  under 914 m: 1,040 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Defense Secretariat (includes Army
  and Air Force), Navy Secretariat (includes Naval Air and Marines)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 25,675,266 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 18,675,524 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 1,085,042 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $6 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.3% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: illicit cultivation of opium poppy (cultivation in
  1998--5,500 hectares; potential production--60 metric tons) and
  cannabis cultivation in 1998--4,600 hectares; government eradication
  efforts have been key in keeping illicit crop levels low; major
  supplier of heroin and marijuana to the US market; continues as the
  primary transshipment country for US-bound cocaine from South
  America; involved in the production and distribution of
  methamphetamines



======================================================================




@Micronesia, Federated States of
-------------------------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, island group in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 6 55 N, 158 15 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 702 sq km
  land: 702 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Pohnpei (Ponape), Truk (Chuuk) Islands, Yap Islands,
  and Kosrae

Area--comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 6,112 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; heavy year-round rainfall, especially in the
  eastern islands; located on southern edge of the typhoon belt with
  occasionally severe damage

Terrain: islands vary geologically from high mountainous islands
  to low, coral atolls; volcanic outcroppings on Pohnpei, Kosrae, and
  Truk

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Totolom 791 m

Natural resources: forests, marine products, deep-seabed minerals

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (June to December)

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: four major island groups totaling 607 islands



People



Population: 131,500 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 3.3% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27.32 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.01 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 11.65 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33.99 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.48 years
  male: 66.52 years
  female: 70.48 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.87 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Micronesian(s)
  adjective: Micronesian; Kosrae(s), Pohnpeian(s), Trukese, Yapese

Ethnic groups: nine ethnic Micronesian and Polynesian groups

Religions: Roman Catholic 50%, Protestant 47%, other and none 3%

Languages: English (official and common language), Trukese,
  Pohnpeian, Yapese, Kosrean

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 89%
  male: 91%
  female: 88% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federated States of Micronesia
  conventional short form: none
  former: Kosrae, Ponape, Truk, and Yap Districts (Trust Territory of
  the Pacific Islands)
  abbreviation: FSM

Data code: FM

Government type: constitutional government in free association
  with the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 3
  November 1986

Capital: Palikir

Administrative divisions: 4 states; Chuuk (Truk), Kosrae,
  Pohnpei, Yap

Independence: 3 November 1986 (from the US-administered UN
  Trusteeship)

National holiday: Proclamation of the Federated States of
  Micronesia, 10 May (1979)

Constitution: 10 May 1979

Legal system: based on adapted Trust Territory laws, acts of the
  legislature, municipal, common, and customary laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacob NENA (acting president since NA July
  1996, president since 9 May 1997); Vice President Leo A. FALCAM
  (since 9 May 1997); note--the president is both the chief of state
  and head of government; Vice President Jacob NENA became acting
  president in July 1996 after President Bailey OLTER suffered a
  stroke; OLTER was declared incapacitated in November 1996; as
  provided for by the constitution, 180 days later, with OLTER still
  unable to resume his duties, NENA was sworn in as the new president;
  he will serve for the remaining two years of OLTER's term
  head of government: President Jacob NENA (acting president since NA
  July 1996, president since 9 May 1997); Vice President Leo A. FALCAM
  (since 9 May 1997); note--the president is both the chief of state
  and head of government; Vice President Jacob NENA became acting
  president in July 1996 after President Bailey OLTER suffered a
  stroke; OLTER was declared incapacitated in November 1996; as
  provided for by the constitution, 180 days later, with OLTER still
  unable to resume his duties, NENA was sworn in as the new president;
  he will serve for the remaining two years of OLTER's term
  cabinet: Cabinet
  elections: president and vice president elected by Congress from
  among the four senators-at-large for four-year terms; election last
  held 11 May 1995 (next to be held NA May 1999); note--because of the
  vacancy to the post of vice president created after NENA left to
  become acting president, a new election to fill the position of vice
  president for the remaining two years of the term was held on 9 May
  1997 (next to be held NA May 1999)
  election results: Bailey OLTER reelected president; percent of
  Congress vote--NA; Leo A. FALCAM elected vice president; percent of
  Congress vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Congress (14 seats; members
  elected by popular vote; four--one elected from each of state--to
  serve four-year terms and 10--elected from single-member districts
  delineated by population--to serve two-year terms)
  elections: elections for four-year term seats last held 7 March 1995
  (next to be held 2 March 1999); elections for two-year term seats
  last held 3 March 1997 (next to be held NA March 1999)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 14

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: no formal parties

International organization participation: AsDB, ESCAP, G-77,
  IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IFC, IMF, Intelsat, ITU, OPCW, Sparteca, SPC, SPF,
  UN, UNCTAD, WHO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jesse Bibiano MAREHALAU
  chancery: 1725 N Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Honolulu and Tamuning (Guam)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Ann WRIGHT
  embassy: address NA, Kolonia
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1286, Pohnpei, Federated States of
  Micronesia 96941

Flag description: light blue with four white five-pointed stars
  centered; the stars are arranged in a diamond pattern



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity consists primarily of
  subsistence farming and fishing. The islands have few mineral
  deposits worth exploiting, except for high-grade phosphate. The
  potential for a tourist industry exists, but the remoteness of the
  location and a lack of adequate facilities hinder development.
  Financial assistance from the US is the primary source of revenue,
  with the US pledged to spend $1 billion in the islands in the 1990s.
  Geographical isolation and a poorly developed infrastructure are
  major impediments to long-term growth.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$220 million (1996 est.)
  note: GDP is supplemented by grant aid, averaging perhaps $100
  million annually

GDP--real growth rate: 1% (1996 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,760 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4% (1996 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: two-thirds are government employees

Unemployment rate: 27% (1989)

Budget:
  revenues: $58 million
  expenditures: $52 million, including capital expenditures of $4.7
  million (FY95/96 est.)

Industries: tourism, construction, fish processing, craft items
  from shell, wood, and pearls

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: black pepper, tropical fruits and
  vegetables, coconuts, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs,
  chickens

Exports: $73 million (f.o.b., 1996 est.)

Exports--commodities: fish, garments, bananas, black pepper

Exports--partners: Japan, US, Guam

Imports: $168 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: food, manufactured goods, machinery and
  equipment, beverages

Imports--partners: US, Japan, Australia

Debt--external: $129 million

Economic aid--recipient: $77.4 million (1995); note?under terms of
  the Compact of Free Association, the US will provide $1.3 billion in
  grant aid during the period 1986-2001

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 960

Telephone system:
  domestic: islands interconnected by shortwave radiotelephone (used
  mostly for government purposes)
  international: satellite earth stations--4 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 1, shortwave 1

Radios: 17,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 1,290 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 240 km
  paved: 42 km
  unpaved: 198 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Colonia (Yap), Kolonia (Pohnpei), Lele, Moen

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: Federated States of Micronesia (FSM) is a
  sovereign, self-governing state in free association with the US; FSM
  is totally dependent on the US for its defense



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Midway Islands
--------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  one-third of the way from Honolulu to Tokyo

Geographic coordinates: 28 13 N, 177 22 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 6.2 sq km
  land: 6.2 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Eastern Island, Sand Island, and Spit Island

Area--comparative: about nine times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 15 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical, but moderated by prevailing easterly winds

Terrain: low, nearly level

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 4 m

Natural resources: wildlife, terrestrial and aquatic

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: a coral atoll managed as a national wildlife
  refuge and open to the public for wildlife-related recreation in the
  form of wildlife observation and photography, sport fishing,
  snorkeling, and scuba diving



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Midway Islands

Data code: MQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US; formerly
  administered from Washington, DC, by the US Navy, under Naval
  Facilities Engineering Command, Pacific Division; this facility has
  been operationally closed since 10 September 1993; on 31 October
  1996, through a presidential executive order, the jurisdiction and
  control of the atoll was transferred to the Fish and Wildlife
  Service of the US Department of the Interior as part of the National
  Wildlife Refuge system

Capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is based on providing support
  services for the national wildlife refuge activities located on the
  islands. All food and manufactured goods must be imported.



Transportation



Highways:
  total: 32 km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Pipelines: 7.8 km

Ports and harbors: Sand Island

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Moldova
-------





Geography



Location: Eastern Europe, northeast of Romania

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 29 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 33,843 sq km
  land: 33,371 sq km
  water: 472 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,389 km
  border countries: Romania 450 km, Ukraine 939 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: moderate winters, warm summers

Terrain: rolling steppe, gradual slope south to Black Sea

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Nistru River 2 m
  highest point: Mount Balaneshty 430 m

Natural resources: lignite, phosphorites, gypsum

Land use:
  arable land: 53%
  permanent crops: 14%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 13%
  other: 7% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,110 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: landslides (57 cases in 1998)

Environment--current issues: heavy use of agricultural chemicals,
  including banned pesticides such as DDT, has contaminated soil and
  groundwater; extensive soil erosion from poor farming methods

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 4,460,838 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 555,096; female 535,625)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 1,408,334; female 1,529,542)
  65 years and over: 10% (male 160,317; female 271,924) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.1% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.43 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.5 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.59 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.91 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 43.52 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.39 years
  male: 59.76 years
  female: 69.24 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.86 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Moldovan(s)
  adjective: Moldovan

Ethnic groups: Moldavian/Romanian 64.5%, Ukrainian 13.8%, Russian
  13%, Gagauz 3.5%, Jewish 1.5%, Bulgarian 2%, other 1.7% (1989 est.)
  note: internal disputes with ethnic Russians in the Transdniester
  region

Religions: Eastern Orthodox 98.5%, Jewish 1.5%, Baptist (only
  about 1,000 members) (1991)
  note: the large majority of churchgoers are ethnic Moldovans

Languages: Moldovan (official, virtually the same as the Romanian
  language), Russian, Gagauz (a Turkish dialect)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 96%
  male: 99%
  female: 94% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Moldova
  conventional short form: Moldova
  local long form: Republica Moldova
  local short form: none
  former: Soviet Socialist Republic of Moldova; Moldavia

Data code: MD

Government type: republic

Capital: Chisinau

Administrative divisions: 40 raions (singular--raion) and 4
  municipalities*; Anenii Noi, Balti*, Basarabeasca, Bender*, Briceni,
  Cahul, Cainari, Calarasi, Camenca, Cantemir, Causeni, Ceadir-Lunga,
  Chisinau*, Cimislia, Comrat, Criuleni, Donduseni, Drochia, Dubasari,
  Edinet, Falesti, Floresti, Glodeni, Grigoriopol, Hincesti, Ialoveni,
  Leova, Nisporeni, Ocnita, Orhei, Rezina, Ribnita, Riscani, Singerei,
  Slobozia, Soldanesti, Soroca, Stefan-Voda, Straseni, Taraclia,
  Telenesti, Tiraspol*, Ungheni, Vulcanesti
  note: in accordance with the Law on Territorial Administrative
  Reform, the 40 raions have been reorganized into 9 counties
  (judets), one municipality*, and 2 territorial units**: Baltsi,
  Cahul, Chisinau, Chisinau*, Dubossary district (Transnistria)**,
  Edinets, Gagauzia**, Lapushna, Orhei, Soroca, Tighina, Ungheni; the
  status of the Dubossary district is still under negotiation

Independence: 27 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 August 1991

Constitution: new constitution adopted 28 July 1994; replaces old
  Soviet constitution of 1979

Legal system: based on civil law system; Constitutional Court
  reviews legality of legislative acts and governmental decisions of
  resolution; it is unclear if Moldova accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction but accepts many UN and Organization for Security and
  Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) documents

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Petru LUCINSCHI (since 15 January 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Ion CIUBUC (since 15 January
  1997) and four deputy prime ministers
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 17 November 1996; runoff election 1 December 1996
  (next to be held NA November 2000); following legislative elections,
  the leader of the majority party or leader of the majority coalition
  is usually elected prime minister by Parliament; names of deputy
  prime ministers are submitted by the prime minister for acceptance
  by the president
  election results: Petru LUCINSCHI ran against Mircea SNEGUR and was
  elected president; percent of vote--LUCINSCHI 54%, SNEGUR 46%; Prime
  Minister Ion CIUBUC was appointed by the president 15 January 1997
  and was elected by a parliamentary vote of 75-15 on 24 January 1997

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Parlamentul (101
  seats; members are directly elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 22 March 1998 (next to be held spring 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PCM 30%, CDM 19%, PMDP
  18%, PFD 9%; seats by party--PCM 40, CDM 26, PMDP 24, PFD 11
  note: the comparative breakdown of seats by faction is approximate

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Communist Party or PCM [Vladimir
  VORONIN, first chairman]; The Democratic Convention or CDM (includes
  the Christian Democratic Popular Front or FPCD and the Party of
  chairman]; Bloc for a Democratic and Prosperous Moldova or PMDP

Political pressure groups and leaders: The Ecology Movement of
  president]; Liberal Convention of Moldova (now the Liberal Party);

International organization participation: ACCT, BIS, BSEC, CCC,
  CE, CEI, CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, ILO, IMF, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ceslav CIOBANU
  chancery: 2101 S Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Rudolf Villem PERINA
  embassy: Strada Alexei Mateevicie, #103, Chisinau 2009
  mailing address: use embassy street address; pouch address--American
  Embassy Chisinau, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7080

Flag description: same color scheme as Romania--three equal
  vertical bands of blue (hoist side), yellow, and red; emblem in
  center of flag is of a Roman eagle of gold outlined in black with a
  red beak and talons carrying a yellow cross in its beak and a green
  olive branch in its right talons and a yellow scepter in its left
  talons; on its breast is a shield divided horizontally red over blue
  with a stylized ox head, star, rose, and crescent all in
  black-outlined yellow



Economy



Economy--overview: Moldova enjoys a favorable climate and good
  farmland but has no major mineral deposits. As a result, the economy
  depends heavily on agriculture, featuring fruits, vegetables, wine,
  and tobacco. Moldova must import all of its supplies of oil, coal,
  and natural gas, largely from Russia. Energy shortages contributed
  to sharp production declines after the breakup of the Soviet Union
  in 1991. The Moldovan Government has recently been making progress
  on an ambitious economic reform agenda. As part of its reform
  efforts, Moldova introduced a stable convertible currency, freed all
  prices, stopped issuing preferential credits to state enterprises
  and backed steady land privatization, removed export controls, and
  freed interest rates. In 1998, the economic troubles of Russia, with
  whom Moldova conducts 55% of its trade, was a major cause of the
  8.6% drop in GDP. In 1999, the IMF resumed payment on Moldova's
  Extended Fund Facility, which had been suspended since 1997. The IMF
  intends to grant $135 million in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$10 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -8.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 30%
  industry: 29%
  services: 41% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.7%
  highest 10%: 25.8% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 18.3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.7 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 40.2%, industry 14.3%,
  other 45.5% (1998)

Unemployment rate: 2% (includes only officially registered
  unemployed; large numbers of underemployed workers) (September 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $536 million
  expenditures: $594 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: food processing, agricultural machinery, foundry
  equipment, refrigerators and freezers, washing machines, hosiery,
  sugar, vegetable oil, shoes, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 8.325 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 96.1%
  hydro: 3.9%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.825 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 3.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.6 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: vegetables, fruits, wine, grain, sugar
  beets, sunflower seed, tobacco; beef, milk

Exports: $633 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: foodstuffs, wine, tobacco, textiles and
  footwear, machinery

Exports--partners: Russia 58%, Kazakhstan, Ukraine, Belarus,
  Romania, US, Germany, Italy (1997)

Imports: $1.02 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: oil, gas, coal, steel, machinery, chemical
  products, metals, metal products, foodstuffs, automobiles, other
  consumer durables

Imports--partners: Russia 26%, Ukraine 20%, Belarus, Romania,
  Germany, Italy (1997)

Debt--external: more than $1.2 billion (February 1999)

Economic aid--recipient: $100.8 million (1995); note?$547 million
  from the IMF and World Bank (1992-99)

Currency: the Moldovan leu (MLD) (plural lei) was introduced in
  late 1993

Exchange rates: lei (MLD) per US$1 (end of period)--8.3226
  (December 1998), 8.3395 (1998), 4.6605 (1997), 4.6500 (1996), 4.4990
  (1995), 4.2700 (1994); period average--4.6758 (January 1998), 4.6236
  (1997), 4.6045 (1996), 4.4958 (1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 600,000 (1998 est.)

Telephone system: the Ministry of Information, Computers, and
  Telecommunications controls telecommunications; the carrier is
  Modtelecom
  domestic: local--Chisinau has a fiber-optic loop and one cellular GSM
  provider; the waiting list for telephones is long; local service
  outside Chisinau is poor; intercity--Moldova's two fiber-optic
  segments form a synchronous digital hierarchy ring through Romania's
  system; an analog backbone system runs from south to north in Moldova
  international: two fiber-optic segments provide connectivity to
  Romania; worldwide service can be available to Moldova through this
  infrastructure; additional analog lines are to Russia; Intelsat,
  Eutelsat, and Intersputnik earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 8, shortwave NA (1999)

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 1 national station, 3 private
  stations, 15 small local stations outside Chisinau (1998)

Televisions: 93 televisions/100 people (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,328 km
  broad gauge: 1,328 km 1.520-m gauge (1992)

Highways:
  total: 12,300 km
  paved: 10,738 km
  unpaved: 1,562 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 424 km (1994)

Pipelines: natural gas 310 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 26 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 8
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  under 914 m: 3 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 8 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Air and Air Defense Forces,
  Republic Security Forces (internal and border troops)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,151,674 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 908,347 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 38,666 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $6.3 million (FY99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: separatist Transdniester region,
  comprising the area between the Nistru (Dniester) River and Ukraine,
  has its own de facto government, dominated by Moldovan Slavs

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of opium poppy and cannabis,
  mostly for CIS consumption; transshipment point for illicit drugs
  from Southwest Asia via Central Asia to Russia, Western Europe and
  possibly the United States



======================================================================




@Monaco
------





Geography



Location: Western Europe, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, on the
  southern coast of France, near the border with Italy

Geographic coordinates: 43 44 N, 7 24 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 1.95 sq km
  land: 1.95 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about three times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 4.4 km
  border countries: France 4.4 km

Coastline: 4.1 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean with mild, wet winters and hot, dry summers

Terrain: hilly, rugged, rocky

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mont Agel 140 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (urban area)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: second smallest independent state in world (after
  Holy See); almost entirely urban



People



Population: 32,149 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 2,723; female 2,645)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 10,014; female 10,530)
  65 years and over: 19% (male 2,302; female 3,935) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.31% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.7 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 11.79 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.17 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.59 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.88 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.47 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.58 years
  male: 75 years
  female: 82.35 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.7 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Monegasque(s) or Monacan(s)
  adjective: Monegasque or Monacan

Ethnic groups: French 47%, Monegasque 16%, Italian 16%, other 21%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%

Languages: French (official), English, Italian, Monegasque

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Principality of Monaco
  conventional short form: Monaco
  local long form: Principaute de Monaco
  local short form: Monaco

Data code: MN

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Monaco

Administrative divisions: none; there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are four quarters (quartiers, singular--quartier); Fontvieille, La
  Condamine, Monaco-Ville, Monte-Carlo

Independence: 1419 (beginning of the rule by the House of
  Grimaldi)

National holiday: National Day, 19 November

Constitution: 17 December 1962

Legal system: based on French law; has not accepted compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Prince RAINIER III (since 9 May 1949); Heir Apparent
  Prince ALBERT Alexandre Louis Pierre, son of the monarch (born 14
  March 1958)
  head of government: Minister of State Michel LEVEQUE (since 3
  February 1997)
  cabinet: Council of Government is under the authority of the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; minister of state
  appointed by the monarch from a list of three French national
  candidates presented by the French Government

Legislative branch: unicameral National Council or Conseil
  National (18 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 1 and 8 February 1998 (next to be held NA
  January 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--National and Democratic Union 18

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal Supreme, judges named
  by the monarch on the basis of nominations by the National Council

Political parties and leaders: National and Democratic Union or

International organization participation: ACCT, ECE, IAEA, ICAO,
  ICRM, IFRCS, IHO, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, OPCW,
  OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Monaco does not have an
  embassy in the US
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Monaco; the US Consul General in Marseille (France) is
  accredited to Monaco

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  white; similar to the flag of Indonesia which is longer and the flag
  of Poland which is white (top) and red



Economy



Economy--overview: Monaco, situated on the French Mediterranean
  coast, is a popular resort, attracting tourists to its casino and
  pleasant climate. The Principality has successfully sought to
  diversify into services and small, high-value-added, nonpolluting
  industries. The state has no income tax and low business taxes and
  thrives as a tax haven both for individuals who have established
  residence and for foreign companies that have set up businesses and
  offices. The state retains monopolies in a number of sectors,
  including tobacco, the telephone network, and the postal service.
  About 55% of Monaco's annual revenue comes from value-added taxes on
  hotels, banks, and the industrial sector. Living standards are high,
  roughly comparable to those in prosperous French metropolitan areas.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$800 million (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$25,000 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 30,540 (January 1994)

Unemployment rate: 3.1% (1994)

Budget:
  revenues: $518 million
  expenditures: $531 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: none

Exports: $NA; full customs integration with France, which
  collects and rebates Monegasque trade duties; also participates in
  EU market system through customs union with France

Imports: $NA; full customs integration with France, which
  collects and rebates Monegasque trade duties; also participates in
  EU market system through customs union with France

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 53,180 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: automatic telephone system
  domestic: NA
  international: no satellite earth stations; connected by cable into
  the French communications system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 33,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (1997)

Televisions: 24,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1.7 km
  standard gauge: 1.7 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 50 km
  paved: 50 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Monaco

Merchant marine: none

Airports: linked to airport in Nice, France, by helicopter service



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Mongolia
--------





Geography



Location: Northern Asia, between China and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 105 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 1.565 million sq km
  land: 1.565 million sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Alaska

Land boundaries:
  total: 8,114 km
  border countries: China 4,673 km, Russia 3,441 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: desert; continental (large daily and seasonal
  temperature ranges)

Terrain: vast semidesert and desert plains; mountains in west and
  southwest; Gobi Desert in southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Hoh Nuur 518 m
  highest point: Tavan Bogd Uul 4,374 m

Natural resources: oil, coal, copper, molybdenum, tungsten,
  phosphates, tin, nickel, zinc, wolfram, fluorspar, gold

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 80%
  forests and woodland: 9%
  other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms can occur in the spring; grassland
  fires

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water
  resources; policies of the former communist regime promoting rapid
  urbanization and industrial growth have raised concerns about their
  negative effects on the environment; the burning of soft coal and
  the concentration of factories in Ulaanbaatar have severely polluted
  the air; deforestation, overgrazing, the converting of virgin land
  to agricultural production have increased soil erosion from wind and
  rain; desertification; mining activities have also had a deleterious
  effect on the environment

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked; strategic location between China and
  Russia



People



Population: 2,617,379 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 36% (male 480,087; female 464,609)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 787,222; female 787,405)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 42,219; female 55,837) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.45% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.51 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.97 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 64.63 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 61.81 years
  male: 59.71 years
  female: 64.02 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.6 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mongolian(s)
  adjective: Mongolian

Ethnic groups: Mongol 90%, Kazakh 4%, Chinese 2%, Russian 2%,
  other 2%

Religions: predominantly Tibetan Buddhist, Muslim 4%
  note: previously limited religious activity because of communist
  regime

Languages: Khalkha Mongol 90%, Turkic, Russian, Chinese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 82.9%
  male: 88.6%
  female: 77.2% (1988 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Mongolia
  local long form: none
  local short form: Mongol Uls
  former: Outer Mongolia

Data code: MG

Government type: republic

Capital: Ulaanbaatar

Administrative divisions: 18 provinces (aymguud, singular--aymag)
  and 3 municipalities* (hotuud, singular--hot); Arhangay, Bayanhongor,
  Bayan-Olgiy, Bulgan, Darhan*, Dornod, Dornogovi, Dundgovi, Dzavhan,
  Erdenet*, Govi-Altay, Hentiy, Hovd, Hovsgol, Omnogovi, Ovorhangay,
  Selenge, Suhbaatar, Tov, Ulaanbaatar*, Uvs

Independence: 13 March 1921 (from China)

National holiday: National Day, 11 July (1921)

Constitution: 12 February 1992

Legal system: blend of Russian, Chinese, and Turkish systems of
  law; no constitutional provision for judicial review of legislative
  acts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Natsagiyn BAGABANDI (since 20 June 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Janlavyn NARANTSATSRALT (since 9
  December 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the State Great Hural in consultation
  with the president
  elections: president nominated by parties in the State Great Hural
  and elected by popular vote for a four-year term; election last held
  18 May 1997 (next to be held summer 2001); following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party or majority coalition is
  usually elected prime minister by the State Great Hural
  election results: Natsagiyn BAGABANDI elected president; percent of
  vote--Natsagiyn BAGABANDI (MPRP) 60.8%, Punsalmaagiyn OCHIRBAT (MNDP
  and MSDP) 29.8%, Jambyn GOMBOJAV (MUTP) 6.6%; following five months
  of political deadlock which left Mongolia without a working
  government, Janlavyn NARANTSATSRALT was elected prime minister on 9
  December 1998 by a vote in the State Great Hural of 36 to 21, with
  nine abstentions and 10 absentees

Legislative branch: unicameral State Great Hural (76 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 30 June 1996 (next to be held NA June 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--DUC 66%, MPRP 33%, MCP
  1%; seats by party--DUC 50 (MNDP 34, MSDP 13, independents 3), MPRP
  25, MCP 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, serves as appeals court for
  people's and provincial courts, but to date rarely overturns
  verdicts of lower courts, judges are nominated by the General
  Council of Courts for approval by the State Great Hural

Political parties and leaders: Mongolian People's Revolutionary
  chairman], Mongolian Social Democratic Party or MSDP

International organization participation: AsDB, ASEAN (observer),
  CCC, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, OPCW,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jalbuugiyn CHOINHOR
  chancery: 2833 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Alphonse F. LA PORTA
  embassy: inner north side of the Big Ring, just west of the Selbe
  Gol, Ulaanbaatar
  mailing address: c/o American Embassy Beijing, Micro Region 11, Big
  Ring Road, C.P.O. 1021, Ulaanbaatar 13; PSC 461, Box 300, FPO AP
  96521-0002

Flag description: three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist
  side), blue, and red; centered on the hoist-side red band in yellow
  is the national emblem ("soyombo"--a columnar arrangement of abstract
  and geometric representation for fire, sun, moon, earth, water, and
  the yin-yang symbol)



Economy



Economy--overview: The government has embraced free-market
  economics, freezing spending, easing price controls, liberalizing
  domestic and international trade. Mongolia's severe climate,
  scattered population, and wide expanses of unproductive land,
  however, have constrained economic development. Economic activity
  traditionally has been based on agriculture and the breeding of
  livestock. In past years, extensive mineral resources had been
  developed with Soviet support; total Soviet assistance at its height
  amounted to 30% of GDP, but disappeared almost overnight in 1990-91.
  The mining and processing of coal, copper, molybdenum, tin,
  tungsten, and gold account for a large part of industrial
  production. The Mongolian leadership has been soliciting support
  from foreign donors and economic growth picked up in 1997 and 1998
  after stalling in 1996 due to a series of natural disasters and
  declines in world prices of copper and cashmere. Mongolia joined the
  World Trade Organization in 1997.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,250 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 31%
  industry: 35%
  services: 34% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 36.3% (1995 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.9%
  highest 10%: 24.5% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6% (1998)

Labor force: 1.115 million (mid-1993 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: primarily herding/agricultural

Unemployment rate: 4.5% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $260 million (1998)
  expenditures: $330 million (1998)

Industries: copper, construction materials, mining (particularly
  coal); food and beverage, processing of animal products

Industrial production growth rate: 4.5% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 2.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 2.681 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 381 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, potatoes, forage crops;
  sheep, goats, cattle, camels, horses

Exports: $316.8 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: copper, livestock, animal products,
  cashmere, wool, hides, fluorspar, other nonferrous metals

Exports--partners: China 30.1%, Switzerland 21.5%, Russia 12.1%,
  South Korea 9.7%, US 8.1% (1998)

Imports: $472.4 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, fuels, food
  products, industrial consumer goods, chemicals, building materials,
  sugar, tea

Imports--partners: Russia 30.6%, China 13.3%, Japan 11.7%, South
  Korea 7.5%, US 6.9% (1998)

Debt--external: $500 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $250 million (1998 est.)

Currency: 1 tughrik (Tug) = 100 mongos

Exchange rates: tughriks (Tug) per US$1--902 (January 1999),
  840.83 (1998), 789.99 (1997), 548.40 (1996), 448.61 (1995), 412.72
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 93,600 (1998)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean
  Region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 220,000

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are 18
  provincial repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 120,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,928 km
  broad gauge: 1,928 km 1.524-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
  total: 46,470 km
  paved: 3,730 km
  unpaved: 42,740 km (1997 est.)
  note: much of the unpaved rural road system consists of rough
  cross-country tracks

Waterways: 397 km of principal routes (1988)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 34 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 8
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  under 914 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 26
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 5 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Mongolian People's Army (includes Internal
  Security Forces and Frontier Guards), Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 702,141 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 457,270 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 28,613 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $20.3 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Montserrat
----------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, southeast of
  Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 16 45 N, 62 12 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 100 sq km
  land: 100 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.6 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 40 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; little daily or seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: volcanic islands, mostly mountainous, with small coastal
  lowland

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Chances Peak 914 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 20%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 10%
  forests and woodland: 40%
  other: 30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: severe hurricanes (June to November); volcanic
  eruptions (full-scale eruptions of the Soufriere Hills volcano
  occurred during 1996-97)

Environment--current issues: land erosion occurs on slopes that
  have been cleared for cultivation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 12,853 (July 1999 est.)
  note: demographic figures include an estimated 8,000 refugees who
  left the island following the resumption of volcanic activity in
  July 1995

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.21% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.87 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.88 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.94 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.56 years
  male: 73.79 years
  female: 77.37 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.78 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Montserratian(s)
  adjective: Montserratian

Ethnic groups: black, white

Religions: Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Pentecostal,
  Seventh-Day Adventist, other Christian denominations

Languages: English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 97%
  male: 97%
  female: 97% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Montserrat

Data code: MH

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Plymouth (abandoned in 1997 due to volcanic activity;
  interim government buildings have been built at Brades, in the
  Carr's Bay/Little Bay vicinity at the northwest end of Montserrat)

Administrative divisions: 3 parishes; Saint Anthony, Saint
  Georges, Saint Peter's

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen
  (second Saturday of June)

Constitution: present constitution came into force 19 December
  1989

Legal system: English common law and statutory law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor Anthony John ABBOTT (since NA September 1997)
  head of government: Chief Minister David BRANDT (since 22 August
  1997)
  cabinet: Executive Council consists of the governor, the chief
  minister, three other ministers, the attorney general, and the
  finance secretary
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by the
  monarch; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
  party usually becomes chief minister; note--as a result of the last
  election, a coalition party was formed between NPP, NDP, and one of
  the independent candidates

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (11 seats, 7
  popularly elected; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 11 November 1996 (next to be held by NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PPA 2,
  MNR 2, NPP 1, independent 2

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based in Saint
  Lucia) (one judge of the Supreme Court is a resident of the islands
  and presides over the High Court)

Political parties and leaders: National Progressive Party or NPP

International organization participation: Caricom, CDB, ECLAC
  (associate), ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau), OECS, WCL

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Montserratian coat of arms centered in
  the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms features a woman
  standing beside a yellow harp with her arm around a black cross



Economy



Economy--overview: Severe volcanic activity, which began in July
  1995, put a damper on this small, open economy throughout 1996-98. A
  catastrophic eruption in June 1997 closed the air and sea ports,
  causing further economic and social dislocation. Two-thirds of the
  12,000 inhabitants fled the island. Some began to return in 1998,
  but lack of housing limited the number. The agriculture sector
  continued to be affected by the lack of suitable land for farming
  and the destruction of crops. Construction was the dominant activity
  in 1997 and 1998. GDP probably declined again in 1998. Prospects for
  the economy depend largely on developments in relation to the
  volcano and on public sector construction activity. The UK has
  committed about $100 million in 1996-98 to help reconstruct the
  economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$36 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -18.5% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5.4%
  industry: 13.6%
  services: 81% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1997)

Labor force: 4,521 (1992); note--later substantially lowered by
  flight of people from volcanic activity

Labor force--by occupation: community, social, and personal
  services 40.5%, construction 13.5%, trade, restaurants, and hotels
  12.3%, manufacturing 10.5%, agriculture, forestry, and fishing 8.8%,
  other 14.4% (1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $31.4 million
  expenditures: $31.6 million, including capital expenditures of $8.4
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: tourism, rum, textiles, electronic appliances

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cabbages, carrots, cucumbers, tomatoes,
  onions, peppers; livestock products

Exports: $8.2 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: electronic components, plastic bags,
  apparel, hot peppers, live plants, cattle

Exports--partners: US, Ireland

Imports: $26.1 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transportation equipment,
  foodstuffs, manufactured goods, fuels, lubricants, and related
  materials

Imports--partners: NA

Debt--external: $8.9 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $9.8 million (1995); note?about $100
  million (1996-98) in reconstruction aid from the UK

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 3,000

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 6,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 269 km
  paved: 203 km
  unpaved: 66 km (1995)

Ports and harbors: Plymouth (abandoned), Little Bay (anchorages
  and ferry landing), Carr's Bay

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Police Force

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Morocco
-------





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean and
  the Mediterranean Sea, between Algeria and Western Sahara

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 5 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 446,550 sq km
  land: 446,300 sq km
  water: 250 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,017.9 km
  border countries: Algeria 1,559 km, Western Sahara 443 km, Spain
  (Ceuta) 6.3 km, Spain (Melilla) 9.6 km

Coastline: 1,835 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Mediterranean, becoming more extreme in the interior

Terrain: northern coast and interior are mountainous with large
  areas of bordering plateaus, intermontane valleys, and rich coastal
  plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sebkha Tah -55 m
  highest point: Jebel Toubkal 4,165 m

Natural resources: phosphates, iron ore, manganese, lead, zinc,
  fish, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 21%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 47%
  forests and woodland: 20%
  other: 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,580 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: northern mountains geologically unstable and
  subject to earthquakes; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: land degradation/desertification
  (soil erosion resulting from farming of marginal areas, overgrazing,
  destruction of vegetation); water supplies contaminated by raw
  sewage; siltation of reservoirs; oil pollution of coastal waters

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: strategic location along Strait of Gibraltar



People



Population: 29,661,636 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 36% (male 5,409,322; female 5,208,742)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 8,773,625; female 8,922,976)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 619,164; female 727,807) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.84% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.78 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.12 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.27 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 50.96 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.87 years
  male: 66.85 years
  female: 70.99 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.24 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Moroccan(s)
  adjective: Moroccan

Ethnic groups: Arab-Berber 99.1%, other 0.7%, Jewish 0.2%

Religions: Muslim 98.7%, Christian 1.1%, Jewish 0.2%

Languages: Arabic (official), Berber dialects, French often the
  language of business, government, and diplomacy

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 43.7%
  male: 56.6%
  female: 31% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Morocco
  conventional short form: Morocco
  local long form: Al Mamlakah al Maghribiyah
  local short form: Al Maghrib

Data code: MO

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Rabat

Administrative divisions: 37 provinces and 2 wilayas*; Agadir, Al
  Hoceima, Azilal, Beni Mellal, Ben Slimane, Boulemane, Casablanca*,
  Chaouen, El Jadida, El Kelaa des Srarhna, Er Rachidia, Essaouira,
  Fes, Figuig, Guelmim, Ifrane, Kenitra, Khemisset, Khenifra,
  Khouribga, Laayoune, Larache, Marrakech, Meknes, Nador, Ouarzazate,
  Oujda, Rabat-Sale*, Safi, Settat, Sidi Kacem, Tanger, Tan-Tan,
  Taounate, Taroudannt, Tata, Taza, Tetouan, Tiznit
  note: three additional provinces of Ad Dakhla (Oued Eddahab),
  Boujdour, and Es Smara as well as parts of Tan-Tan and Laayoune fall
  within Moroccan-claimed Western Sahara;
  decentralization/regionalization law passed by the legislature in
  March 1997 creating many new provinces/regions; specific details and
  scope of the reorganization not yet available

Independence: 2 March 1956 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 3 March (1961) (anniversary of
  King HASSAN II's accession to the throne)

Constitution: 10 March 1972, revised 4 September 1992, amended
  (to create bicameral legislature) September 1996

Legal system: based on Islamic law and French and Spanish civil
  law system; judicial review of legislative acts in Constitutional
  Chamber of Supreme Court

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King HASSAN II (since 3 March 1961)
  head of government: Prime Minister Abderrahmane YOUSSOUFI (since 14
  March 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch following legislative elections

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of an upper
  house or Chamber of Counselors (270 seats; members elected
  indirectly by local councils, professional organizations, and labor
  syndicates for nine-year terms; one-third of the members are renewed
  every three years) and a lower house or Chamber of Representatives
  (325 seats; members elected by popular vote for five-year terms)
  elections: Chamber of Counselors--last held 5 December 1997 (next to
  be held NA December 2000); Chamber of Representatives--last held 14
  November 1997 (next to be held NA November 2002)
  election results: Chamber of Counselors--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--RNI 42, MDS 33, UC 28, MP 27, PND 21, IP 21, USFP 16,
  MNP 15, UT 13, FFD 12, CDT 11, UTM 8, PPS 7, PSD 4, PDI 4, UGTM 3,
  UNMT 2, other 3; Chamber of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--USFP 57, UC 50, RNI 46, MP 40, MDS 32, IP
  32, MNP 19, PND 10, MPCD 9, PPS 9, FFD 9, PSD 5, OADP 4, PA 2, PDI 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed on the
  recommendation of the Supreme Council of the Judiciary, presided
  over by the monarch

Political parties and leaders:
  ARCHANE]
  labor unions and community organizations (indirect elections only):

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT
  (associate), AfDB, AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, CCC, EBRD, ECA, FAO, G-77,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO
  (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OIC, OPCW, OSCE
  (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mohamed BENAISSA
  chancery: 1601 21st Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edward M. GABRIEL
  embassy: 2 Avenue de Marrakech, Rabat
  mailing address: PSC 74, Box 3, APO AE 09718
  consulate(s) general: Casablanca

Flag description: red with a green pentacle (five-pointed, linear
  star) known as Solomon's seal in the center of the flag; green is
  the traditional color of Islam



Economy



Economy--overview: Morocco faces the problems typical of
  developing countries--restraining government spending, reducing
  constraints on private activity and foreign trade, and keeping
  inflation within manageable bounds. Since the early 1980s the
  government has pursued an economic program toward these objectives
  with the support of the IMF, the World Bank, and the Paris Club of
  creditors. The dirham is now fully convertible for current account
  transactions; reforms of the financial sector have been implemented;
  and state enterprises are slowly being privatized. Drought
  conditions in 1997 depressed activity in the key agricultural
  sector, holding down exports and contributing to a 2.2% contraction
  in real GDP. Favorable rainfalls in the fall of 1997 have led to
  6.8% real GDP growth in 1998. Growth is forecast to be about 4.0% in
  1999. Formidable long-term challenges include: servicing the
  external debt; preparing the economy for freer trade with the EU;
  and improving education and attracting foreign investment to improve
  living standards and job propects for Morocco's youthful population.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$107 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14%
  industry: 33%
  services: 53% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 13.1% (1990-91 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.8%
  highest 10%: 30.5% (1990-91)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2%-3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 11 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 50%, services 26%,
  industry 15%, other 9% (1985)

Unemployment rate: 19% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $8.4 billion
  expenditures: $10 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.8
  billion (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: phosphate rock mining and processing, food
  processing, leather goods, textiles, construction, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 4.1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 11.5 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 95.65%
  hydro: 4.35%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 12.52 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.02 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: barley, wheat, citrus, wine, vegetables,
  olives; livestock

Exports: $7 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: food and beverages 30%, semiprocessed goods
  23%, consumer goods 21%, phosphates 17% (1995 est.)

Exports--partners: EU 63%, Japan 7.7%, India 6.6%, US 3.4%, Libya
  3.4% (1996 est.)

Imports: $10 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: semiprocessed goods 26%, capital goods 25%,
  food and beverages 18%, fuel and lubricants 15%, consumer goods 12%,
  raw materials 4% (1995 est.)

Imports--partners: EU 57%, US 6.6%, Saudi Arabia 5.3%, Brazil 2.8%
  (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $20.9 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $565.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Moroccan dirham (DH) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Moroccan dirhams (DH) per US$1--9.320 (January
  1999), 9.604 (1998), 9.527 (1997), 8.716 (1996), 8.540 (1995), 9.203
  (1994)

Fiscal year: July 1-June 30



Communications



Telephones: 1,312,596 (1999 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: good system composed of open-wire lines, cables, and
  microwave radio relay links; principal centers are Casablanca and
  Rabat; secondary centers are Fes, Marrakech, Oujda, Tangier, and
  Tetouan
  international: 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--2
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; microwave radio relay to
  Gibraltar, Spain, and Western Sahara; coaxial cable and microwave
  radio relay to Algeria; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 22, FM 7, shortwave 5 (1998 est.)

Radios: 5.1 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 26 (in addition, there are 35
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.21 million (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,907 km
  standard gauge: 1,907 km 1.435-m gauge (1,003 km electrified; 246 km
  double track) (1994)

Highways:
  total: 60,626 km
  paved: 30,556 km (including 219 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 30,070 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 362 km; petroleum products 491 km
  (abandoned); natural gas 241 km

Ports and harbors: Agadir, El Jadida, Casablanca, El Jorf Lasfar,
  Kenitra, Mohammedia, Nador, Rabat, Safi, Tangier; also
  Spanish-controlled Ceuta and Melilla

Merchant marine:
  total: 40 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 217,869 GRT/263,033 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 8, chemical tanker 6, container 3, oil tanker
  3, passenger 1, refrigerated cargo 10, roll-on/roll-off cargo 8,
  short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 69 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 26
  over 3,047 m: 11
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 43
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 21
  under 914 m: 11 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Armed Forces (includes Army, Navy, Air
  Force), Gendarmerie, Auxiliary Forces

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 7,735,597 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,888,595 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 320,040 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.3611 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.8% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims and administers Western Sahara,
  but sovereignty is unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a
  referendum on the issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in
  effect since September 1991; Spain controls five places of
  sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of
  Morocco--the coastal enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla which Morocco
  contests, as well as the islands of Penon de Alhucemas, Penon de
  Velez de la Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of hashish; trafficking on the
  increase for both domestic and international drug markets; shipments
  of hashish mostly directed to Western Europe; transit point for
  cocaine from South America destined for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Mozambique
----------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, bordering the Mozambique Channel,
  between South Africa and Tanzania

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 S, 35 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 801,590 sq km
  land: 784,090 sq km
  water: 17,500 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,571 km
  border countries: Malawi 1,569 km, South Africa 491 km, Swaziland
  105 km, Tanzania 756 km, Zambia 419 km, Zimbabwe 1,231 km

Coastline: 2,470 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical to subtropical

Terrain: mostly coastal lowlands, uplands in center, high
  plateaus in northwest, mountains in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Monte Binga 2,436 m

Natural resources: coal, titanium, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 4%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 56%
  forests and woodland: 18%
  other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,180 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe droughts and floods occur in central and
  southern provinces; devastating cyclones

Environment--current issues: a long civil war and recurrent
  drought in the hinterlands have resulted in increased migration of
  the population to urban and coastal areas with adverse environmental
  consequences; desertification; pollution of surface and coastal
  waters

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 19,124,335 (July 1999 est.)
  note: the 1997 Mozambican census reported a population of
  16,542,800; other estimates range as low as 16.9 million

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 4,236,545; female 4,325,586)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 4,941,048; female 5,181,282)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 182,857; female 257,017) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.54% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 42.75 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 17.31 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 117.56 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 45.89 years
  male: 44.73 years
  female: 47.09 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.88 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Mozambican(s)
  adjective: Mozambican

Ethnic groups: indigenous tribal groups 99.66% (Shangaan, Chokwe,
  Manyika, Sena, Makua, and others), Europeans 0.06%, Euro-Africans
  0.2%, Indians 0.08%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 50%, Christian 30%, Muslim 20%

Languages: Portuguese (official), indigenous dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 40.1%
  male: 57.7%
  female: 23.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Mozambique
  conventional short form: Mozambique
  local long form: Republica de Mocambique
  local short form: Mocambique

Data code: MZ

Government type: republic

Capital: Maputo

Administrative divisions: 10 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia); Cabo Delgado, Gaza, Inhambane, Manica, Maputo,
  Nampula, Niassa, Sofala, Tete, Zambezia

Independence: 25 June 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 June (1975)

Constitution: 30 November 1990

Legal system: based on Portuguese civil law system and customary
  law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO (since 6 November
  1986); note--before being popularly elected, CHISSANO was elected
  president by Frelimo's Central Committee 4 November 1986 (reelected
  by the Committee 30 July 1989)
  head of government: Prime Minister Pascoal MOCUMBI (since NA
  December 1994)
  cabinet: Cabinet
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 27 October 1994 (next to be held NA October
  1999); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Joaquim Alberto CHISSANO elected president;
  percent of vote--Joaquim CHISSANO 53.3%, Afonso DHLAKAMA 33.3%

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the Republic or
  Assembleia da Republica (250 seats; members are directly elected by
  popular vote on a secret ballot to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 27-29 October 1994 (next to be held NA October
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Frelimo 44.33%, Renamo
  33.78%, DU 5.15%, other 16.74%; seats by party--Frelimo 129, Renamo
  112, DU 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the president
  and judges elected by the Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Front for the Liberation of
  Alberto CHISSANO, chairman]; Mozambique National Resistance
  secretary]; note--the DU may have broken up into the three parties
  that composed it--Liberal and Democratic Party of Mozambique,
  National Democratic Party, and National Party of Mozambique

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO
  (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, SADC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Marcos Geraldo NAMASHULUA
  chancery: Suite 570, 1990 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20036

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Bryan Dean CURRAN
  embassy: Avenida Kenneth Kuanda 193, Maputo
  mailing address: P. O. Box 783, Maputo

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  black, and yellow with a red isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side; the black band is edged in white; centered in the triangle is
  a yellow five-pointed star bearing a crossed rifle and hoe in black
  superimposed on an open white book



Economy



Economy--overview: Before the peace accord of October 1992,
  Mozambique's economy was devastated by a protracted civil war and
  socialist mismanagement. In 1994, it ranked as one of the poorest
  countries in the world. Since then, Mozambique has undertaken a
  series of economic reforms. Almost all aspects of the economy have
  been liberalized to some extent. More than 900 state enterprises
  have been privatized. Pending are tax and much needed commercial
  code reform, as well as greater private sector involvement in the
  transportation, telecommunications, and energy sectors. Since 1996,
  inflation has been low and foreign exchange rates stable. Albeit
  from a small base, Mozambique achieved one of the highest growth
  rates in the world in 1997-98. Still, the country depends on foreign
  assistance to balance the budget and to pay for a trade imbalance in
  which imports outnumber exports by three to one. The medium-term
  outlook for the country looks bright, as trade and transportation
  links to South Africa and the rest of the region are expected to
  improve and sizable foreign investments materialize. Among these
  investments are metal production (aluminum, steel), natural gas,
  power generation, agriculture (cotton, sugar), fishing, timber, and
  transportation services. Additional exports in these areas should
  bring in needed foreign exchange.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$16.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 11% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$900 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 35%
  industry: 13%
  services: 52% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -1.3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry 9.5%,
  services 5.5%, wage earners working abroad 5% (1993 est)

Unemployment rate: NA

Budget:
  revenues: $402 million
  expenditures: $799 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: food, beverages, chemicals (fertilizer, soap,
  paints), petroleum products, textiles, cement, glass, asbestos,
  tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 39% (1997)

Electricity--production: 426 million kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 1.11 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 685.6 million kWh (1997)

Agriculture--products: cotton, cashew nuts, sugarcane, tea,
  cassava (tapioca), corn, rice, tropical fruits; beef, poultry

Exports: $295 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: shrimp 40%, cashews, cotton, sugar, copra,
  citrus (1997)

Exports--partners: Spain 17%, South Africa 16%, Portugal 12%, US
  10%, Japan, Malawi, India, Zimbabwe (1996 est.)

Imports: $965 million (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: food, clothing, farm equipment, petroleum
  (1997)

Imports--partners: South Africa 55%, Zimbabwe 7%, Saudi Arabia 5%,
  Portugal 4%, US, Japan, India (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $5.7 billion (December 1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.115 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 metical (Mt) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: meticais (Mt) per US$1--12,394.0 (January 1999),
  11,874.6 (1998), 11.543.6 (1997), 11,293.8 (1996), 9,024.3 (1995),
  6,038.6 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 70,000 (1998 est.)

Telephone system: fair system of tropospheric scatter, open-wire
  lines, and microwave radio relay
  domestic: microwave radio relay and tropospheric scatter
  international: satellite earth stations--5 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean
  and 3 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 29, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 700,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 44,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,131 km
  narrow gauge: 2,988 km 1.067-m gauge; 143 km 0.762-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
  total: 30,400 km
  paved: 5,685 km
  unpaved: 24,715 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: about 3,750 km of navigable routes

Pipelines: crude oil 306 km; petroleum products 289 km
  note: not operating

Ports and harbors: Beira, Inhambane, Maputo, Nacala, Pemba,
  Quelimane

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,125 GRT/7,024
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 174 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 22
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 152
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 16
  914 to 1,523 m: 39
  under 914 m: 96 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Naval Command, Air and Air Defense
  Forces, Militia

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,385,483 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,526,447 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $72 million (FY97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.7% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: Southern African transit hub for South American
  cocaine probably destined for the European and US markets; producer
  of hashish and methaqualone



======================================================================




@Namibia
-------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, bordering the South Atlantic Ocean,
  between Angola and South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 22 00 S, 17 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 825,418 sq km
  land: 825,418 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than half the size of Alaska

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,824 km
  border countries: Angola 1,376 km, Botswana 1,360 km, South Africa
  855 km, Zambia 233 km

Coastline: 1,572 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; hot, dry; rainfall sparse and erratic

Terrain: mostly high plateau; Namib Desert along coast; Kalahari
  Desert in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Konigstein 2,606 m

Natural resources: diamonds, copper, uranium, gold, lead, tin,
  lithium, cadmium, zinc, salt, vanadium, natural gas, fish; suspected
  deposits of oil, natural gas, coal, iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 22%
  other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 60 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged periods of drought

Environment--current issues: very limited natural fresh water
  resources; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 1,648,270 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 366,030; female 358,105)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 424,879; female 435,116)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 26,787; female 37,353) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.57% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 35.63 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 19.92 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 65.94 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 41.26 years
  male: 41.64 years
  female: 40.87 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.94 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Namibian(s)
  adjective: Namibian

Ethnic groups: black 86%, white 6.6%, mixed 7.4%
  note: about 50% of the population belong to the Ovambo tribe and 9%
  to the Kavangos tribe; other ethnic groups are: Herero 7%, Damara
  7%, Nama 5%, Caprivian 4%, Bushmen 3%, Baster 2%, Tswana 0.5%

Religions: Christian 80% to 90% (Lutheran 50% at least, other
  Christian denominations 30%), native religions 10% to 20%

Languages: English 7% (official), Afrikaans common language of
  most of the population and about 60% of the white population, German
  32%, indigenous languages: Oshivambo, Herero, Nama

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 38%
  male: 45%
  female: 31% (1960 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Namibia
  conventional short form: Namibia

Data code: WA

Government type: republic

Capital: Windhoek

Administrative divisions: 13 regions; Caprivi, Erongo, Hardap,
  Karas, Khomas, Kunene, Ohangwena, Okavango, Omaheke, Omusati,
  Oshana, Oshikoto, Otjozondjupa

Independence: 21 March 1990 (from South African mandate)

National holiday: Independence Day, 21 March (1990)

Constitution: ratified 9 February 1990; effective 12 March 1990

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and 1990 constitution

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Sam NUJOMA (since 21 March 1990); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Sam NUJOMA (since 21 March 1990);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of the National Assembly
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 7-8 December 1994 (next to be held NA December
  1999)
  election results: Sam NUJOMA elected president; percent of vote--76%

Legislative branch: bicameral legislature consists of the
  National Council (26 seats; two members are chosen from each
  regional council to serve six-year terms) and the National Assembly
  (72 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: National Council--last held 30 November-1 December 1998
  (next to be held by December 2004); National Assembly--last held 7-8
  December 1994 (next to be held NA December 1999)
  election results: National Council--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--NA; National Assembly--percent of vote by party--SWAPO
  73.89%, DTA 20.78%, UDF 2.72%, DCN 0.83%, MAG 0.82%; seats by
  party--SWAPO 53, DTA 15, UDF 2, MAG 1, DCN 1
  note: the National Council is a purely advisory body

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: South West Africa People's
  KATJIUONGUA]

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO (subscriber), ITU,
  MONUA, NAM, OAU, OPCW, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Usko SHIVUTE
  chancery: 1605 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador George F. WARD, Jr.
  embassy: Ausplan Building, 14 Lossen St., Private Bag 12029
  Ausspannplatz, Windhoek
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: a large blue triangle with a yellow sunburst
  fills the upper left section and an equal green triangle (solid)
  fills the lower right section; the triangles are separated by a red
  stripe that is contrasted by two narrow white-edge borders



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is heavily dependent on the
  extraction and processing of minerals for export. Mining accounts
  for 20% of GDP. Namibia is the fourth-largest exporter of nonfuel
  minerals in Africa and the world's fifth-largest producer of
  uranium. Rich alluvial diamond deposits make Namibia a primary
  source for gem-quality diamonds. Namibia also produces large
  quantities of lead, zinc, tin, silver, and tungsten. Half of the
  population depends on agriculture (largely subsistence agriculture)
  for its livelihood. Namibia must import some of its food. Although
  per capita GDP is three times the per capita GDP of Africa's poorer
  countries, the majority of Namibia's people live in pronounced
  poverty because of the great inequality of income distribution and
  the large amounts going to foreigners. The Namibian economy has
  close links to South Africa.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$6.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 11%
  industry: 34%
  services: 55% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 500,000

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 49%, industry and commerce
  25%, services 5%, government 18%, mining 3% (1994 est.)

Unemployment rate: 30% to 40%, including underemployment (1997
  est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.1 billion
  expenditures: $1.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $193
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: meat packing, fish processing, dairy products; mining
  (diamond, lead, zinc, tin, silver, tungsten, uranium, copper)

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (1994)

Electricity--production: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 1.11 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.11 billion kWh (1996)
  note: imports electricity from South Africa

Agriculture--products: millet, sorghum, peanuts; livestock; fish

Exports: $1.44 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: diamonds, copper, gold, zinc, lead, uranium;
  cattle, processed fish, karakul skins

Exports--partners: UK 38%, South Africa 24%, Spain 12%, Japan 7%
  (1996 est.)

Imports: $1.48 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs; petroleum products and fuel,
  machinery and equipment, chemicals

Imports--partners: South Africa 87%, Germany, US, Japan (1995 est.)

Debt--external: $315 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $127 million (1998)

Currency: 1 Namibian dollar (N$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Nambian dollars (N$) per US$1--5.98380 (January
  1999), 5.52828 (1998), 4.60796 (1997), 4.29935 (1996), 3.62709
  (1995), 3.55080 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 89,722 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: good urban services; fair rural service; microwave radio
  relay links major towns; connections to other populated places are
  by open wire
  international: NA
  note: a fully automated digital network is being implemented

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 40, shortwave 0

Radios: 195,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8 (of which five are main stations
  and three are low-power stations; there are also about 20 low-power
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 27,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,382 km
  narrow gauge: 2,382 km 1.067-m gauge; single track (1995)

Highways:
  total: 64,799 km
  paved: 7,841 km
  unpaved: 56,958 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Luderitz, Walvis Bay

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 135 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 22
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 15
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 113
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 20
  914 to 1,523 m: 70
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Defense Force (Army), Police

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 380,528 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 228,225 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $90 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.6% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: quadripoint with Botswana, Zambia, and
  Zimbabwe is in disagreement; dispute with Botswana over uninhabited
  Kasikili (Sidudu) Island in Linyanti (Chobe) River is presently at
  the ICJ; at least one other island in Linyanti River is contested



======================================================================




@Nauru
-----





Geography



Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, south of
  the Marshall Islands

Geographic coordinates: 0 32 S, 166 55 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 21 sq km
  land: 21 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 30 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; monsoonal; rainy season (November to February)

Terrain: sandy beach rises to fertile ring around raised coral
  reefs with phosphate plateau in center

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location along plateau rim 61 m

Natural resources: phosphates

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water
  resources, roof storage tanks collect rainwater; intensive phosphate
  mining during the past 90 years--mainly by a UK, Australia, and New
  Zealand consortium--has left the central 90% of Nauru a wasteland and
  threatens limited remaining land resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: Nauru is one of the three great phosphate rock
  islands in the Pacific Ocean--the others are Banaba (Ocean Island) in
  Kiribati and Makatea in French Polynesia; only 53 km south of Equator



People



Population: 10,605 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA

Death rate: 0 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA
  male: NA
  female: NA

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Nauruan(s)
  adjective: Nauruan

Ethnic groups: Nauruan 58%, other Pacific Islander 26%, Chinese
  8%, European 8%

Religions: Christian (two-thirds Protestant, one-third Roman
  Catholic)

Languages: Nauruan (official, a distinct Pacific Island
  language), English widely understood, spoken, and used for most
  government and commercial purposes

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Nauru
  conventional short form: Nauru
  former: Pleasant Island

Data code: NR

Government type: republic

Capital: no official capital; government offices in Yaren District

Administrative divisions: 14 districts; Aiwo, Anabar, Anetan,
  Anibare, Baiti, Boe, Buada, Denigomodu, Ewa, Ijuw, Meneng, Nibok,
  Uaboe, Yaren

Independence: 31 January 1968 (from the Australia-, New Zealand-,
  and UK-administered UN trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 31 January (1968)

Constitution: 29 January 1968

Legal system: acts of the Nauru Parliament and British common law

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Bernard DOWIYOGO (since 17 June 1998);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Bernard DOWIYOGO (since 17 June 1998);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of Parliament
  elections: president elected by Parliament for a three-year term;
  election last held 17 June 1998 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: Bernard DOWIYOGO elected president; percent of
  Parliament vote--NA
  note: former President Kinza CLODUMAR was deposed in a no-confidence
  vote

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (18 seats; members
  elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms)
  elections: last held 8 February 1997 (next to be held NA February
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 18

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: loose multi-party system; Nauru

International organization participation: AsDB, C (special),
  ESCAP, ICAO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, OPCW,
  Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU, WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US: Nauru does not have an
  embassy in the US
  consulate(s): Hagatna (Guam)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Nauru; the US Ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Nauru

Flag description: blue with a narrow, horizontal, yellow stripe
  across the center and a large white 12-pointed star below the stripe
  on the hoist side; the star indicates the country's location in
  relation to the Equator (the yellow stripe) and the 12 points
  symbolize the 12 original tribes of Nauru



Economy



Economy--overview: Revenues come from exports of phosphates, but
  reserves are expected to be exhausted by the year 2000. Phosphates
  have given Nauruans one of the highest per capita incomes in the
  Third World. Few other resources exist, thus most necessities must
  be imported, including fresh water from Australia. The
  rehabilitation of mined land and the replacement of income from
  phosphates are serious long-term problems. Substantial amounts of
  phosphate income are invested in trust funds to help cushion the
  transition. The government also has been borrowing heavily from the
  trusts to finance fiscal deficits. To cut costs the government has
  called a freezing of wages, a reduction of over-staffed public
  service departments, privatization of numerous government agencies,
  and closure of some overseas consulates.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$100 million (1993 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,000 (1993 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -3.6% (1993)

Labor force--by occupation: employed in mining phosphates, public
  administration, education, and transportation

Unemployment rate: 0%

Budget:
  revenues: $23.4 million
  expenditures: $64.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY95/96)

Industries: phosphate mining, financial services, coconut products

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 32 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 32 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts

Exports: $25.3 million (f.o.b., 1991)

Exports--commodities: phosphates

Exports--partners: Australia, NZ

Imports: $21.1 million (c.i.f., 1991)

Imports--commodities: food, fuel, manufactures, building
  materials, machinery

Imports--partners: Australia, UK, NZ, Japan

Debt--external: $33.3 million

Economic aid--recipient: $2.5 million (1995); note?$2.25 million
  from Australia (FY96/97 est.)

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1--1.5853 (January
  1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995),
  1.3667 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 2,000 (1989 est.)

Telephone system: adequate local and international radiotelephone
  communications provided via Australian facilities
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 4,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3.9 km; note--used to haul phosphates from the center of the
  island to processing facilities on the southwest coast

Highways:
  total: 30 km
  paved: 24 km
  unpaved: 6 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Nauru

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular armed forces; Directorate of the
  Nauru Police Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: Nauru maintains no defense forces; under an
  informal agreement, Australia is responsible for defense of the
  island



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Navassa Island
--------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island in the Caribbean Sea, about
  one-fourth of the way from Haiti to Jamaica

Geographic coordinates: 18 25 N, 75 02 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 5.2 sq km
  land: 5.2 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about nine times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 8 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: marine, tropical

Terrain: raised coral and limestone plateau, flat to undulating;
  ringed by vertical white cliffs (9 to 15 meters high)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on southwest side 77 m

Natural resources: guano

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 10%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 90%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: strategic location 160 km south of the US Naval
  Base at Guantanamo Bay, Cuba; mostly exposed rock, but enough
  grassland to support goat herds; dense stands of fig-like trees,
  scattered cactus



People



Population: uninhabited
  note: transient Haitian fishermen and others camp on the island



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Navassa Island

Data code: BQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC, by the Office of Insular Affairs,
  US Department of the Interior; in September 1996, the Coast Guard
  ceased operations and maintenance of Navassa Island Light, a
  46-meter-tall lighthouse located on the southern side of the island;
  there has also been a private claim advanced against the island

Capital: none; administered from Washington, DC

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Haiti



======================================================================




@Nepal
-----





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, between China and India

Geographic coordinates: 28 00 N, 84 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 140,800 sq km
  land: 136,800 sq km
  water: 4,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Arkansas

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,926 km
  border countries: China 1,236 km, India 1,690 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies from cool summers and severe winters in north to
  subtropical summers and mild winters in south

Terrain: Terai or flat river plain of the Ganges in south,
  central hill region, rugged Himalayas in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Kanchan Kalan 70 m
  highest point: Mount Everest 8,848 m

Natural resources: quartz, water, timber, hydropower potential,
  scenic beauty, small deposits of lignite, copper, cobalt, iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 15%
  forests and woodland: 42%
  other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 8,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: severe thunderstorms, flooding, landslides,
  drought, and famine depending on the timing, intensity, and duration
  of the summer monsoons

Environment--current issues: the almost total dependence on wood
  for fuel and cutting down trees to expand agricultural land without
  replanting has resulted in widespread deforestation; soil erosion;
  water pollution (use of contaminated water presents human health
  risks)

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: landlocked; strategic location between China and
  India; contains eight of world's 10 highest peaks



People



Population: 24,302,653 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 41% (male 5,182,829; female 4,869,895)
  15-64 years: 55% (male 6,856,905; female 6,571,916)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 407,797; female 413,311) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.51% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 35.32 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.18 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.99 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 73.58 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 58.42 years
  male: 58.47 years
  female: 58.36 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.78 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Nepalese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Nepalese

Ethnic groups: Newars, Indians, Tibetans, Gurungs, Magars,
  Tamangs, Bhotias, Rais, Limbus, Sherpas

Religions: Hindu 90%, Buddhist 5%, Muslim 3%, other 2% (1981)
  note: only official Hindu state in the world, although no sharp
  distinction between many Hindu and Buddhist groups

Languages: Nepali (official), 20 other languages divided into
  numerous dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 27.5%
  male: 40.9%
  female: 14% (1995 est.)

People--note: refugee issue over the presence in Nepal of
  approximately 91,000 Bhutanese refugees, 90% of whom are in seven
  United Nations Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees (UNHCR)
  camps



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Nepal
  conventional short form: Nepal

Data code: NP

Government type: parliamentary democracy as of 12 May 1991

Capital: Kathmandu

Administrative divisions: 14 zones (anchal, singular and plural);
  Bagmati, Bheri, Dhawalagiri, Gandaki, Janakpur, Karnali, Kosi,
  Lumbini, Mahakali, Mechi, Narayani, Rapti, Sagarmatha, Seti

Independence: 1768 (unified by Prithvi Narayan Shah)

National holiday: Birthday of His Majesty the King, 28 December
  (1945)

Constitution: 9 November 1990

Legal system: based on Hindu legal concepts and English common
  law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King BIRENDRA Bir Bikram Shah Dev (succeeded to the
  throne 31 January 1972 following the death of his father King
  MAHENDRA Bir Bikram Shah Dev, crowned king 24 February 1975); Heir
  Apparent Crown Prince DIPENDRA Bir Bikram
  head of government: Prime Minister Girija Prasad KOIRALA (since 15
  April 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the monarch on the recommendation of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; following legislative
  elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a majority
  coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the monarch

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the National
  Council (60 seats; 35 appointed by the House of Representatives, 10
  by the king, and 15 elected by an electoral college; one-third of
  the members elected every two years to serve six-year terms) and the
  House of Representatives (205 seats; members elected by popular vote
  to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 15 November 1994 (next
  to be held 3 May 1999)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NCP 33%, CPN/UML 31%, NDP 18%, Nepal Sadbhavana (Goodwill)
  Party 3%, NWPP 1%; seats by party-- CPN/UML 88, NCP 83, NDP 20, NWPP
  4, Nepal Sadbhavana (Goodwill) Party 3, independents 7

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Sarbochha Adalat), chief justice
  is appointed by the monarch on recommendation of the Constitutional
  Council, the other judges are appointed by the monarch on the
  recommendation of the Judicial Council

Political parties and leaders: Communist Party of Nepal/United
  Madhar KUMAR, general secretary]; Nepali Congress Party or NCP
  general secretary]; National Democratic Party or NDP (also called
  party chair]

Political pressure groups and leaders: numerous small,
  left-leaning student groups in the capital; several small, radical
  Nepalese antimonarchist groups

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CP, ESCAP,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OPCW,
  SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador THAPA Bekh Bahadur
  chancery: 2131 Leroy Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ralph FRANK
  embassy: Pani Pokhari, Kathmandu
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: red with a blue border around the unique shape
  of two overlapping right triangles; the smaller, upper triangle
  bears a white stylized moon and the larger, lower triangle bears a
  white 12-pointed sun



Economy



Economy--overview: Nepal is among the poorest and least developed
  countries in the world with nearly half of its population living
  below the poverty line. Agriculture is the mainstay of the economy,
  providing a livelihood for over 80% of the population and accounting
  for 41% of GDP. Industrial activity mainly involves the processing
  of agricultural produce including jute, sugarcane, tobacco, and
  grain. Production of textiles and carpets has expanded recently and
  accounted for about 80% of foreign exchange earnings in the past
  three years. Apart from agricultural land and forests, exploitable
  natural resources are mica, hydropower, and tourism. Agricultural
  production is growing by about 5% on average as compared with annual
  population growth of 2.5%. Since May 1991, the government has been
  moving forward with economic reforms particularly those that
  encourage trade and foreign investment, e.g., by eliminating
  business licenses and registration requirements in order to simplify
  investment procedures. The government has also been cutting
  expenditures by reducing subsidies, privatizing state industries,
  and laying off civil servants. More recently, however, political
  instability--five different governments over the past few years--has
  hampered Kathmandu's ability to forge consensus to implement key
  economic reforms. Nepal has considerable scope for accelerating
  economic growth by exploiting its potential in hydropower and
  tourism, areas of recent foreign investment interest. Prospects for
  foreign trade or investment in other sectors will remain poor,
  however, because of the small size of the economy, its technological
  backwardness, its remoteness, its landlocked geographic location,
  and its susceptibility to natural disaster. The international
  community's role of funding more than 60% of Nepal's development
  budget and more than 28% of total budgetary expenditures will likely
  continue as a major ingredient of growth.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$26.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 41%
  industry: 22%
  services: 37% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 42% (1995-96 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.2%
  highest 10%: 29.8% (1995-96)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 10 million (1996 est.)
  note: severe lack of skilled labor

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 81%, services 16%,
  industry 3%

Unemployment rate: NA%; substantial underemployment (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $536 million
  expenditures: $818 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: tourism, carpet, textile; small rice, jute, sugar,
  and oilseed mills; cigarette; cement and brick production

Industrial production growth rate: 14.7% (FY94/95 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.032 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 3.1%
  hydro: 96.9%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.013 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 89 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 70 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, corn, wheat, sugarcane, root crops;
  milk, water buffalo meat

Exports: $394 million (f.o.b., 1997), but does not include
  unrecorded border trade with India

Exports--commodities: carpets, clothing, leather goods, jute
  goods, grain

Exports--partners: India, US, Germany, UK

Imports: $1.7 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: petroleum products 20%, fertilizer 11%,
  machinery 10%

Imports--partners: India, Singapore, Japan, Germany

Debt--external: $2.4 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $411 million (FY97/98)

Currency: 1 Nepalese rupee (NR) = 100 paisa

Exchange rates: Nepalese rupees (NRs) per US$1--67.675 (January
  1999), 65.976 (1998), 58.010 (1997), 56.692 (1996), 51.890 (1995),
  49.398 (1994)

Fiscal year: 16 July--15 July



Communications



Telephones: 115,911 (1996 est.)

Telephone system: poor telephone and telegraph service; fair
  radiotelephone communication service
  domestic: NA
  international: radiotelephone communications; satellite earth
  station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 88, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 690,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6 (1998 est.)

Televisions: 45,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 101 km; note--all in Kosi close to Indian border
  narrow gauge: 101 km 0.762-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 7,700 km
  paved: 3,196 km
  unpaved: 4,504 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 45 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 40
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 29 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Nepalese Army, Royal Nepalese Army Air
  Service, Nepalese Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,924,732 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,079,569 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 281,658 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $44 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.9% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: with Bhutan over 91,000 Bhutanese
  refugees in Nepal

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the domestic and
  international drug markets; transit point for opiates from Southeast
  Asia to the West



======================================================================




@Netherlands
-----------





Geography



Location: Western Europe, bordering the North Sea, between
  Belgium and Germany

Geographic coordinates: 52 30 N, 5 45 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 41,532 sq km
  land: 33,889 sq km
  water: 7,643 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,027 km
  border countries: Belgium 450 km, Germany 577 km

Coastline: 451 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; marine; cool summers and mild winters

Terrain: mostly coastal lowland and reclaimed land (polders);
  some hills in southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Prins Alexanderpolder -7 m
  highest point: Vaalserberg 321 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, fertile soil

Land use:
  arable land: 25%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 8%
  other: 39% (1996 est.)

Irrigated land: 6,000 sq km (1996 est.)

Natural hazards: the extensive system of dikes and dams protects
  nearly one-half of the total area from being flooded

Environment--current issues: water pollution in the form of heavy
  metals, organic compounds, and nutrients such as nitrates and
  phosphates; air pollution from vehicles and refining activities;
  acid rain

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: located at mouths of three major European rivers
  (Rhine, Maas or Meuse, and Schelde)



People



Population: 15,807,641 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 1,475,606; female 1,410,088)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 5,482,193; female 5,288,948)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 875,847; female 1,274,959) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.47% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.36 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.69 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.99 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.11 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.15 years
  male: 75.28 years
  female: 81.17 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.49 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Dutchman(men), Dutchwoman(women)
  adjective: Dutch

Ethnic groups: Dutch 94%, Moroccans, Turks, and other 6% (1988)

Religions: Roman Catholic 34%, Protestant 25%, Muslim 3%, other
  2%, unaffiliated 36% (1991)

Languages: Dutch

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1979 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of the Netherlands
  conventional short form: Netherlands
  local long form: Koninkrijk der Nederlanden
  local short form: Nederland

Data code: NL

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Amsterdam; The Hague is the seat of government

Administrative divisions: 12 provinces (provincien,
  singular--provincie); Drenthe, Flevoland, Friesland, Gelderland,
  Groningen, Limburg, Noord-Brabant, Noord-Holland, Overijssel,
  Utrecht, Zeeland, Zuid-Holland

Dependent areas: Aruba, Netherlands Antilles

Independence: 1579 (from Spain)

National holiday: Queen's Day, 30 April

Constitution: adopted 1814; amended many times, last time 17
  February 1983

Legal system: civil law system incorporating French penal theory;
  constitution does not permit judicial review of acts of the States
  General; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard (since 30 April
  1980); Heir Apparent WILLEM-ALEXANDER (born 27 April 1967), Prince
  of Orange, son of the monarch
  head of government: Prime Minister Wim KOK (since 22 August 1994)
  and Vice Prime Ministers Annemarie JORRITSMA (since 3 August 1998)
  and Els BORST-EILERS (since 3 August 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; following Second Chamber
  elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a majority
  coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the monarch; vice
  prime ministers appointed by the monarch
  note: there is a Council of State composed of the monarch, heir
  apparent, and councillors consulted by the executive on legislative
  and administrative policy

Legislative branch: bicameral States General or Staten Generaal
  consists of the First Chamber or Eerste Kamer (75 seats; members
  indirectly elected by the country's 12 provincial councils for
  four-year terms) and the Second Chamber or Tweede Kamer (150 seats;
  members directly elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: First Chamber--last held 9 June 1995 (next to be held 25
  May 1999); Second Chamber--last held 6 May 1998 (next to be held May
  2002)
  election results: First Chamber--percent of vote by party--NA; seats
  by party--VVD 23, CDA 19, PvdA 14, D'66 7, other 12; Second
  Chamber--percent of vote by party--PvdA 30.0%, VVD 25.3%, CDA 19.3%,
  D'66 9.3%, other 16.1%; seats by party--PvdA 45, VVD 38, CDA 29, D'66
  14, other 24

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Hoge Raad, justices are
  nominated for life by the monarch

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Appeal or CDA

Political pressure groups and leaders: large multinational firms;
  Federation of Netherlands Trade Union Movement (comprising Socialist
  and Catholic trade unions) and a Protestant trade union; Federation
  of Catholic and Protestant Employers Associations; the
  nondenominational Federation of Netherlands Enterprises; and
  Interchurch Peace Council or IKV

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, Benelux, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB,
  EMU, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO,
  NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Joris M. VOS
  chancery: 4200 Linnean Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Cynthia P. SCHNEIDER
  embassy: Lange Voorhout 102, 2514 EJ, The Hague
  mailing address: PSC 71, Box 1000, APO AE 09715
  consulate(s) general: Amsterdam

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and blue; similar to the flag of Luxembourg, which uses a
  lighter blue and is longer



Economy



Economy--overview: This prosperous and open economy is based on
  private enterprise with the government's presence felt in many
  aspects of the economy. Industrial activity features food
  processing, petroleum refining, and metalworking. The highly
  mechanized agricultural sector employs only 4% of the labor force,
  but provides large surpluses for export and the domestic
  food-processing industry. As a result, the Netherlands ranks third
  worldwide in value of agricultural exports, behind the US and
  France. Sharp cuts in subsidy and social security spending since the
  1980s helped the Dutch achieve sustained economic growth combined
  with falling unemployment and moderate inflation. The economy
  achieved a strong 3.7% growth in 1998; a dip in the business cycle
  probably will cause the economy to decelerate to slightly over 2%
  growth in 1999. Unemployment in 1999 is expected to be less than 5%
  of the labor force, and inflation probably will decline. The Dutch
  joined the first wave of 11 EU countries launching the euro system
  on 1 January 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$348.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$22,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3.2%
  industry: 27.5%
  services: 69.3% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.9%
  highest 10%: 24.7% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2% (1998)

Labor force: 7 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 73%, manufacturing and
  construction 23%, agriculture 4% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: 4.1% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $163 billion
  expenditures: $170 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 est.)

Industries: agroindustries, metal and engineering products,
  electrical machinery and equipment, chemicals, petroleum,
  construction, microelectronics, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 2.4% (1998)

Electricity--production: 83.3 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 94.51%
  hydro: 0.1%
  nuclear: 4.95%
  other: 0.44% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 90.366 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 700 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 11.3 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, fruits,
  vegetables; livestock

Exports: $160 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, fuels,
  food and tobacco

Exports--partners: EU 78% (Germany 27%, Belgium-Luxembourg 13%,
  France 11%, UK 10%, Italy 6%), Central and Eastern Europe, US (1997)

Imports: $142 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  chemicals, foodstuffs, fuels, consumer goods

Imports--partners: EU 61% (Germany 21%, Belgium-Luxembourg 11%, UK
  10%), US 9%, Central and Eastern Europe (1997)

Debt--external: $0

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $2.9 billion (1997)

Currency: 1 Netherlands guilder, gulden, or florin (f.) = 100
  cents; note--on 1 January 2002 to be replaced by the euro

Exchange rates: Netherlands guilders, gulden, or florins (f.) per
  US$1--1.8904 (January 1999), 1.9837 (1998), 1.9513 (1997), 1.6859
  (1996), 1.6057 (1995), 1.8200 (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 2.20371 guilders per euro; the euro will replace the local
  currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 8.431 million (1998 est.); 3.4 million cellular
  telephone subscribers (1998 est.)

Telephone system: highly developed and well maintained; system of
  multi-conductor cables gradually being supplemented/replaced by a
  glass-fiber based telecommunication infrastructure; Mobile GSM-based
  mobile telephony density rapidly growing; third generation Universal
  Mobile Telecommunications System expected for introduction by the
  year 2001
  domestic: nationwide cellular telephone system; microwave radio relay
  international: 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--3
  Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Atlantic Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, and 1
  Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean Regions)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3 (relays 3), FM 12 (repeaters 39),
  shortwave 0

Radios: 14 million (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 15 (in addition, there are five
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 7.6 million (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,813 km
  standard gauge: 2,813 km 1.435-m gauge; (1,991 km electrified) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 127,000 km
  paved: 114,427 km (including 2,360 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 12,573 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 5,046 km, of which 47% is usable by craft of 1,000
  metric ton capacity or larger

Pipelines: crude oil 418 km; petroleum products 965 km; natural
  gas 10,230 km

Ports and harbors: Amsterdam, Delfzijl, Dordrecht, Eemshaven,
  Groningen, Haarlem, Ijmuiden, Maastricht, Rotterdam, Terneuzen,
  Utrecht

Merchant marine:
  total: 510 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 3,632,477
  GRT/4,097,328 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 303, chemical tanker 42, combination
  bulk 1, container 52, liquefied gas tanker 17, livestock carrier 1,
  multifunction large-load carrier 9, oil tanker 24, passenger 8,
  refrigerated cargo 30, roll-on/roll-off cargo 12, short-sea
  passenger 3, specialized tanker 4
  note: many Dutch-owned ships are also operating under the registry
  of Netherlands Antilles (1998 est.)

Airports: 28 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 19
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 9
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 6 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Netherlands Army, Royal Netherlands Navy
  (includes Naval Air Service and Marine Corps), Royal Netherlands Air
  Force, Royal Constabulary

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,117,376 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,595,693 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 95,368 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $6.604 billion (FY97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.1% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: important gateway for cocaine, heroin, and hashish
  entering Europe; major European producer of illicit amphetamines and
  other synthetic drugs



======================================================================




@Netherlands Antilles
--------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, two island groups in the Caribbean Sea--one
  includes Curacao and Bonaire north of Venezuela and the other is
  east of the Virgin Islands

Geographic coordinates: 12 15 N, 68 45 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 960 sq km
  land: 960 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint
  Maarten (Dutch part of the island of Saint Martin)

Area--comparative: more than five times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 10.2 km
  border countries: Guadeloupe (Saint Martin) 10.2 km

Coastline: 364 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; ameliorated by northeast trade winds

Terrain: generally hilly, volcanic interiors

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Scenery 862 m

Natural resources: phosphates (Curacao only), salt (Bonaire only)

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 90% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: Curacao and Bonaire are south of Caribbean
  hurricane belt and are rarely threatened; Sint Maarten, Saba, and
  Sint Eustatius are subject to hurricanes from July to October

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 207,827 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 26% (male 27,160; female 26,149)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 65,781; female 73,054)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 6,538; female 9,145) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.01% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 17.11 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.58 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.43 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.9 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.92 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.59 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.25 years
  male: 72.19 years
  female: 76.41 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.09 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Netherlands Antillean(s)
  adjective: Netherlands Antillean

Ethnic groups: mixed black 85%, Carib Amerindian, white, East
  Asian

Religions: Roman Catholic, Protestant, Jewish, Seventh-Day
  Adventist

Languages: Dutch (official), Papiamento (a
  Spanish-Portuguese-Dutch-English dialect) predominates, English
  widely spoken, Spanish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 98%
  female: 99% (1981 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Netherlands Antilles
  local long form: none
  local short form: Nederlandse Antillen

Data code: NT

Dependency status: part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands; full
  autonomy in internal affairs granted in 1954

Government type: parliamentary

Capital: Willemstad

Administrative divisions: none (part of the Kingdom of the
  Netherlands)
  note: each island has its own government

Independence: none (part of the Kingdom of the Netherlands)

National holiday: Queen's Day, 30 April (1938)

Constitution: 29 December 1954, Statute of the Realm of the
  Netherlands, as amended

Legal system: based on Dutch civil law system, with some English
  common law influence

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen BEATRIX Wilhelmina Armgard of the Netherlands
  (since 30 April 1980), represented by Governor General Jaime SALEH
  (since NA October 1989)
  head of government: Prime Minister Miguel POURIER (since 25 February
  1994)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers elected by the Staten
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed by
  the monarch for a six-year term; following legislative elections,
  the leader of the majority party is usually elected prime minister
  by the Staten; election last held 30 January 1998 (next to be held
  by NA 2002)
  election results: Miguel POURIER elected prime minister; percent of
  legislative vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral States or Staten (22 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 30 January 1998 (next to be held by NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PAR 4,
  PNP 3, SPA 1, PDB 2, UPB 1, MAN 2, PLKP 3, WIPM 1, SEA 1, DP-St.M 2,
  FOL 2; no party won enough seats to form a government
  note: the government of Prime Minister Miguel POURIER is a coalition
  of several parties

Judicial branch: Joint High Court of Justice (judges appointed by
  the monarch)

Political parties and leaders:
  Sint Eustatius: Democratic Party of Sint Eustatius or DP-St. E
  WESTCOTT-WILLIAMS]; Patriotic Movement of Sint Maarten or SPA
  ROLLOCKS]
  note: political parties are indigenous to each island

International organization participation: Caricom (observer),
  ECLAC (associate), Interpol, IOC, UNESCO (associate), UPU, WMO, WToO
  (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (represented by the
  Kingdom of the Netherlands)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Consul General James L. WILLIAMS
  consulate(s) general: J.B. Gorsiraweg #1, Curacao
  mailing address: P. O. Box 158, Willemstad, Curacao

Flag description: white, with a horizontal blue stripe in the
  center superimposed on a vertical red band, also centered; five
  white, five-pointed stars are arranged in an oval pattern in the
  center of the blue band; the five stars represent the five main
  islands of Bonaire, Curacao, Saba, Sint Eustatius, and Sint Maarten



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism, petroleum transshipment, and offshore
  finance are the mainstays of this small economy, which is closely
  tied to the outside world. The islands enjoy a high per capita
  income and a well-developed infrastructure as compared with other
  countries in the region. Almost all consumer and capital goods are
  imported, with Venezuela, the US, and Mexico being the major
  suppliers. Poor soils and inadequate water supplies hamper the
  development of agriculture.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.4 billion (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1.8% (1997)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$11,500 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1%
  industry: 15%
  services: 84% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.3% (1997)

Labor force: 89,000

Labor force--by occupation: government 65%, industry and commerce
  28% (1983)

Unemployment rate: 14.9% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $710.8 million
  expenditures: $741.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: tourism (Curacao, Sint Maarten, and Bonaire),
  petroleum refining (Curacao), petroleum transshipment facilities
  (Curacao and Bonaire), light manufacturing (Curacao)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: aloes, sorghum, peanuts, vegetables,
  tropical fruit

Exports: $268.2 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum products 98% (1993)

Exports--partners: US 28.6%, Honduras 6.4%, Belgium-Luxembourg 6%,
  Italy 4.9%, Guatemala 4.5%, Costa Rica 4% (1996)

Imports: $1.4 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: crude petroleum 64%, food, manufactures
  (1993)

Imports--partners: Venezuela 34%, US 16.4%, Mexico 15.5%,
  Netherlands 5%, Italy 3.5%, Brazil 2.8% (1996)

Debt--external: $1.35 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?the Netherlands provided a $97
  million aid package in 1996

Currency: 1 Netherlands Antillean guilder, gulden, or florin
  (NAf.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Netherlands Antillean guilders, gulden, or
  florins (NAf.) per US$1--1.790 (fixed rate since 1989)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system: generally adequate facilities
  domestic: extensive interisland microwave radio relay links
  international: 2 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--2
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 205,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, there is a cable
  service which supplies programs received from various US satellite
  networks) (1997)

Televisions: 64,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 600 km
  paved: 300 km
  unpaved: 300 km (1992 est.)

Ports and harbors: Kralendijk, Philipsburg, Willemstad

Merchant marine:
  total: 95 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 811,782 GRT/1,045,989
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 26, chemical tanker 2, combination
  ore/oil 3, container 10, liquefied gas tanker 4, multifunction
  large-load carrier 19, oil tanker 4, passenger 1, refrigerated cargo
  18, roll-on/roll-off cargo 6
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships of 2 countries:
  Belgium owns 9 ships, Germany 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Netherlands Navy, Marine Corps, Royal
  Netherlands Air Force, National Guard, Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-47: 53,285 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 29,888 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 1,457 (1999 est.)

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the Kingdom of
  the Netherlands



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: money-laundering center; transshipment point for
  South American drugs bound for the US and Europe



======================================================================




@New Caledonia
-------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, east of
  Australia

Geographic coordinates: 21 30 S, 165 30 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 19,060 sq km
  land: 18,575 sq km
  water: 485 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,254 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; modified by southeast trade winds; hot, humid

Terrain: coastal plains with interior mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Panie 1,628 m

Natural resources: nickel, chrome, iron, cobalt, manganese,
  silver, gold, lead, copper

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 12%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 49% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons most frequent from November to March

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 197,361 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 29% (male 29,610; female 28,485)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 64,552; female 63,229)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 5,443; female 6,042) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.59% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.68 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.82 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.9 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.15 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.35 years
  male: 72.1 years
  female: 78.77 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.43 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: New Caledonian(s)
  adjective: New Caledonian

Ethnic groups: Melanesian 42.5%, European 37.1%, Wallisian 8.4%,
  Polynesian 3.8%, Indonesian 3.6%, Vietnamese 1.6%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 60%, Protestant 30%, other 10%

Languages: French, 28 Melanesian-Polynesian dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 91%
  male: 92%
  female: 90% (1976 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of New Caledonia and Dependencies
  conventional short form: New Caledonia
  local long form: Territoire des Nouvelle-Caledonie et Dependances
  local short form: Nouvelle-Caledonie

Data code: NC

Dependency status: overseas territory of France since 1956

Government type: NA

Capital: Noumea

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France);
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the
  US Government, but there are 3 provinces named Iles Loyaute, Nord,
  and Sud

Independence: none (overseas territory of France); note--a
  referendum on independence was held in 1998 but did not pass

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: the 1988 Matignon Accords grant substantial
  autonomy to the islands; formerly under French law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by High Commissioner and President of the Council
  of Government Dominque BUR (since NA August 1995)
  head of government: President of the Territorial Congress Simon
  LOUECKHOTE (since NA 1998)
  cabinet: Consultative Committee
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; high commissioner appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of Interior; president of the
  Territorial Congress elected by the members of the congress

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Congress or Congres
  Territorial (54 seats; members are members of the three Provincial
  Assemblies or Assemblees Provinciales elected by popular vote to
  serve six-year terms)
  elections: last held 9 July 1995 (next to be held NA July 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR
  22, FLNKS 12, UNCT 9, UNI 5, DEPCA 2, FN 2, RCF 2, and other 2
  note: New Caledonia elects 1 seat to the French Senate; elections
  last held 27 September 1992 (next to be held NA September 2001);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR 1; New
  Caledonia also elects 2 seats to the French National Assembly;
  elections last held 25 May-1 June 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR 2

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Progressive Melanesian Union or
  POSTIC]; Union des Synicates de Travailleurs Kanaks Exploites or
  Caledonia in the Republic or RPCR is a coalition of 5 parties: Union

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate), FZ,
  ICFTU, SPC, WFTU, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of France)

Flag description: three horizontal bands, blue (top), red, and
  green, with a yellow disk enclosing a black symbol centered to the
  hoist side; the flag of France is used for official occasions



Economy



Economy--overview: New Caledonia has more than 20% of the world's
  known nickel resources. In recent years, the economy has suffered
  because of depressed international demand for nickel, the principal
  source of export earnings. Only a negligible amount of the land is
  suitable for cultivation, and food accounts for about 25% of
  imports. In addition to nickel, financial support from France and
  tourism are key to the health of the economy. Performance in 1998
  was hampered by the spillover of financial problems in East Asia and
  by lower expected prices for nickel.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.1 billion (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$11,400 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 25%
  services: 72% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.7% (1996 est.)

Labor force: 70,044 (1988)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 20%, industry 16%,
  services 60%, mining 4% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1994)

Budget:
  revenues: $755.6 million
  expenditures: $755.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1995 est.)

Industries: nickel mining and smelting

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.145 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 69.87%
  hydro: 30.13%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.145 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: vegetables; beef, other livestock products

Exports: $500 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: ferronickels, nickel ore

Exports--partners: Japan 31%, France 29%, US 12%, Australia 7%,
  Taiwan 6% (1996 est.)

Imports: $845 million (c.i.f., 1996)

Imports--commodities: foods, transport equipment, machinery and
  electrical equipment, fuels, minerals

Imports--partners: France 45%, Australia 18%, Singapore 7%, New
  Zealand 6%, Japan 4% (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $446.3 million (1995); note?about $50
  million yearly support from France for government operations

Currency: 1 Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (CFPF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per
  US$1--102.72 (January 1999), 107.25 (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00
  (1996), 90.75 (1995), 100.93 (1994); note--linked at the rate of
  18.18 to the French franc

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 38,748 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 97,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6 (in addition, there are 25
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 47,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 5,562 km
  paved: 975 km
  unpaved: 4,587 km (1993)

Ports and harbors: Mueo, Noumea, Thio

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 27 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 22
  914 to 1,523 m: 11
  under 914 m: 11 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 7 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: French Armed Forces (Army, Navy, Air Force,
  Gendarmerie); Police Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Matthew and Hunter Islands claimed by
  France and Vanuatu



======================================================================




@New Zealand
-----------





Geography



Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, southeast
  of Australia

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 S, 174 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 268,680 sq km
  land: 268,670 sq km
  water: 10 sq km
  note: includes Antipodes Islands, Auckland Islands, Bounty Islands,
  Campbell Island, Chatham Islands, and Kermadec Islands

Area--comparative: about the size of Colorado

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 15,134 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate with sharp regional contrasts

Terrain: predominately mountainous with some large coastal plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Cook 3,764 m

Natural resources: natural gas, iron ore, sand, coal, timber,
  hydropower, gold, limestone

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 50%
  forests and woodland: 28%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,850 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes are common, though usually not
  severe; volcanic activity

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; native
  flora and fauna hard-hit by species introduced from outside

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine Life
  Conservation

Geography--note: about 80% of the population lives in cities



People



Population: 3,662,265 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 23% (male 430,105; female 409,302)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 1,202,762; female 1,195,006)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 184,048; female 241,042) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.99% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.42 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.53 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3.01 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.22 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.82 years
  male: 74.55 years
  female: 81.27 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.85 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: New Zealander(s)
  adjective: New Zealand

Ethnic groups: New Zealand European 74.5%, Maori 9.7%, other
  European 4.6%, Pacific Islander 3.8%, Asian and others 7.4%

Religions: Anglican 24%, Presbyterian 18%, Roman Catholic 15%,
  Methodist 5%, Baptist 2%, other Protestant 3%, unspecified or none
  33% (1986)

Languages: English (official), Maori

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1980 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: New Zealand
  abbreviation: NZ

Data code: NZ

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Wellington

Administrative divisions: 93 counties, 9 districts*, and 3 town
  districts**; Akaroa, Amuri, Ashburton, Bay of Islands, Bruce,
  Buller, Chatham Islands, Cheviot, Clifton, Clutha, Cook, Dannevirke,
  Egmont, Eketahuna, Ellesmere, Eltham, Eyre, Featherston, Franklin,
  Golden Bay, Great Barrier Island, Grey, Hauraki Plains, Hawera*,
  Hawke's Bay, Heathcote, Hikurangi**, Hobson, Hokianga, Horowhenua,
  Hurunui, Hutt, Inangahua, Inglewood, Kaikoura, Kairanga, Kiwitea,
  Lake, Mackenzie, Malvern, Manaia**, Manawatu, Mangonui, Maniototo,
  Marlborough, Masterton, Matamata, Mount Herbert, Ohinemuri, Opotiki,
  Oroua, Otamatea, Otorohanga*, Oxford, Pahiatua, Paparua, Patea,
  Piako, Pohangina, Raglan, Rangiora*, Rangitikei, Rodney, Rotorua*,
  Runanga, Saint Kilda, Silverpeaks, Southland, Stewart Island,
  Stratford, Strathallan, Taranaki, Taumarunui, Taupo, Tauranga,
  Thames-Coromandel*, Tuapeka, Vincent, Waiapu, Waiheke, Waihemo,
  Waikato, Waikohu, Waimairi, Waimarino, Waimate, Waimate West,
  Waimea, Waipa, Waipawa*, Waipukurau*, Wairarapa South, Wairewa,
  Wairoa, Waitaki, Waitomo*, Waitotara, Wallace, Wanganui, Waverley**,
  Westland, Whakatane*, Whangarei, Whangaroa, Woodville
  note: there may be a new administrative structure of 16 regions
  (Auckland, Bay of Plenty, Canterbury, Gisborne, Hawke's Bay,
  Marlborough, Nelson, Northland, Otago, Southland, Taranaki, Tasman,
  Waikato, Wanganui-Manawatu, Wellington, West Coast) that are
  subdivided into 57 districts and 16 cities* (Ashburton, Auckland*,
  Banks Peninsula, Buller, Carterton, Central Hawke's Bay, Central
  Otago, Christchurch*, Clutha, Dunedin*, Far North, Franklin,
  Gisborne, Gore, Grey, Hamilton*, Hastings, Hauraki, Horowhenua,
  Hurunui, Hutt*, Invercargill*, Kaikoura, Kaipara, Kapiti Coast,
  Kawerau, Mackenzie, Manawatu, Manukau*, Marlborough, Masterton,
  Matamata Piako, Napier*, Nelson*, New Plymouth, North Shore*,
  Opotiki, Otorohanga, Palmerston North*, Papakura*, Porirua*,
  Queenstown Lakes, Rangitikei, Rodney, Rotorua, Ruapehu, Selwyn,
  Southland, South Taranaki, South Waikato, South Wairarapa,
  Stratford, Tararua, Tasman, Taupo, Tauranga, Thames Coromandel,
  Timaru, Upper Hutt*, Waikato, Waimakariri, Waimate, Waipa, Wairoa,
  Waitakere*, Waitaki, Waitomo, Wanganui, Wellington*, Western Bay of
  Plenty, Westland, Whakatane, Whangarei)

Dependent areas: Cook Islands, Niue, Tokelau

Independence: 26 September 1907 (from UK)

National holiday: Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of
  Waitangi established British sovereignty)

Constitution: no formal, written constitution; consists of
  various documents, including certain acts of the UK and New Zealand
  Parliaments; Constitution Act 1986 was to have come into force 1
  January 1987, but has not been enacted

Legal system: based on English law, with special land legislation
  and land courts for Maoris; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
  with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Michael HARDIE BOYS (since 21
  March 1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jenny SHIPLEY (since 8 December
  1997) and Deputy Prime Minister Wyatt CREECH (since NA August 1998);
  note--the coalition government of the National Party and the New
  Zealand First Party was dissolved on 18 August 1998
  cabinet: Executive Council appointed by the governor general on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or the leader of a majority coalition
  is usually appointed prime minister by the governor general for a
  three-year term; deputy prime minister appointed by the governor
  general

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives--commonly
  called Parliament (120 seats; members elected by popular vote in
  single-member constituencies to serve three-year terms)
  elections: last held 12 October 1996 (next must be called by October
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NP 34.1%, NZLP 28.3%,
  NZFP 13.1%, Alliance 10.1%, ACT 6.17%, UNZ 0.91%; seats by party--NP
  44, NZLP 37, NZFP 17, Alliance 13, ACT 8, UNZ 1

Judicial branch: High Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: National Party or NP [Jenny
  coalition of the Christian Democrats and Christian Heritage Party)

International organization participation: ANZUS (US suspended
  security obligations to NZ on 11 August 1986), APEC, AsDB, Australia
  Group, C, CCC, CP, EBRD, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MONUA, MTCR, NAM (guest),
  NSG, OECD, OPCW, PCA, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO,
  UNMOP, UNOMSIL, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James Brendan BOLGER
  chancery: 37 Observatory Circle NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Josiah Horton BEEMAN
  embassy: 29 Fitzherbert Terrace, Thorndon, Wellington
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1190, Wellington; PSC 467, Box 1, FPO AP
  96531-1001
  consulate(s) general: Auckland

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant with four red five-pointed stars edged in white
  centered in the outer half of the flag; the stars represent the
  Southern Cross constellation



Economy



Economy--overview: Since 1984 the government has accomplished
  major economic restructuring, moving an agrarian economy dependent
  on a concessionary British market access toward a more
  industrialized, free market economy that can compete globally. This
  dynamic growth has boosted real incomes, broadened and deepened the
  technological capabilities of the industrial sector, and contained
  inflationary pressures. Inflation remains among the lowest in the
  industrial world. Per capita GDP has been moving up toward the
  levels of the big West European economies. New Zealand's heavy
  dependence on trade leaves its growth prospects vulnerable to
  economic performance in Asia, Europe, and the US. The slump in
  demand in Asian markets largely explains the slight drop in GDP in
  1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$61.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -0.2% (1998)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$17,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 9%
  industry: 25%
  services: 66% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.1% (1998)

Labor force: 1.86 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: services 65.1%, industry 25.1%,
  agriculture 9.8% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 7.6% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $24.9 billion
  expenditures: $23.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: food processing, wood and paper products, textiles,
  machinery, transportation equipment, banking and insurance, tourism,
  mining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 35.534 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 18.72%
  hydro: 75.67%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 5.61% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 35.534 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, potatoes, pulses, fruits,
  vegetables; wool, beef, dairy products; fish

Exports: $12.9 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: wool, lamb, mutton, beef, fish, cheese,
  chemicals, forestry products, fruits and vegetables, manufactures,
  dairy products, wood

Exports--partners: Australia 20%, Japan 15%, US 10%, UK 6% (1997)

Imports: $13 billion (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, vehicles and
  aircraft, petroleum, consumer goods, plastics

Imports--partners: Australia 27%, US 19%, Japan 12%, UK 6% (1997)

Debt--external: $53.2 billion (March 1998)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $123 million (1995)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1--1.85 (February
  1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5083 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235 (1995),
  1.6844 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 1.7 million (1986 est.)

Telephone system: excellent international and domestic systems
  domestic: NA
  international: submarine cables to Australia and Fiji; satellite
  earth stations--2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 64, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.215 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 41 (in addition, there are 52
  medium-power repeaters and over 650 low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.53 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,973 km
  narrow gauge: 3,973 km 1.067-m gauge (519 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 92,200 km
  paved: 53,568 km (including at least 144 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 38,632 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,609 km; of little importance to transportation

Pipelines: petroleum products 160 km; natural gas 1,000 km;
  liquefied petroleum gas or LPG 150 km

Ports and harbors: Auckland, Christchurch, Dunedin, Tauranga,
  Wellington

Merchant marine:
  total: 14 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 138,687 GRT/183,372 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 1, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker
  3, railcar carrier 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 4 (1998 est.)

Airports: 111 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 44
  over 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 29
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 67
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 23
  under 914 m: 43 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: New Zealand Army, Royal New Zealand Navy,
  Royal New Zealand Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 943,624 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 793,814 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 26,046 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $562 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.05% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial claim in Antarctica (Ross
  Dependency)



======================================================================




@Nicaragua
---------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and
  the North Pacific Ocean, between Costa Rica and Honduras

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 85 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 129,494 sq km
  land: 120,254 sq km
  water: 9,240 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than the state of New York

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,231 km
  border countries: Costa Rica 309 km, Honduras 922 km

Coastline: 910 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 25-nm security zone
  continental shelf: natural prolongation
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical in lowlands, cooler in highlands

Terrain: extensive Atlantic coastal plains rising to central
  interior mountains; narrow Pacific coastal plain interrupted by
  volcanoes

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mogoton 2,438 m

Natural resources: gold, silver, copper, tungsten, lead, zinc,
  timber, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 27%
  other: 17% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 880 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes, volcanoes, landslides,
  and occasionally severe hurricanes

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; water
  pollution; Hurricane Mitch damage

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea



People



Population: 4,717,132 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 1,037,269; female 1,018,909)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 1,236,326; female 1,297,356)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 54,706; female 72,566) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.84% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 35.04 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.6 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.06 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 40.47 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 67.08 years
  male: 64.7 years
  female: 69.56 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.14 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Nicaraguan(s)
  adjective: Nicaraguan

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 69%, white
  17%, black 9%, Amerindian 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 95%, Protestant 5%

Languages: Spanish (official)
  note: English- and Amerindian-speaking minorities on Atlantic coast

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 65.7%
  male: 64.6%
  female: 66.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Nicaragua
  conventional short form: Nicaragua
  local long form: Republica de Nicaragua
  local short form: Nicaragua

Data code: NU

Government type: republic

Capital: Managua

Administrative divisions: 15 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento), 2 autonomous regions* (regiones
  autonomistas, singular--region autonomista); Boaco, Carazo,
  Chinandega, Chontales, Esteli, Granada, Jinotega, Leon, Madriz,
  Managua, Masaya, Matagalpa, Nueva Segovia, Rio San Juan, Rivas,
  Atlantico Norte*, Atlantico Sur*

Independence: 15 September 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 15 September (1821)

Constitution: 9 January 1987

Legal system: civil law system; Supreme Court may review
  administrative acts

Suffrage: 16 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (10 January 1997);
  Vice President Enrique BOLANOS Geyer (10 January 1997); note--the
  president is both chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Arnoldo ALEMAN Lacayo (10 January
  1997); Vice President Enrique BOLANOS Geyer (10 January 1997);
  note--the president is both chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for a five-year term; election last held 20 October
  1996 (next to be held NA 2001); note--in July 1995 the term of the
  office of the president was amended to five years
  party]--includes PLC, PALI, PLIUN, and PUCA) 51.03%, Daniel ORTEGA
  Saavedra (FSLN) 37.75%, Guillermo OSORNO (PCCN) 4.10%, Noel VIDAURRE
  (PCN) 2.26%, Benjamin LANZAS (PRONAL) 0.53%, other (18 other
  candidates) remaining 4.33%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Asamblea
  Nacional (93 seats; members are elected by proportional
  representation to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 October 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Liberal Alliance (ruling
  party--includes PLC, PALI, PLIUN, and PUCA) 46.03%, FSLN 36.55%, PCCN
  3.73%, PCN 2.12%, MRS 1.33%; seats by party--Liberal Alliance 42,
  FSLN 36, PCCN 4, PCN 3, PRONAL 2, MRS 1, PRN 1, PNC 1, PLI 1, AU 1,
  UNO-96 Alliance 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Corte Suprema), 12 judges elected
  for seven-year terms by the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders:
  OSORNO, Roberto RODRIGUEZ]; Liberal Constitutionalist Party or PLC
  Saavedra]

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Workers Front or
  FNT is a Sandinista umbrella group of eight labor unions: Sandinista
  Workers Central or CST; Farm Workers Association or ATC; Health
  Workers Federation or FETASALUD; National Union of Employees or UNE;
  National Association of Educators of Nicaragua or ANDEN; Union of
  Journalists of Nicaragua or UPN; Heroes and Martyrs Confederation of
  Professional Associations or CONAPRO; and the National Union of
  Farmers and Ranchers or UNAG; Permanent Congress of Workers or CPT
  is an umbrella group of four non-Sandinista labor unions:
  Confederation of Labor Unification or CUS; Autonomous Nicaraguan
  Workers Central or CTN-A; Independent General Confederation of Labor
  or CGT-I; and Labor Action and Unity Central or CAUS; Nicaraguan
  Workers' Central or CTN is an independent labor union; Superior
  Council of Private Enterprise or COSEP is a confederation of
  business groups

International organization participation: BCIE, CACM, ECLAC, FAO,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, LAES, LAIA
  (observer), NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Francisco AGUIRRE Sacasa
  chancery: 1627 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New
  York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Lino GUTIERREZ
  embassy: Kilometer 4.5 Carretera Sur, Managua
  mailing address: APO AA 34021
  666026, 666027, 666032, 666033

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  white, and blue with the national coat of arms centered in the white
  band; the coat of arms features a triangle encircled by the words
  REPUBLICA DE NICARAGUA on the top and AMERICA CENTRAL on the bottom;
  similar to the flag of El Salvador, which features a round emblem
  encircled by the words REPUBLICA DE EL SALVADOR EN LA AMERICA
  CENTRAL centered in the white band; also similar to the flag of
  Honduras, which has five blue stars arranged in an X pattern
  centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Prior to Hurricane Mitch in the fall of 1998,
  Nicaragua had been pursuing a number of impressive economic reforms
  and had begun to shed the legacy of a decade of civil war and
  economic mismanagement by posting strong annual growth numbers. The
  storm has put the reform effort on hold and has changed economic
  forecasts for the foreseeable future--Nicaragua, the poorest country
  in Central America was one of the hardest hit by the hurricane.
  Nicaragua sustained approximately $1 billion in damages and will
  probably see GDP growth slow by at least one percentage point in
  1999. Hardest hit was the all-important agriculture sector, which is
  responsible for the majority of exports. As a result, the trade
  deficit is likely to balloon in 1999 to roughly $900 million.
  Significant aid and relief have helped to stabilize the country. In
  addition, the Paris Club and other creditors have offered
  substantial debt relief. Nevertheless, additional financing will be
  needed to restore the economy to its pre-Mitch condition.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$11.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 32%
  industry: 24%
  services: 44% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 50.3% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.6%
  highest 10%: 39.8% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 16% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.5 million

Labor force--by occupation: services 54%, agriculture 31%,
  industry 15% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 14%; underemployment 36% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $389 million
  expenditures: $551 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, chemicals, metal products, textiles,
  clothing, petroleum refining and distribution, beverages, footwear

Industrial production growth rate: 1.4% (1994 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.665 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 48.95%
  hydro: 21.02%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 30.03% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.665 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, bananas, sugarcane, cotton, rice,
  corn, cassava (tapioca), citrus, beans; beef, veal, pork, poultry,
  dairy products

Exports: $704 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: coffee, seafood, meat, sugar, gold, bananas

Exports--partners: US, Central America, Germany, Canada

Imports: $1.45 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, machinery and equipment,
  petroleum products

Imports--partners: Central America, US, Venezuela, Japan

Debt--external: $6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $839.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 gold cordoba (C$) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: gold cordobas (C$) per US$1--11.14 (December
  1998), 10.58 (1998), 9.45 (1997), 8.44 (1996), 7.55 (1995), 6.72
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 66,810 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: low-capacity microwave radio relay and wire
  system being expanded; connected to Central American Microwave System
  domestic: wire and microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intersputnik (Atlantic
  Ocean region) and 1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 45, FM 0, shortwave 3

Radios: 1.037 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, there are seven
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 260,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Highways:
  total: 16,382 km
  paved: 1,818 km
  unpaved: 14,564 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 2,220 km, including 2 large lakes

Pipelines: crude oil 56 km

Ports and harbors: Bluefields, Corinto, El Bluff, Puerto Cabezas,
  Puerto Sandino, Rama, San Juan del Sur

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 184 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 13
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 171
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 27
  under 914 m: 143 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,108,146 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 681,495 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 53,508 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $26 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial disputes with Colombia over
  the Archipelago de San Andres y Providencia and Quita Sueno Bank;
  with respect to the maritime boundary question in the Golfo de
  Fonseca, the International Court of Justice (ICJ) referred the
  disputants to an earlier agreement in this century and advised that
  some tripartite resolution among El Salvador, Honduras, and
  Nicaragua likely would be required; maritime boundary dispute with
  Honduras

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for cocaine destined for the US



======================================================================




@Niger
-----





Geography



Location: Western Africa, southeast of Algeria

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1.267 million sq km
  land: 1,266,700 sq km
  water: 300 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,697 km
  border countries: Algeria 956 km, Benin 266 km, Burkina Faso 628 km,
  Chad 1,175 km, Libya 354 km, Mali 821 km, Nigeria 1,497 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: desert; mostly hot, dry, dusty; tropical in extreme south

Terrain: predominately desert plains and sand dunes; flat to
  rolling plains in south; hills in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Niger River 200 m
  highest point: Mont Greboun 1,944 m

Natural resources: uranium, coal, iron ore, tin, phosphates,
  gold, petroleum

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 2%
  other: 88% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 660 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts

Environment--current issues: overgrazing; soil erosion;
  deforestation; desertification; wildlife populations (such as
  elephant, hippopotamus, giraffe, and lion) threatened because of
  poaching and habitat destruction

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the
  Sea

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 9,962,242 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 2,445,536; female 2,346,844)
  15-64 years: 50% (male 2,421,971; female 2,518,248)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 121,253; female 108,390) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.95% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 52.31 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 22.78 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.12 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 112.79 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 41.96 years
  male: 42.22 years
  female: 41.7 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.24 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Nigerien(s)
  adjective: Nigerien

Ethnic groups: Hausa 56%, Djerma 22%, Fula 8.5%, Tuareg 8%, Beri
  Beri (Kanouri) 4.3%, Arab, Toubou, and Gourmantche 1.2%, about 1,200
  French expatriates

Religions: Muslim 80%, remainder indigenous beliefs and Christians

Languages: French (official), Hausa, Djerma

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 13.6%
  male: 20.9%
  female: 6.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Niger
  conventional short form: Niger
  local long form: Republique du Niger
  local short form: Niger

Data code: NG

Government type: republic

Capital: Niamey

Administrative divisions: 7 departments (departements,
  singular--departement), and 1 capital district* (capitale district);
  Agadez, Diffa, Dosso, Maradi, Niamey*, Tahoua, Tillaberi, Zinder

Independence: 3 August 1960 (from France)

National holiday: Republic Day, 18 December (1958)

Constitution: the constitution of January 1993 was revised by
  national referendum on 12 May 1996

Legal system: based on French civil law system and customary law;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ibrahim BARE Mainassara (since 28 January
  1996); note--the president is both chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Ibrahim BARE Mainassara (since 28
  January 1996); note--Ibrahim MAYAKI (since 27 November 1997) was
  appointed prime minister by the president but does not exercise any
  executive authority and is only the implementor of the president's
  programs; the president is both chief of state and head of government
  note: President Ibrahim BARE was assasinated on the 9 April 1999
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  last held 7-8 July 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); note--Ibrahim BARE
  Mainassara initially became president when he ousted President
  Mahamane OUSMANE in a coup on 27 January 1996 and subsequently
  defeated him in the flawed election of July 1996
  election results: percent of vote--Ibrahim BARE Mainassara 52.22%,
  Mahamane OUSMANE 19.75%, Tandja MAMADOU 15.65%, Mahamadou ISSOUFOU
  7.60%, Moumouni AMADOU Djermakoye 4.77%

Legislative branch: two-chamber National Assembly; one chamber
  with 83 seats (members elected by popular vote for five-year terms);
  selection process for second chamber not established
  elections: last held 23 November 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--UNIRD
  59, ANDPS-Zaman Lahiya 8, UDPS-Amana 3, coalition of independents 3,
  MDP-Alkwali 1, UPDP-Shamuwa 4, DARAJA 3, PMT-Albarka 2

Judicial branch: State Court or Cour d'Etat; Court of Appeal or
  Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Alliance for Democracy and
  TALBA, chairman]; Democratic and Social Convention-Rahama or
  MAMADOU, chairman]; National Union of Independents for Democratic
  Nigerien Party for Democracy and Socialism-Tarayya or PNDS-Tarayya
  Patriots, Democrats, and Progressives-Shamuwa or UPDP-Shamuwa
  NA]

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU,
  MIPONUH, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WADB,
  WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Joseph DIATTA
  chancery: 2204 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Charles O. CECIL
  embassy: Rue Des Ambassades, Niamey
  mailing address: B. P. 11201, Niamey

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of orange (top),
  white, and green with a small orange disk (representing the sun)
  centered in the white band; similar to the flag of India, which has
  a blue spoked wheel centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Niger is a poor, landlocked Sub-Saharan nation,
  whose economy centers on subsistence agriculture, animal husbandry,
  reexport trade, and increasingly less on uranium, its major export
  since the 1970s. The 50% devaluation of the West African franc in
  January 1994 boosted exports of livestock, cowpeas, onions, and the
  products of Niger's small cotton industry. The government relies on
  bilateral and multilateral aid for operating expenses and public
  investment and is strongly induced to adhere to structural
  adjustment programs designed by the IMF and the World Bank.
  Short-term prospects depend largely on upcoming negotiations on debt
  relief and extended aid.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$9.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$970 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 40%
  industry: 18%
  services: 42% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3%
  highest 10%: 29.3% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.8% (1998)

Labor force: 70,000 receive regular wages or salaries

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 90%, industry and commerce
  6%, government 4%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $370 million (including $160 million from foreign sources)
  expenditures: $370 million, including capital expenditures of $186
  million (1998 est.)

Industries: cement, brick, textiles, food processing, chemicals,
  slaughterhouses, and a few other small light industries; uranium
  mining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 170 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 365 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 195 million kWh (1996)
  note: imports electricity from Nigeria

Agriculture--products: cowpeas, cotton, peanuts, millet, sorghum,
  cassava (tapioca), rice; cattle, sheep, goats, camels, donkeys,
  horses, poultry

Exports: $269 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: uranium ore 50%, livestock products 20%,
  cowpeas, onions (1996 est.)

Exports--partners: Greece 21%, Canada 18%, France 12%, Nigeria 7%
  (1996 est.)

Imports: $295 million (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, primary materials,
  machinery, vehicles and parts, petroleum, cereals

Imports--partners: France 17%, Cote d'Ivoire 7%, US 5%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 4%, Nigeria (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $1.2 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $222 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (January 1999), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 14,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: small system of wire, radiotelephone
  communications, and microwave radio relay links concentrated in
  southwestern area
  domestic: wire, radiotelephone communications, and microwave radio
  relay; domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations and 1 planned
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 15, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 620,000 (1995 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 10 (in addition, there are seven
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 105,000 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 10,100 km
  paved: 798 km
  unpaved: 9,302 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: Niger river is navigable 300 km from Niamey to Gaya on
  the Benin frontier from mid-December through March

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 27 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 9
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 15
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
  Republican Guard, National Police

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,117,868 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,143,355 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 102,762 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $20 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.1% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Libya claims about 19,400 sq km in
  northern Niger; delimitation of international boundaries in the
  vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border incidents in
  the past, is completed and awaits ratification by Cameroon, Chad,
  Niger, and Nigeria



======================================================================




@Nigeria
-------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the Gulf of Guinea, between
  Benin and Cameroon

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 923,770 sq km
  land: 910,770 sq km
  water: 13,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,047 km
  border countries: Benin 773 km, Cameroon 1,690 km, Chad 87 km, Niger
  1,497 km

Coastline: 853 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 30 nm

Climate: varies; equatorial in south, tropical in center, arid in
  north

Terrain: southern lowlands merge into central hills and plateaus;
  mountains in southeast, plains in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Chappal Waddi 2,419 m

Natural resources: petroleum, tin, columbite, iron ore, coal,
  limestone, lead, zinc, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 33%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 44%
  forests and woodland: 12%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,570 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: soil degradation; rapid
  deforestation; desertification; recent droughts in north severely
  affecting marginal agricultural activities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 113,828,587 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 25,613,974; female 25,397,166)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 30,272,539; female 29,197,611)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 1,678,732; female 1,668,565) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.92% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 41.84 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.98 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.31 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.01 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 69.46 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 53.3 years
  male: 52.55 years
  female: 54.06 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.02 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Nigerian(s)
  adjective: Nigerian

Ethnic groups: Hausa, Fulani, Yoruba, Ibo, Ijaw, Kanuri, Ibibio,
  Tiv

Religions: Muslim 50%, Christian 40%, indigenous beliefs 10%

Languages: English (official), Hausa, Yoruba, Ibo, Fulani

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 57.1%
  male: 67.3%
  female: 47.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federal Republic of Nigeria
  conventional short form: Nigeria

Data code: NI

Government type: republic transitioning from military to civilian
  rule

Capital: Abuja
  note: on 12 December 1991 the capital was officially moved from
  Lagos to Abuja; many government offices remain in Lagos pending
  completion of facilities in Abuja

Administrative divisions: 30 states and 1 territory*; Abia, Abuja
  Federal Capital Territory*, Adamawa, Akwa Ibom, Anambra, Bauchi,
  Benue, Borno, Cross River, Delta, Edo, Enugu, Imo, Jigawa, Kaduna,
  Kano, Katsina, Kebbi, Kogi, Kwara, Lagos, Niger, Ogun, Ondo, Osun,
  Oyo, Plateau, Rivers, Sokoto, Taraba, Yobe
  note: the government has announced the creation of six additional
  states named Bayelsa, Ebonyi, Ekiti, Gombe, Nassarawa, and Zamfara
  as part of the process of transition to a civilian government

Independence: 1 October 1960 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October (1960)

Constitution: 1979 constitution still partially in force

Legal system: based on English common law, Islamic law, and
  tribal law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council and
  Commander in Chief of Armed Forces Gen. Abdulsalami ABUBAKAR (since
  9 June 1998) will remain chief of state and head of government until
  29 May 1999 when President-elect Olusegun OBASANJO will be
  inaugurated
  head of government: Chairman of the Provisional Ruling Council and
  Commander in Chief of Armed Forces Gen. Abdulsalami ABUBAKAR (since
  9 June 1998) will remain chief of state and head of government until
  29 May 1999 when President-elect Olusegun OBASANJO will be
  inaugurated
  cabinet: Federal Executive Council
  elections: the president is elected by popular vote for no more than
  two four-year terms; election last held 27 February 1999 (next
  election to be held NA 2003)
  election results: Olusegun OBASANJO (PDP) won the election with NA%
  of the vote, Olu FALAE (APP-AD) NA%

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly consists of
  Senate (109 seats, three from each state and one from the Federal
  Capital Territory; members elected by popular vote to serve
  seven-year terms) and House of Representatives (360 seats, members
  elected by popular vote to serve seven-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 20-24 February 1999 (next to be held NA
  2006); House of Representatives--last held 20-24 February 1999 (next
  to be held NA 2006)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PDP 61, APP 24, AD 20, other 4; House of Representives--percent
  of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PDP 206, APP 74, AD 68, others 12
  note: the National Assembly was suspended by the military government
  following the military takeover on 17 November 1993; the new
  civilian government which was elected on 20 February 1999 is
  expected to be inaugurated on 29 May 1999

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges appointed by the
  Provisional Ruling Council; Federal Court of Appeal, judges are
  appointed by the federal government on the advice of the Advisory
  Judicial Committee

Political parties and leaders: political parties, suppressed by
  the military government, were allowed to form in July 1998; three
  parties were registered by the Provisional Ruling Council for
  participation in local, state and national elections; All People's

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C
  (suspended), CCC, ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MONUA, NAM,
  OAU, OIC, OPCW, OPEC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
  UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNPREDEP, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Wakili Hassan ADAMU
  chancery: 1333 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William H. TWADDELL
  embassy: 2 Eleke Crescent, Lagos
  mailing address: P. O. Box 554, Lagos

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), white, and green



Economy



Economy--overview: The oil-rich Nigerian economy continues to be
  hobbled by political instability, corruption, and poor macroeconomic
  management. Nigeria's unpopular military rulers have failed to make
  significant progress in diversifying the economy away from
  overdependence on the capital intensive oil sector which provides
  30% of GDP, 95% of foreign exchange earnings, and about 80% of
  budgetary revenues. The government's resistance to initiating
  greater transparency and accountability in managing the country's
  multibillion dollar oil earnings continues to limit economic growth
  and prevent an agreement with the IMF and bilateral creditors on a
  staff-monitored program and debt relief. The largely subsistence
  agricultural sector has failed to keep up with rapid population
  growth, and Nigeria, once a large net exporter of food, now must
  import food. Growth in 1999 may become negative because of continued
  low oil prices and persistent inefficiencies in the system.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$106.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$960 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 33%
  industry: 42%
  services: 25% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 34.1% (1992-93 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.3%
  highest 10%: 31.4% (1992-93)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 15% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 42.844 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 54%, industry, commerce,
  and services 19%, government 15%

Unemployment rate: 28% (1992 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $13.9 billion (1998 est.)
  expenditures: $13.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  billion (1998 est.)

Industries: crude oil, coal, tin, columbite, palm oil, peanuts,
  cotton, rubber, wood, hides and skins, textiles, cement and other
  construction materials, food products, footwear, chemicals,
  fertilizer, printing, ceramics, steel

Industrial production growth rate: 4.1% (1996)

Electricity--production: 13.78 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 60.94%
  hydro: 39.06%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 13.74 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 50 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cocoa, peanuts, palm oil, corn, rice,
  sorghum, millet, cassava (tapioca), yams, rubber; cattle, sheep,
  goats, pigs; timber; fish

Exports: $9.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 95%, cocoa,
  rubber

Exports--partners: US 35%, Spain 11%, Italy 6%, France 6% (1997
  est.)

Imports: $9.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery, chemicals, transportation
  equipment, manufactured goods, food and animals

Imports--partners: US 14%, UK 11%, Germany 10%, France 8%,
  Netherlands 5% (1997 est.)

Debt--external: $32 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $39.2 million (1995)

Currency: 1 naira (N) = 100 kobo

Exchange rates: nairas (N) per US$1--21.886 (December 1998),
  21.886 (1998), 21.886 (1997), 21.895 (1995), 21.996 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 405,100 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: average system limited by poor maintenance;
  major expansion in progress
  domestic: intercity traffic is carried by coaxial cable, microwave
  radio relay, cellular network, and a domestic communications
  satellite system with 20 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean); 1 coaxial submarine cable

Radio broadcast stations: AM 82, FM 32, shortwave 10 (1998 est.)

Radios: 17.2 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (government-controlled)

Televisions: 6.1 million (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,557 km
  narrow gauge: 3,505 km 1.067-m gauge
  standard gauge: 52 km 1.435-m gauge (1995)
  note: years of neglect of both the rolling stock and the
  right-of-way have seriously reduced the capacity and utility of the
  system; a project to restore Nigeria's railways is now underway

Highways:
  total: 51,000 km
  paved: 26,000 km (including 2,044 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 25,000 km (1998 est.)
  note: many of the roads reported as paved may be graveled; because
  of poor maintenance and years of heavy freight traffic (in part the
  result of the failure of the railroad system), much of the road
  system is barely useable

Waterways: 8,575 km consisting of the Niger and Benue rivers and
  smaller rivers and creeks

Pipelines: crude oil 2,042 km; petroleum products 3,000 km;
  natural gas 500 km

Ports and harbors: Calabar, Lagos, Onne, Port Harcourt, Sapele,
  Warri

Merchant marine:
  total: 38 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 371,499 GRT/631,425 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 13, chemical tanker 3, oil tanker 20,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 72 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 6
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 10
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 16
  under 914 m: 18 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 25,967,281 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 14,890,337 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 1,201,738 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $236 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.7% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: delimitation of international boundaries
  in the vicinity of Lake Chad, the lack of which led to border
  incidents in the past, is completed and awaits ratification by
  Cameroon, Chad, Niger, and Nigeria; dispute with Cameroon over land
  and maritime boundaries around the Bakasi Peninsula is currently
  before the International Court of Justice; maritime boundary dispute
  with Equatorial Guinea because of disputed jurisdiction over
  oil-rich areas in the Gulf of Guinea

Illicit drugs: facilitates movement of heroin en route from
  Southeast and Southwest Asia to Western Europe and North America;
  increasingly a transit route for cocaine from South America intended
  for European, East Asian, and North American markets



======================================================================




@Niue
----





Geography



Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, east of
  Tonga

Geographic coordinates: 19 02 S, 169 52 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 260 sq km
  land: 260 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 64 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; modified by southeast trade winds

Terrain: steep limestone cliffs along coast, central plateau

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location near Mutalau settlement 68 m

Natural resources: fish, arable land

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 8%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 19%
  other: 50% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons

Environment--current issues: traditional methods of burning brush
  and trees to clear land for agriculture have threatened soil
  supplies which are not naturally very abundant

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Law of the
  Sea

Geography--note: one of world's largest coral islands



People



Population: 2,103 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.5% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA
  male: NA
  female: NA

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Niuean(s)
  adjective: Niuean

Ethnic groups: Polynesian (with some 200 Europeans, Samoans, and
  Tongans)

Religions: Ekalesia Niue (Niuean Church) 75%--a Protestant church
  closely related to the London Missionary Society, Latter-Day Saints
  10%, other 15% (mostly Roman Catholic, Jehovah's Witnesses,
  Seventh-Day Adventist)

Languages: Polynesian closely related to Tongan and Samoan,
  English

Literacy:
  definition: NA
  total population: 95%
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Niue

Data code: NE

Dependency status: self-governing in free association with New
  Zealand; Niue fully responsible for internal affairs; New Zealand
  retains responsibility for external affairs

Government type: self-governing parliamentary democracy

Capital: Alofi

Administrative divisions: none; note--there are no first-order
  administrative divisions as defined by the US Government, but there
  are 14 villages each with its own village council whose members are
  elected and serve three-year terms

Independence: on 19 October 1974, Niue became a self-governing
  parliamentary government in free association with New Zealand

National holiday: Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of
  Waitangi established British sovereignty)

Constitution: 19 October 1974 (Niue Constitution Act)

Legal system: English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); the UK
  and New Zealand are represented by New Zealand High Commissioner
  Warren SEARELL (since NA August 1993)
  head of government: Premier Frank Fakaotimanava LUI (since 12 March
  1993)
  cabinet: Cabinet consists of the premier and three ministers
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; premier elected by the
  Legislative Assembly for a three-year term; election last held 23
  February 1996 (next to be held NA March 1999)
  election results: Frank Fakaotimanava LUI elected premier; percent
  of Legislative Assembly vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (20 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms; six
  elected from a common roll and 14 are village representatives)
  elections: last held 23 February 1996 (next to be held NA March 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NPP 9,
  independents 11

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of New Zealand; High Court of Niue

Political parties and leaders: Niue People's Action Party or NPP

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate),
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, WHO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (self-governing
  territory in free association with New Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (self-governing
  territory in free association with New Zealand)

Flag description: yellow with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant; the flag of the UK bears five yellow
  five-pointed stars--a large one on a blue disk in the center and a
  smaller one on each arm of the bold red cross



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is heavily dependent on aid and
  remittances from New Zealand as Niue has no indigenous export
  products. Government expenditures regularly exceed revenues, and the
  shortfall is made up by grants from New Zealand which are used to
  pay wages to public employees. Niue has cut government expenditures
  by reducing the public service by almost half. The agricultural
  sector consists mainly of subsistence gardening, although some cash
  crops are grown for export. Industry consists primarily of small
  factories to process passion fruit, lime oil, honey, and coconut
  cream. The sale of postage stamps to foreign collectors is an
  important source of revenue. The island in recent years has suffered
  a serious loss of population because of migration of Niueans to New
  Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.4 million (1993 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,200 (1993 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1992)

Labor force: 450 (1992 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: most work on family plantations; paid
  work exists only in government service, small industry, and the Niue
  Development Board

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $5.5 million
  expenditures: $6.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1985 est.)

Industries: tourism, handicrafts, food processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 3 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, passion fruit, honey, limes,
  taro, yams, cassava (tapioca), sweet potatoes; pigs, poultry, beef
  cattle

Exports: $117,500 (f.o.b., 1989)

Exports--commodities: canned coconut cream, copra, honey, passion
  fruit products, pawpaw, root crops, limes, footballs, stamps,
  handicrafts

Exports--partners: NZ 89%, Fiji, Cook Islands, Australia

Imports: $4.1 million (c.i.f., 1989)

Imports--commodities: food, live animals, manufactured goods,
  machinery, fuels, lubricants, chemicals, drugs

Imports--partners: NZ 59%, Fiji 20%, Japan 13%, Samoa, Australia,
  US

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $8.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1--1.8560
  (January 1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5082 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235
  (1995), 1.6844 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 276 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: single-line telephone system connects all villages on
  island
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0 (1987 est.)

Radios: 1,000

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 312 (1991 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 234 km
  paved: 0 km
  unpaved: 234 km

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Police Force

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Norfolk Island
--------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, island in the South Pacific Ocean, east of
  Australia

Geographic coordinates: 29 02 S, 167 57 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 34.6 sq km
  land: 34.6 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.2 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 32 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: subtropical, mild, little seasonal temperature variation

Terrain: volcanic formation with mostly rolling plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Bates 319 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 75% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (especially May to July)

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 1,905 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -0.71% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA
  male: NA
  female: NA

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Norfolk Islander(s)
  adjective: Norfolk Islander(s)

Ethnic groups: descendants of the Bounty mutineers, Australian,
  New Zealander, Polynesians

Religions: Anglican 39%, Roman Catholic 11.7%, Uniting Church in
  Australia 16.4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 4.4%, none 9.2%, unknown
  16.9%, other 2.4% (1986)

Languages: English (official), Norfolk a mixture of 18th century
  English and ancient Tahitian



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of Norfolk Island
  conventional short form: Norfolk Island

Data code: NF

Dependency status: territory of Australia; Canberra administers
  Commonwealth responsibilities on Norfolk Island through the
  Department of Environment, Sport and Territories

Government type: NA

Capital: Kingston

Administrative divisions: none (territory of Australia)

Independence: none (territory of Australia)

National holiday: Pitcairners Arrival Day Anniversary, 8 June
  (1856)

Constitution: Norfolk Island Act of 1979

Legal system: based on the laws of Australia, local ordinances
  and acts; English common law applies in matters not covered by
  either Australian or Norfolk Island law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); the UK
  and Australia are represented by Administrator A. J. MESSNER (since
  4 August 1997)
  head of government: Assembly President and Chief Minister George
  Charles Smith (since 30 April 1997)
  cabinet: Executive Council is made up of four of the nine members of
  the Legislative Assembly; the council devises government policy and
  acts as an advisor to the Administrator
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed by the
  governor general of Australia; chief minister elected by the
  Legislative Assembly for a term of not more than three years;
  election last held 30 April 1997 (next to be held by May 2000)
  election results: George Charles Smith elected chief minister;
  percent of Legislative Assembly vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly (9 seats;
  members elected by electors who have nine equal votes each but only
  four votes can be given to any one candidate; members serve
  three-year terms)
  elections: last held 30 April 1997 (next to be held by May 2000)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 9

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Petty Sessions

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of Australia)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of
  Australia)

Flag description: three vertical bands of green (hoist side),
  white, and green with a large green Norfolk Island pine tree
  centered in the slightly wider white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism, the primary economic activity, has
  steadily increased over the years and has brought a level of
  prosperity unusual among inhabitants of the Pacific islands.
  Revenues from tourism have helped the agricultural sector to become
  self-sufficient in the production of beef, poultry, and eggs.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 1,395 (1991 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: tourism NA%, subsistence agriculture
  NA%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $4.6 million
  expenditures: $4.8 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY92/93)

Industries: tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: Norfolk Island pine seed, Kentia palm seed,
  cereals, vegetables, fruit; cattle, poultry

Exports: $1.5 million (f.o.b., FY91/92)

Exports--commodities: postage stamps, seeds of the Norfolk Island
  pine and Kentia palm, small quantities of avocados

Exports--partners: Australia, other Pacific island countries, NZ,
  Asia, Europe

Imports: $17.9 million (c.i.f., FY91/92)

Imports--commodities: NA

Imports--partners: Australia, other Pacific island countries, NZ,
  Asia, Europe

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Australian dollar ($A) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Australian dollars ($A) per US$1--1.5853 (January
  1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773 (1996), 1.3486 (1995),
  1.3667 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 1,087 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: radiotelephone service with Sydney (Australia)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 2,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (local programming station; in
  addition, there are two repeaters that bring in Australian programs
  by satellite) (1998)

Televisions: 1,500 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 80 km
  paved: 53 km
  unpaved: 27 km

Ports and harbors: none; loading jetties at Kingston and Cascade

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of Australia



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Northern Mariana Islands
------------------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, islands in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to the Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 15 12 N, 145 45 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 477 sq km
  land: 477 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes 14 islands including Saipan, Rota, and Tinian

Area--comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,482 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; moderated by northeast trade winds,
  little seasonal temperature variation; dry season December to June,
  rainy season July to October

Terrain: southern islands are limestone with level terraces and
  fringing coral reefs; northern islands are volcanic

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Agrihan 965 m

Natural resources: arable land, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 21%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 19%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 60%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: active volcanoes on Pagan and Agrihan; typhoons
  (especially August to November)

Environment--current issues: contamination of groundwater on
  Saipan may contribute to disease; clean-up of landfill; protection
  of endangered species conflicts with development

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean



People



Population: 69,398 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 8,459; female 8,197)
  15-64 years: 74% (male 24,651; female 26,949)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 550; female 592) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.99% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.19 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 2.42 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 20.14 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.36 years
  male: 72.19 years
  female: 78.72 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.86 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: NA
  adjective: NA

Ethnic groups: Chamorro, Carolinians and other Micronesians,
  Caucasian, Japanese, Chinese, Korean

Religions: Christian (Roman Catholic majority, although
  traditional beliefs and taboos may still be found)

Languages: English, Chamorro, Carolinian
  note: 86% of population speaks a language other than English at home

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 97%
  female: 96% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
  conventional short form: Northern Mariana Islands

Data code: CQ

Dependency status: commonwealth in political union with the US;
  federal funds to the Commonwealth administered by the US Department
  of the Interior, Office of Insular Affairs

Government type: commonwealth; self-governing with locally
  elected governor, lieutenant governor, and legislature

Capital: Saipan

Administrative divisions: none (commonwealth in political union
  with the US); there are no first-order administrative divisions as
  defined by the US Government, but there are four municipalities at
  the second order; Northern Islands, Rota, Saipan, Tinian

Independence: none (commonwealth in political union with the US)

National holiday: Commonwealth Day, 8 January (1978)

Constitution: Covenant Agreement effective 4 November 1986 and
  the Constitution of the Commonwealth of the Northern Mariana Islands
  effective 1 January 1978

Legal system: based on US system, except for customs, wages,
  immigration laws, and taxation

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; indigenous inhabitants are
  US citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON of the US (since
  20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
  1993)
  head of government: Governor Pedro P. TENORIO (since NA January
  1998) and Lieutenant Governor Jesus R. SABLAN (since NA January 1998)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
  on the same ticket by popular vote for four-year terms; election
  last held in NA November 1997 (next to be held NA November 2001)
  election results: Pedro P. TENORIO elected governor in a three-way
  race; percent of vote--Pedro P. TENORIO (Republican) 47%

Legislative branch: bicameral Legislature consists of the Senate
  (9 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve four-year
  staggered terms) and the House of Representatives (18 seats; members
  are elected by popular vote to serve two-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held NA November 1997 (next to be held NA
  November 1999); House of Representatives--last held NA November 1997
  (next to be held NA November 1999)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Republicans 8, Democrats 1; House of Representatives--percent
  of vote by party--NA; seats by party--Republicans 13, Democrats 5
  note: the Commonwealth does not have a nonvoting delegate in
  Congress; instead, it has an elected official or "resident
  representative" located in Washington, DC; seats by party--Republican
  1 (Juan N. BABAUTA)

Judicial branch: Commonwealth Supreme Court; Superior Court;
  Federal District Court

Political parties and leaders: Republican Party [Benigno R.

International organization participation: ESCAP (associate),
  Interpol (subbureau), SPC

Flag description: blue, with a white, five-pointed star
  superimposed on the gray silhouette of a latte stone (a traditional
  foundation stone used in building) in the center, surrounded by a
  wreath



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy benefits substantially from
  financial assistance from the US. The rate of funding has declined
  as locally generated government revenues have grown. An agreement
  for the years 1986 to 1992 entitled the islands to $228 million for
  capital development, government operations, and special programs.
  Since 1992, funding has been extended one year at a time. The
  commonwealth received $27.7 million from FY93/94 through FY95/96.
  For FY96/97 through FY02/03, funding of $11 million will be provided
  for infrastructure, with an equal local match. A rapidly growing
  chief source of income is the tourist industry, which now employs
  about 50% of the work force. Japanese tourists predominate. The
  agricultural sector is of minor importance and is made up of cattle
  ranches and small farms producing coconuts, breadfruit, tomatoes,
  and melons. Garment production is the fastest growing industry with
  employment of 12,000 mostly Chinese workers and shipments of $1
  billion to the US in 1998 under duty and quota exemptions.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$524 million (1996 est.)
  note: GDP numbers reflect US spending

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$9,300 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.5% (1994 est.)

Labor force: 6,006 total indigenous labor force; 2,699
  unemployed; 28,717 foreign workers (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: managerial 20.5%, technical, sales
  16.4%, services 19.3%, farming 3.1%, precision production 13.8%,
  operators, fabricators 26.9%

Unemployment rate: 14% (residents)

Budget:
  revenues: $221 million
  expenditures: $213 million, including capital expenditures of $17.7
  million (1996)

Industries: tourism, construction, garments, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: coconuts, fruits, vegetables; cattle

Exports: $1 billion (1998)

Exports--commodities: garments

Exports--partners: US

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: food, construction equipment and materials,
  petroleum products

Imports--partners: US, Japan

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $21.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 13,618 (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3

Radios: 15,460 (1995 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (on Saipan and one station
  planned for Rota; in addition, two cable stations on Saipan provide
  varied programming from satellite networks) (1997)

Televisions: 15,460 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 362 km (1991 est.)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Saipan, Tinian

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Norway
------





Introduction



Background: Norway gained its independence from Sweden in 1905.
  As a separate realm, Norway stayed free of World War I but suffered
  German occupation in World War II. Discovery of oil and gas in
  adjacent waters in the late 1960s gave a strong boost to Norway's
  economic fortunes. Norway is planning for the time when its oil and
  gas reserves are depleted and is focusing on containing spending on
  its extensive welfare system. It has decided at this time not to
  join the European Union and the new euro currency regime.



Geography



Location: Northern Europe, bordering the North Sea and the North
  Atlantic Ocean, west of Sweden

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 10 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 324,220 sq km
  land: 307,860 sq km
  water: 16,360 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,515 km
  border countries: Finland 729 km, Sweden 1,619 km, Russia 167 km

Coastline: 21,925 km (includes mainland 3,419 km, large islands
  2,413 km, long fjords, numerous small islands, and minor
  indentations 16,093 km)

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 10 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: temperate along coast, modified by North Atlantic
  Current; colder interior; rainy year-round on west coast

Terrain: glaciated; mostly high plateaus and rugged mountains
  broken by fertile valleys; small, scattered plains; coastline deeply
  indented by fjords; arctic tundra in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Norwegian Sea 0 m
  highest point: Glittertinden 2,472 m

Natural resources: petroleum, copper, natural gas, pyrites,
  nickel, iron ore, zinc, lead, fish, timber, hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 27%
  other: 70% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 970 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: water pollution; acid rain damaging
  forests and adversely affecting lakes, threatening fish stocks; air
  pollution from vehicle emissions

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: about two-thirds mountains; some 50,000 islands
  off its much indented coastline; strategic location adjacent to sea
  lanes and air routes in North Atlantic; one of most rugged and
  longest coastlines in world; Norway is the only NATO member having a
  land boundary with Russia



People



Population: 4,438,547 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 447,607; female 423,844)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 1,462,906; female 1,415,992)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 286,339; female 401,859) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.4% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.54 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.12 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.62 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.96 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.36 years
  male: 75.55 years
  female: 81.35 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.77 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Norwegian(s)
  adjective: Norwegian

Ethnic groups: Germanic (Nordic, Alpine, Baltic), Lapps (Sami)
  20,000

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 87.8% (state church), other
  Protestant and Roman Catholic 3.8%, none 3.2%, unknown 5.2% (1980)

Languages: Norwegian (official)
  note: small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1976 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Norway
  conventional short form: Norway
  local long form: Kongeriket Norge
  local short form: Norge

Data code: NO

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Oslo

Administrative divisions: 19 provinces (fylker, singular--fylke);
  Akershus, Aust-Agder, Buskerud, Finnmark, Hedmark, Hordaland, More
  og Romsdal, Nordland, Nord-Trondelag, Oppland, Oslo, Ostfold,
  Rogaland, Sogn og Fjordane, Sor-Trondelag, Telemark, Troms,
  Vest-Agder, Vestfold

Dependent areas: Bouvet Island, Jan Mayen, Svalbard

Independence: 26 October 1905 (from Sweden)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 17 May (1814)

Constitution: 17 May 1814, modified in 1884

Legal system: mixture of customary law, civil law system, and
  common law traditions; Supreme Court renders advisory opinions to
  legislature when asked; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King HARALD V (since 17 January 1991); Heir Apparent
  Crown Prince HAAKON MAGNUS, son of the monarch (born 20 July 1973)
  head of government: Prime Minister Kjell Magne BONDEVIK (since 15
  October 1997)
  cabinet: State Council appointed by the monarch with the approval of
  the Parliament
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; following parliamentary
  elections, the leader of the majority party or leader of a majority
  coalition is usually appointed prime minister by the monarch with
  the approval of the Parliament

Legislative branch: modified unicameral Parliament or Storting
  which, for certain purposes, divides itself into two chambers (165
  seats; members are elected by popular vote by proportional
  representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 15 September 1997 (next to be held NA September
  2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Labor 35%, Center Party
  7.9%, Conservatives 14.3%, Christian People's 13.7%, Socialist Left
  6%, Progress 15.3%, Liberal Party 4.4%, other parties 1.6%; seats by
  party--Labor 65, Center Party 11, Conservatives 23, Christian
  People's 25, Socialist Left 9, Progress 25, Liberal Party 6, other
  parties 1
  note: for certain purposes, the Parliament divides itself into two
  chambers and elects one-fourth of its membership to an upper house
  or Lagting

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Hoyesterett, justices appointed
  by the monarch

Political parties and leaders: Labor Party [Thorbjorn JAGLAND];

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, CBSS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA, FAO,
  IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, MONUA, MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO, NC, NEA, NIB, NSG, OPCW,
  OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOP,
  UNPREDEP, UPU, WEU (associate), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Tom Erik VRAALSON
  chancery: 2720 34th Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Houston, Miami, Minneapolis, New York, and San
  Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador David B. HERMELIN
  embassy: Drammensveien 18, 0244 Oslo
  mailing address: PSC 69, Box 1000, APO AE 09707

Flag description: red with a blue cross outlined in white that
  extends to the edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is
  shifted to the hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)



Economy



Economy--overview: Norway is a prosperous bastion of welfare
  capitalism. The economy consists of a combination of free market
  activity and government intervention. The government controls key
  areas, such as the vital petroleum sector (through large-scale state
  enterprises), and extensively subsidizes agriculture, fishing, and
  areas with sparse resources. Norway maintains an extensive welfare
  system that helps propel public sector expenditures to more than 50%
  of GDP and results in one of the highest average tax levels in the
  world. A major shipping nation, with a high dependence on
  international trade, Norway is basically an exporter of raw
  materials and semiprocessed goods. The country is richly endowed
  with natural resources--petroleum, hydropower, fish, forests, and
  minerals--and is highly dependent on its oil production and
  international oil prices. Only Saudi Arabia exports more oil than
  Norway. Norway imports more than half its food needs. Oslo opted to
  stay out of the EU during a referendum in November 1994. Economic
  growth in 1999 should drop to about 1%. Despite their high per
  capita income and generous welfare benefits, Norwegians worry about
  that time in the 21st century when the oil and gas run out.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$109 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$24,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2%
  industry: 30%
  services: 68% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.1%
  highest 10%: 21.2% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.3 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 71%, industry 23%,
  agriculture, forestry, and fishing 6% (1993)

Unemployment rate: 2.6% (yearend 1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $48.6 billion
  expenditures: $53 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1994 est.)

Industries: petroleum and gas, food processing, shipbuilding,
  pulp and paper products, metals, chemicals, timber, mining,
  textiles, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 2.7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 103.374 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.76%
  hydro: 99.23%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0.01% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 112.374 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 4.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 13.2 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: oats, other grains; beef, milk; fish

Exports: $39.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 55%,
  machinery and equipment, metals, chemicals, ships, fish (1997)

Exports--partners: EU 76% (UK 19%, Germany 10%, Netherlands 11%,
  Sweden 9%, France 8%), US 6% (1997)

Imports: $37.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, chemicals, metals,
  foodstuffs

Imports--partners: EU 68% (Sweden 16%, Germany 14%, UK 9%, Denmark
  7%, Netherlands 4%), US 6%, Japan 4%(1997)

Debt--external: none?Norway is a net external creditor

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.4 billion (1998)

Currency: 1 Norwegian krone (NKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Norwegian kroner (NKr) per US$1--7.4524 (January
  1999), 7.5451 (1998), 7.0734 (1997), 6.4498 (1996), 6.3352 (1995),
  7.0576 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2.39 million (1994 est.); 470,000 cellular telephone
  subscribers (1994)

Telephone system: high-quality domestic and international
  telephone, telegraph, and telex services
  domestic: NA domestic satellite earth stations
  international: 2 buried coaxial cable systems; 4 coaxial submarine
  cables; satellite earth stations--NA Eutelsat, NA Intelsat (Atlantic
  Ocean), and 1 Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions);
  note--Norway shares the Inmarsat earth station with the other Nordic
  countries (Denmark, Finland, Iceland, and Sweden)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 46, FM 493 (350 private and 143
  government), shortwave 0

Radios: 3.3 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 209 (1997)

Televisions: 1.5 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,012 km
  standard gauge: 4,012 km 1.435-m gauge (2,422 km electrified; 96 km
  double track) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 91,180 km
  paved: 67,473 km (including 109 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 23,707 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 1,577 km along west coast; navigable by 2.4 m draft
  vessels maximum

Pipelines: refined petroleum products 53 km

Ports and harbors: Bergen, Drammen, Floro, Hammerfest, Harstad,
  Haugesund, Kristiansand, Larvik, Narvik, Oslo, Porsgrunn, Stavanger,
  Tromso, Trondheim

Merchant marine:
  total: 788 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 21,200,416
  GRT/33,642,888 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 106, cargo 150, chemical tanker 99, combination
  bulk 8, combination ore/oil 39, container 19, liquefied gas tanker
  86, multifunction large-load carrier 1, oil tanker 143, passenger
  12, refrigerated cargo 15, roll-on/roll-off cargo 52, short-sea
  passenger 22, vehicle carrier 36
  note: the government has created an internal register, the Norwegian
  International Ship register (NIS), as a subset of the Norwegian
  register; ships on the NIS enjoy many benefits of flags of
  convenience and do not have to be crewed by Norwegians (1998 est.)

Airports: 103 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 66
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 11
  under 914 m: 29 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 37
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 32 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Norwegian Army, Royal Norwegian Navy (includes
  Coast Artillery and Coast Guard), Royal Norwegian Air Force, Home
  Guard

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,103,738 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 917,244 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 27,448 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial claim in Antarctica (Queen
  Maud Land); Svalbard is the focus of a maritime boundary dispute in
  the Barents Sea between Norway and Russia

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for drugs shipped via
  the CIS and Baltic states for the European market; increasing
  domestic consumption of cannabis and amphetamines



======================================================================




@Oman
----





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Oman,
  and Persian Gulf, between Yemen and UAE

Geographic coordinates: 21 00 N, 57 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 212,460 sq km
  land: 212,460 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Kansas

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,374 km
  border countries: Saudi Arabia 676 km, UAE 410 km, Yemen 288 km

Coastline: 2,092 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: dry desert; hot, humid along coast; hot, dry interior;
  strong southwest summer monsoon (May to September) in far south

Terrain: vast central desert plain, rugged mountains in north and
  south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Arabian Sea 0 m
  highest point: Jabal Shams 2,980 m

Natural resources: petroleum, copper, asbestos, some marble,
  limestone, chromium, gypsum, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 95% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 580 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: summer winds often raise large sandstorms and
  dust storms in interior; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: rising soil salinity; beach pollution
  from oil spills; very limited natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Ship Pollution, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location with small foothold on
  Musandam Peninsula adjacent to Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit
  point for world crude oil



People



Population: 2,446,645 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 41% (male 508,681; female 489,453)
  15-64 years: 57% (male 856,062; female 535,123)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 30,083; female 27,243) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.45% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 37.98 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.29 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.6 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.1 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.33 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 24.71 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.3 years
  male: 69.31 years
  female: 73.39 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.11 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Omani(s)
  adjective: Omani

Ethnic groups: Arab, Baluchi, South Asian (Indian, Pakistani, Sri
  Lankan, Bangladeshi), African

Religions: Ibadhi Muslim 75%, Sunni Muslim, Shi'a Muslim, Hindu

Languages: Arabic (official), English, Baluchi, Urdu, Indian
  dialects

Literacy:
  definition: NA
  total population: approaching 80%
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Sultanate of Oman
  conventional short form: Oman
  local long form: Saltanat Uman
  local short form: Uman

Data code: MU

Government type: monarchy

Capital: Muscat

Administrative divisions: 6 regions (mintaqat, singular--mintaqah)
  and 2 governorates* (muhafazat, singular--muhafazah) Ad Dakhiliyah,
  Al Batinah, Al Wusta, Ash Sharqiyah, Az Zahirah, Masqat, Musandam*,
  Zufar*

Independence: 1650 (expulsion of the Portuguese)

National holiday: National Day, 18 November (1940)

Constitution: none; note--on 6 November 1996, Sultan QABOOS issued
  a royal decree promulgating a new basic law which, among other
  things, clarifies the royal succession, provides for a prime
  minister, bars ministers from holding interests in companies doing
  business with the government, establishes a bicameral Omani council,
  and guarantees basic civil liberties for Omani citizens

Legal system: based on English common law and Islamic law;
  ultimate appeal to the monarch; has not accepted compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: limited to approximately 50,000 Omanis chosen by the
  government to vote in elections for the Majlis ash-Shura

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al Said
  (since 23 July 1970); note--the monarch is both the chief of state
  and head of government
  head of government: Sultan and Prime Minister QABOOS bin Said Al
  Said (since 23 July 1970); note--the monarch is both the chief of
  state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary

Legislative branch: bicameral Majlis Oman consists of an upper
  chamber or Majlis ad-Dawla (41 seats; members appointed by the
  monarch; has advisory powers only) and a lower chamber or Majlis
  ash-Shura (82 seats; members elected by limited suffrage, however,
  the monarch makes final selections and can negate election results;
  body has some limited power to propose legislation, but otherwise
  has only advisory powers)
  elections: last held NA October 1997 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: NA

Judicial branch: none; traditional Islamic judges and a nascent
  civil court system, administered by region

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
  ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IBRD, ICAO, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent),
  ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Abdallah bin Muhammad bin Aqil al-DHAHAB
  chancery: 2535 Belmont Road, NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John D. CRAIG
  embassy: Jameat A'Duwal Al Arabiya Street, Al Khuwair area, Muscat
  mailing address: international: P. O. Box 202, Code No. 115, Medinat
  Qaboos, Muscat

Flag description: three horizontal bands of white, red, and green
  of equal width with a broad, vertical, red band on the hoist side;
  the national emblem (a khanjar dagger in its sheath superimposed on
  two crossed swords in scabbards) in white is centered at the top of
  the vertical band



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic performance is closely tied to the
  fortunes of the oil industry. Petroleum accounts for 75% of export
  earnings and government revenues and for roughly 40% of GDP. Oman
  has proved oil reserves of 4 billion barrels, equivalent to about 20
  years' production at the current rate of extraction. Agriculture is
  carried on at a subsistence level and the general population depends
  on imported food. The government is encouraging private investment,
  both domestic and foreign, as a prime force for further economic
  development. In 1998-99 the economy is suffering from weak world oil
  prices.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$18.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -8.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,900 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2%
  industry: 50%
  services: 48% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.2% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 850,000 (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $4 billion
  expenditures: $5.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 budget est.)

Industries: crude oil production and refining, natural gas
  production, construction, cement, copper

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: dates, limes, bananas, alfalfa, vegetables;
  camels, cattle; fish

Exports: $7.6 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum, reexports, fish, metals, textiles

Exports--partners: Japan 26%, China 19%, Thailand 19%, South Korea
  14%, US 4% (1997)

Imports: $4 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transportation equipment,
  manufactured goods, food, livestock, lubricants

Imports--partners: UAE 23% (largely reexports), Japan 16%, UK 14%,
  US 8%, Germany 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $3 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $76.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Omani rial (RO) = 1,000 baiza

Exchange rates: Omani rials (RO) per US$1--0.3845 (fixed rate
  since 1986)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 150,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: modern system consisting of open wire,
  microwave, and radiotelephone communication stations; limited
  coaxial cable
  domestic: open wire, microwave, radiotelephone communications, and a
  domestic satellite system with 8 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
  and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 4, shortwave 1

Radios: 1.043 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13 (in addition, there are 25
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 1.195 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 32,800 km
  paved: 9,840 km (including 550 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 22,960 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,300 km; natural gas 1,030 km

Ports and harbors: Matrah, Mina' al Fahl, Mina' Raysut

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 16,306 GRT/8,210 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 1, passenger 1, passenger-cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 143 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 6
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 137
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 58
  914 to 1,523 m: 36
  under 914 m: 35 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary (includes
  Royal Oman Police)

Military manpower--military age: 14 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 752,637 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 420,361 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.672 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 11.1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: southern boundary with the United Arab
  Emirates has not been bilaterally defined; northern section in the
  Musandam Peninsula is an administrative boundary



======================================================================




@Pacific Ocean
-------------





Geography



Location: body of water between Antarctica, Asia, Australia, and
  the Western Hemisphere

Geographic coordinates: 0 00 N, 160 00 W

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 165.384 million sq km
  note: includes Bali Sea, Bellingshausen Sea, Bering Sea, Bering
  Strait, Coral Sea, East China Sea, Flores Sea, Gulf of Alaska, Gulf
  of Tonkin, Java Sea, Philippine Sea, Ross Sea, Savu Sea, Sea of
  Japan, Sea of Okhotsk, South China Sea, Tasman Sea, Timor Sea, and
  other tributary water bodies

Area--comparative: about 18 times the size of the US; the largest
  ocean (followed by the Atlantic Ocean, the Indian Ocean, and the
  Arctic Ocean); covers about one-third of the global surface; larger
  than the total land area of the world

Coastline: 135,663 km

Climate: planetary air pressure systems and resultant wind
  patterns exhibit remarkable uniformity in the south and east; trade
  winds and westerly winds are well-developed patterns, modified by
  seasonal fluctuations; tropical cyclones (hurricanes) may form south
  of Mexico from June to October and affect Mexico and Central
  America; continental influences cause climatic uniformity to be much
  less pronounced in the eastern and western regions at the same
  latitude in the North Pacific Ocean; the western Pacific is
  monsoonal--a rainy season occurs during the summer months, when
  moisture-laden winds blow from the ocean over the land, and a dry
  season during the winter months, when dry winds blow from the Asian
  landmass back to the ocean; tropical cyclones (typhoons) may strike
  southeast and east Asia from May to December

Terrain: surface currents in the northern Pacific are dominated
  by a clockwise, warm-water gyre (broad circular system of currents)
  and in the southern Pacific by a counterclockwise, cool-water gyre;
  in the northern Pacific, sea ice forms in the Bering Sea and Sea of
  Okhotsk in winter; in the southern Pacific, sea ice from Antarctica
  reaches its northernmost extent in October; the ocean floor in the
  eastern Pacific is dominated by the East Pacific Rise, while the
  western Pacific is dissected by deep trenches, including the Mariana
  Trench, which is the world's deepest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Challenger Deep in the Mariana Trench -10,924 m
  highest point: sea level 0 m

Natural resources: oil and gas fields, polymetallic nodules, sand
  and gravel aggregates, placer deposits, fish

Natural hazards: surrounded by a zone of violent volcanic and
  earthquake activity sometimes referred to as the "Pacific Ring of
  Fire"; subject to tropical cyclones (typhoons) in southeast and east
  Asia from May to December (most frequent from July to October);
  tropical cyclones (hurricanes) may form south of Mexico and strike
  Central America and Mexico from June to October (most common in
  August and September); southern shipping lanes subject to icebergs
  from Antarctica; cyclical El Nino phenomenon occurs off the coast of
  Peru, when the trade winds slacken and the warm Equatorial
  countercurrent moves south, killing the plankton that is the primary
  food source for anchovies; consequently, the anchovies move to
  better feeding grounds, causing resident marine birds to starve by
  the thousands because of the loss of their food source; ships
  subject to superstructure icing in extreme north from October to May
  and in extreme south from May to October; persistent fog in the
  northern Pacific can be a maritime hazard from June to December

Environment--current issues: endangered marine species include the
  dugong, sea lion, sea otter, seals, turtles, and whales; oil
  pollution in Philippine Sea and South China Sea

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: the major chokepoints are the Bering Strait,
  Panama Canal, Luzon Strait, and the Singapore Strait; the Equator
  divides the Pacific Ocean into the North Pacific Ocean and the South
  Pacific Ocean; dotted with low coral islands and rugged volcanic
  islands in the southwestern Pacific Ocean



Government



Data code: none; the US Government has not approved a standard
  for hydrographic codes--see the Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic
  Codes appendix



Economy



Economy--overview: The Pacific Ocean is a major contributor to the
  world economy and particularly to those nations its waters directly
  touch. It provides low-cost sea transportation between East and
  West, extensive fishing grounds, offshore oil and gas fields,
  minerals, and sand and gravel for the construction industry. In
  1996, over 60% of the world's fish catch came from the Pacific
  Ocean. Exploitation of offshore oil and gas reserves is playing an
  ever-increasing role in the energy supplies of Australia, NZ, China,
  US, and Peru. The high cost of recovering offshore oil and gas,
  combined with the wide swings in world prices for oil since 1985,
  has slowed but not stopped new drillings.



Communications



Telephone system:
  international: several submarine cables with network nodal points on
  Guam and Hawaii



Transportation



Ports and harbors: Bangkok (Thailand), Hong Kong, Kao-hsiung
  (Taiwan), Los Angeles (US), Manila (Philippines), Pusan (South
  Korea), San Francisco (US), Seattle (US), Shanghai (China),
  Singapore, Sydney (Australia), Vladivostok (Russia), Wellington
  (NZ), Yokohama (Japan)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: some maritime disputes (see littoral
  states)



======================================================================




@Pakistan
--------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, bordering the Arabian Sea, between India
  on the east and Iran and Afghanistan on the west and China in the
  north

Geographic coordinates: 30 00 N, 70 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 803,940 sq km
  land: 778,720 sq km
  water: 25,220 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
  total: 6,774 km
  border countries: Afghanistan 2,430 km, China 523 km, India 2,912
  km, Iran 909 km

Coastline: 1,046 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly hot, dry desert; temperate in northwest; arctic
  in north

Terrain: flat Indus plain in east; mountains in north and
  northwest; Balochistan plateau in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: K2 (Mt. Godwin-Austen) 8,611 m

Natural resources: land, extensive natural gas reserves, limited
  petroleum, poor quality coal, iron ore, copper, salt, limestone

Land use:
  arable land: 27%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 5%
  other: 61% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 171,100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent earthquakes, occasionally severe
  especially in north and west; flooding along the Indus after heavy
  rains (July and August)

Environment--current issues: water pollution from raw sewage,
  industrial wastes, and agricultural runoff; limited natural fresh
  water resources; a majority of the population does not have access
  to potable water; deforestation; soil erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: controls Khyber Pass and Bolan Pass, traditional
  invasion routes between Central Asia and the Indian Subcontinent



People



Population: 138,123,359 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 41% (male 29,423,876; female 27,763,774)
  15-64 years: 55% (male 38,533,918; female 36,804,592)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 2,768,942; female 2,828,257) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.18% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 33.51 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.45 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.98 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 91.86 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 59.38 years
  male: 58.49 years
  female: 60.3 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.73 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Pakistani(s)
  adjective: Pakistani

Ethnic groups: Punjabi, Sindhi, Pashtun (Pathan), Baloch, Muhajir
  (immigrants from India and their descendants)

Religions: Muslim 97% (Sunni 77%, Shi'a 20%), Christian, Hindu,
  and other 3%

Languages: Punjabi 48%, Sindhi 12%, Siraiki (a Punjabi variant)
  10%, Pashtu 8%, Urdu (official) 8%, Balochi 3%, Hindko 2%, Brahui
  1%, English (official and lingua franca of Pakistani elite and most
  government ministries), Burushaski, and other 8%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 37.8%
  male: 50%
  female: 24.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Islamic Republic of Pakistan
  conventional short form: Pakistan
  former: West Pakistan

Data code: PK

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Islamabad

Administrative divisions: 4 provinces, 1 territory*, and 1
  capital territory**; Balochistan, Federally Administered Tribal
  Areas*, Islamabad Capital Territory**, North-West Frontier, Punjab,
  Sindh
  note: the Pakistani-administered portion of the disputed Jammu and
  Kashmir region includes Azad Kashmir and the Northern Areas

Independence: 14 August 1947 (from UK)

National holiday: Pakistan Day, 23 March (1956) (proclamation of
  the republic)

Constitution: 10 April 1973, suspended 5 July 1977, restored with
  amendments 30 December 1985

Legal system: based on English common law with provisions to
  accommodate Pakistan's status as an Islamic state; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal; separate electorates and
  reserved parliamentary seats for non-Muslims

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Mohammad Rafiq TARAR (since 31 December
  1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Mohammad Nawaz SHARIF (since 17
  February 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
  elections: president elected by Parliament for a five-year term;
  election last held 31 December 1997 (next to be held no later than 1
  January 2003); following legislative elections, the leader of the
  majority party or leader of a majority coalition is usually elected
  prime minister by the National Assembly; election last held 3
  February 1997 (next to be held NA February 2002)
  election results: Mohammad Rafiq TARAR elected president; percent of
  Parliament and provincial vote--NA; Mohammad Nawaz SHARIF elected
  prime minister; percent of National Assembly vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Majlis-e-Shoora
  consists of the Senate (87 seats; members indirectly elected by
  provincial assemblies to serve six-year terms; one-third of the
  members up for election every two years) and the National Assembly
  (217 seats--10 represent non-Muslims; members elected by popular vote
  to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 12 March 1997 (next to be held NA March
  1999); National Assembly--last held 3 February 1997 (next to be held
  NA February 2002)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PML/N 30, PPP 17, ANP 7, MQM/A 6, JWP 5, BNP 4, JUI/F 2, PML/J
  2, BNM/M 1, PKMAP 1, TJP 1, independents 6, vacant 5; National
  Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PML/N 137, PPP
  18, MQM/A 12, ANP 10, BNP 3, JWP 2, JUI/F 2, PPP/SB 1, NPP 1,
  independents 21, minorities 10

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judicial chiefs are appointed by
  the president; Federal Islamic (Shari'a) Court

Political parties and leaders:
  government: Pakistan Muslim League, Nawaz Sharif faction or PML/N
  frequently shifting: Jamiat Ulema-i-Pakistan, Niazi faction or
  Milli Yakjheti Council or MYC is an umbrella organization which
  Ulema-i-Islam, Sami-ul-Haq faction or JUI/S, Tehrik-I-Jafria
  Noorani faction or JUP/NO
  note: political alliances in Pakistan can shift frequently;
  subsequent to the election Jamiat Ulema-i-Islami, Fazlur Rehman
  group or JUI/F was disbanded

Political pressure groups and leaders: military remains important
  political force; ulema (clergy), landowners, industrialists, and
  small merchants also influential

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP, ECO,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-19, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MONUA, NAM, OAS (observer),
  OIC, OPCW, PCA, SAARC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
  UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNOMIL, UNOMSIL, UNPREDEP, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Riaz Hussain KHOKHAR
  chancery: 2315 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador William MILAM
  embassy: Diplomatic Enclave, Ramna 5, Islamabad
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1048, Unit 62200, APO AE 09812-2200
  consulate(s) general: Karachi
  consulate(s): Lahore, Peshawar

Flag description: green with a vertical white band (symbolizing
  the role of religious minorities) on the hoist side; a large white
  crescent and star are centered in the green field; the crescent,
  star, and color green are traditional symbols of Islam



Economy



Economy--overview: Pakistan continues to suffer through a damaging
  foreign exchange crisis--stemming from years of loose fiscal policies
  that have exacerbated inflation and allowed public debt to explode.
  After accruing more than $1.5 billion in debt arrears in the first
  six months of FY98/99, Pakistani officials approached multilateral
  creditors requesting balance-of-payments relief and structural
  support. In January 1999, Islamabad received more than $1 billion in
  loans along with $3 billion in debt relief following the Finance
  Minister DAR's pledge to implement an economic reform program to
  reduce the budget deficit, deepen the financial sector, and broaden
  the industrial base. Although the economy has shown signs of
  improvement following implementation of some corrective measures,
  Prime Minister SHARIF--historically--has failed to implement the tough
  structural reforms necessary for sustained, longer-term growth. The
  government must also cope with long-standing economic
  vulnerabilities--inadequate infrastructure and low levels of literacy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$270 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 24.2%
  industry: 26.4%
  services: 49.4% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 34% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.4%
  highest 10%: 25.2% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.8% (FY97/98)

Labor force: 37.8 million (1998)
  note: extensive export of labor, mostly to the Middle East, and use
  of child labor

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 47%, mining and
  manufacturing 17%, services 17%, other 19%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $10.8 billion
  expenditures: $12 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY96/97)

Industries: textiles, food processing, beverages, construction
  materials, clothing, paper products, shrimp

Industrial production growth rate: 2% (FY97/98)

Electricity--production: 59.336 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 57.3%
  hydro: 42.13%
  nuclear: 0.57%
  other: 0% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 59.336 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, wheat, rice, sugarcane, fruits,
  vegetables; milk, beef, mutton, eggs

Exports: $8.5 billion (FY97/98)

Exports--commodities: cotton, textiles, clothing, rice, leather,
  carpets

Exports--partners: EU, US, Hong Kong, Japan

Imports: $10.1 billion (FY97/98)

Imports--commodities: petroleum, petroleum products, machinery,
  transportation equipment, vegetable oils, animal fats, chemicals

Imports--partners: EU, Japan, US, China

Debt--external: $34 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $2 billion (FY97/98)

Currency: 1 Pakistani rupee (PRe) = 100 paisa

Exchange rates: Pakistani rupees (PRs) per US$1--46.000 (January
  1999), 45.033 (1998), 41.086 (1997), 36.056 (1996), 31.623 (1995),
  30.548 (1994); note--annual average of official rate; parallel market
  rate is higher

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 2.828 million (1998)

Telephone system: the domestic system is mediocre, but improving;
  service is adequate for government and business use, in part because
  major businesses have established their own private systems; since
  1988, the government has promoted investment in the national
  telecommunications system on a priority basis, significantly
  increasing network capacity; despite major improvements in trunk and
  urban systems, telecommunication services are still not readily
  available to the majority of the rural population
  domestic: microwave radio relay, coaxial cable, fiber-optic cable,
  cellular, and satellite
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 2 Indian Ocean); 3 operational international gateway exchanges
  (1 at Karachi and 2 at Islamabad); microwave radio relay to
  neighboring countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 26, FM 3, shortwave 18 (1998 est.)

Radios: 10.2 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 22 (in addition, there are seven
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 2.08 million (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 8,163 km
  broad gauge: 7,718 km 1.676-m gauge (293 km electrified; 1,037 km
  double track)
  narrow gauge: 445 km 1.000-m gauge (1996 est.)

Highways:
  total: 224,774 km
  paved: 128,121 km
  unpaved: 96,653 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 885 km; natural
  gas 4,044 km (1987)

Ports and harbors: Karachi, Port Muhammad bin Qasim

Merchant marine:
  total: 23 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 384,304 GRT/619,668 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 15, container 3, oil tanker 1 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 116 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 80
  over 3,047 m: 11
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 20
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 31
  914 to 1,523 m: 15
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 18 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 7 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Civil Armed Forces,
  National Guard

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 33,496,712 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 20,519,762 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 1,553,310 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.48 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.4% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: status of Kashmir with India;
  water-sharing problems with India over the Indus River (Wular
  Barrage)

Illicit drugs: producer of illicit opium and hashish for the
  international drug trade (poppy cultivation in 1998--3,030 hectares,
  a 26% drop from 1997 because of eradication and alternative
  development); limited center for processing Afghan heroin; key
  transit area for Southwest Asian heroin moving to Western markets;
  narcotics still move from Afghanistan into Baluchistan Province



======================================================================




@Palau
-----





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the North Pacific Ocean,
  southeast of the Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 7 30 N, 134 30 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 458 sq km
  land: 458 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than 2.5 times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,519 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive fishing zone: 12 nm
  extended fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: wet season May to November; hot and humid

Terrain: varying geologically from the high, mountainous main
  island of Babelthuap to low, coral islands usually fringed by large
  barrier reefs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Ngerchelchauus 242 m

Natural resources: forests, minerals (especially gold), marine
  products, deep-seabed minerals

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (June to December)

Environment--current issues: inadequate facilities for disposal of
  solid waste; threats to the marine ecosystem from sand and coral
  dredging, illegal fishing practices, and overfishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Law of the Sea
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: includes World War II battleground of Beliliou
  (Peleliu) and world-famous rock islands; archipelago of six island
  groups totaling over 200 islands in the Caroline chain



People



Population: 18,467 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 2,595; female 2,446)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 6,867; female 5,675)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 416; female 468) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.94% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.55 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.74 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 5.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.21 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.89 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.15 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 67.75 years
  male: 64.69 years
  female: 70.98 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.66 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Palauan(s)
  adjective: Palauan

Ethnic groups: Palauans are a composite of Polynesian, Malayan,
  and Melanesian races

Religions: Christian (Catholics, Seventh-Day Adventists,
  Jehovah's Witnesses, the Assembly of God, the Liebenzell Mission,
  and Latter-Day Saints), Modekngei religion (one-third of the
  population observes this religion which is indigenous to Palau)

Languages: English (official in all of Palau's 16 states),
  Sonsorolese (official in the state of Sonsoral), Angaur and Japanese
  (in the state of Anguar), Tobi (in the state of Tobi), Palauan (in
  the other 13 states)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 92%
  male: 93%
  female: 90% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Palau
  conventional short form: Palau
  local long form: Beluu er a Belau
  local short form: Belau
  former: Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands

Data code: PS

Government type: constitutional government in free association
  with the US; the Compact of Free Association entered into force 1
  October 1994

Capital: Koror
  note: a new capital is being built about 20 km northeast of Koror

Administrative divisions: 18 states; Aimeliik, Airai, Angaur,
  Hatobohei, Kayangel, Koror, Melekeok, Ngaraard, Ngarchelong,
  Ngardmau, Ngatpang, Ngchesar, Ngeremlengui, Ngiwal, Palau Island,
  Peleliu, Sonsoral, Tobi

Independence: 1 October 1994 (from the US-administered UN
  Trusteeship)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 9 July (1979)

Constitution: 1 January 1981

Legal system: based on Trust Territory laws, acts of the
  legislature, municipal, common, and customary laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Kuniwo NAKAMURA (since 1 January 1993) and
  Vice President Tommy E. REMENGESAU Jr. (since 1 January 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Kuniwo NAKAMURA (since 1 January 1993)
  and Vice President Tommy E. REMENGESAU Jr. (since 1 January 1993);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet
  elections: president and vice president elected on separate tickets
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 11 November
  1996 (next to be held NA November 2000)
  election results: Kuniwo NAKAMURA reelected president; percent of
  vote--Kuniwo NAKAMURA 64%, Chief Ibedul Yutuka GIBBONS 36%; Tommy E.
  REMENGESAU Jr. reelected vice president; percent of vote--Tommy E.
  REMENGESAU Jr. 69%, Kione ISECHAL 31%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Olbiil Era Kelulau
  (OEK) consists of the Senate (14 seats; members elected by popular
  vote on a population basis to serve four-year terms) and the House
  of Delegates (16 seats--one from each state; members elected by
  popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 11 November 1996 (next to be held NA
  November 2000); House of Delegates--last held 11 November 1996 (next
  to be held NA November 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--NA; House of Delegates--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--NA

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; National Court; Court of Common
  Pleas

Political parties and leaders: Palau Nationalist Party [Polycarp
  BASILIUS]

International organization participation: ESCAP, IBRD, ICAO,
  ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IMF, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD, WHO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Hersey KYOTA
  chancery: 1150 18th Street NW, Suite 750, Washington, DC 20036

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas C. HUBBARD (resident in Manila);
  Charge d'Affaires Allen E. NUGENT
  embassy: address NA, Koror
  mailing address: P.O. Box 6028, Republic of Palau 96940

Flag description: light blue with a large yellow disk
  (representing the moon) shifted slightly to the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy consists primarily of subsistence
  agriculture and fishing. The government is the major employer of the
  work force, relying heavily on financial assistance from the US. The
  population enjoys a per capita income of more than twice that of the
  Philippines and much of Micronesia. Long-run prospects for the
  tourist sector have been greatly bolstered by the expansion of air
  travel in the Pacific and the rising prosperity of leading East
  Asian countries.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$160 million (1997 est.)
  note: GDP numbers reflect US spending

GDP--real growth rate: 10% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$8,800 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 7%

Budget:
  revenues: $52.9 million
  expenditures: $59.9 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: tourism, craft items (from shell, wood, pearls), some
  commercial fishing and agriculture

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 200 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 85%
  hydro: 15%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 200 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, copra, cassava (tapioca), sweet
  potatoes

Exports: $14.3 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: trochus (type of shellfish), tuna, copra,
  handicrafts

Exports--partners: US, Japan

Imports: $72.4 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: NA

Imports--partners: US

Debt--external: about $100 million (1989)

Economic aid--recipient: $155.8 million (1995); note?the Compact
  of Free Association with the US, entered into after the end of the
  UN trusteeship on 1 October 1994, will provide Palau with up to $700
  million in US aid over 15 years in return for furnishing military
  facilities

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 1,500 (1988 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 9,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 1,600 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 61 km
  paved: 36 km
  unpaved: 25 km

Ports and harbors: Koror

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US; under a
  Compact of Free Association between Palau and the US, the US
  military is granted access to the islands for 50 years



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Palmyra Atoll
-------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from Hawaii to American Samoa

Geographic coordinates: 5 52 N, 162 06 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 11.9 sq km
  land: 11.9 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 20 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 14.5 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: equatorial, hot, and very rainy

Terrain: very low

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 2 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 100%
  other: 0%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: about 50 islets covered with dense vegetation,
  coconut trees, and balsa-like trees up to 30 meters tall



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Palmyra Atoll

Data code: LQ

Dependency status: incorporated territory of the US; privately
  owned, but administered from Washington, DC by the Office of Insular
  Affairs, US Department of the Interior

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Transportation



Highways: much of the road and many causeways built during World
  War II are unserviceable and overgrown

Ports and harbors: West Lagoon

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)
  note: some overgrowth of vegetation on runway but still serviceable

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Panama
------





Geography



Location: Middle America, bordering both the Caribbean Sea and
  the North Pacific Ocean, between Colombia and Costa Rica

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 N, 80 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 78,200 sq km
  land: 75,990 sq km
  water: 2,210 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
  total: 555 km
  border countries: Colombia 225 km, Costa Rica 330 km

Coastline: 2,490 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, cloudy; prolonged rainy season
  (May to January), short dry season (January to May)

Terrain: interior mostly steep, rugged mountains and dissected,
  upland plains; coastal areas largely plains and rolling hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Volcan de Chiriqui 3,475 m

Natural resources: copper, mahogany forests, shrimp

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 44%
  other: 27% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 320 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: water pollution from agricultural
  runoff threatens fishery resources; deforestation of tropical rain
  forest; land degradation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law
  of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: strategic location on eastern end of isthmus
  forming land bridge connecting North and South America; controls
  Panama Canal that links North Atlantic Ocean via Caribbean Sea with
  North Pacific Ocean



People



Population: 2,778,526 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 32% (male 446,792; female 429,811)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 882,541; female 859,455)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 76,648; female 83,279) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.53% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.69 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.14 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.22 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.92 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23.35 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.66 years
  male: 71.91 years
  female: 77.51 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.54 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Panamanian(s)
  adjective: Panamanian

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Amerindian and white) 70%,
  Amerindian and mixed (West Indian) 14%, white 10%, Amerindian 6%

Religions: Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant 15%

Languages: Spanish (official), English 14%
  note: many Panamanians bilingual

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 90.8%
  male: 91.4%
  female: 90.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Panama
  conventional short form: Panama
  local long form: Republica de Panama
  local short form: Panama

Data code: PM

Government type: constitutional republic

Capital: Panama

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces (provincias,
  singular--provincia) and 2 territories* (comarca); Bocas del Toro,
  Chiriqui, Cocle, Colon, Darien, Herrera, Los Santos, Panama, San
  Blas*, Veraguas, and a new, as yet unnamed territory* or comarca
  created 7 March 1997 when President PEREZ BALLADARES signed a bill
  designating a reserve stretched across three provinces

Independence: 3 November 1903 (from Colombia; became independent
  from Spain 28 November 1821)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 November (1903)

Constitution: 11 October 1972; major reforms adopted April 1983

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
  legislative acts in the Supreme Court of Justice; accepts compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES (since 1
  September 1994); First Vice President Tomas ALTAMIRANO Duque (since
  1 September 1994); Second Vice President Felipe VIRZI (since 1
  September 1994); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  head of government: President Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES (since 1
  September 1994); First Vice President Tomas ALTAMIRANO Duque (since
  1 September 1994); Second Vice President Felipe VIRZI (since 1
  September 1994); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president and vice presidents elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 8 May 1994
  (next to be held 2 May 1999)
  election results: Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES elected president;
  percent of vote--Ernesto PEREZ BALLADARES (PRD) 33%, Mireya MOSCOSO
  DE GRUBER (PA) 29%, Ruben BLADES (MPE) 17%, Ruben Dario CARLES
  (MOLIRENA) 16%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Asamblea
  Legislativa (72 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 8 May 1994 (next to be held 2 May 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PRD
  32, PS 4, PALA 1, PA 14, MPE 6, MOLIRENA 4, PLA 3, PRC 3, PLN 2, PDC
  1, UDI 1, MORENA 1
  note: legislators from outlying rural districts are chosen on a
  plurality basis while districts located in more populous towns and
  cities elect multiple legislators by means of a proportion-based
  formula

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justicia), nine judges appointed for 10-year terms; five superior
  courts; three courts of appeal

Political parties and leaders:

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Council of
  Organized Workers or CONATO; National Council of Private Enterprise
  or CONEP; Panamanian Association of Business Executives or APEDE;
  National Civic Crusade; Chamber of Commerce; Panamanian
  Industrialists Society or SIP; Workers Confederation of the Republic
  of Panama or CTRP

International organization participation: CAN (associate), CCC,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA (observer), NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Eloy ALFARO de Alba
  chancery: 2862 McGill Terrace NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Houston, Miami, New Orleans, New
  York, Philadelphia, San Francisco, San Juan (Puerto Rico), Tampa

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Simon FERRO
  embassy: Avenida Balboa and Calle 38, Apartado 6959, Panama City 5
  mailing address: American Embassy Panama, Unit 0945, APO AA 34002

Flag description: divided into four, equal rectangles; the top
  quadrants are white (hoist side) with a blue five-pointed star in
  the center and plain red, the bottom quadrants are plain blue (hoist
  side) and white with a red five-pointed star in the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Because of its key geographic location,
  Panama's economy is service-based, heavily weighted toward banking,
  commerce, and tourism. Since taking office in 1994, President PEREZ
  BALLADARES has advanced an economic reform program designed to
  liberalize the trade regime, attract foreign investment, privatize
  state-owned enterprises, institute fiscal reform, and encourage job
  creation through labor code reform. The government privatized its
  two remaining ports along the Panama Canal in 1997 and approved the
  sale of the railroad in early 1998. It also plans to sell other
  assets, including the electric company. Panama joined the World
  Trade Organization (WTrO) and approved a tariff reduction that will
  give the country the lowest average tariff rates in Latin America. A
  banking reform law was approved by the legislature in early 1998.
  The most important sectors driving growth have been the Panama Canal
  and other shipping and port activities.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$19.9 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 8%
  industry: 18%
  services: 74% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.5%
  highest 10%: 42.5% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.4% (1998)

Labor force: 1.044 million (1997 est.)
  note: shortage of skilled labor, but an oversupply of unskilled labor

Labor force--by occupation: government and community services
  31.8%, agriculture, hunting, and fishing 26.8%, commerce,
  restaurants, and hotels 16.4%, manufacturing and mining 9.4%,
  construction 3.2%, transportation and communications 6.2%, finance,
  insurance, and real estate 4.3%

Unemployment rate: 13.1% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.4 billion
  expenditures: $2.4 billion, including capital expenditures of $341
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: construction, petroleum refining, brewing, cement and
  other construction materials, sugar milling

Industrial production growth rate: 0.4% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 3.55 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 29.58%
  hydro: 70.42%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3.488 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 157 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 95 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, rice, corn, coffee, sugarcane,
  vegetables; livestock; shrimp

Exports: $6.68 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: bananas 43%, shrimp 11%, sugar 4%, clothing
  5%, coffee 2%

Exports--partners: US 37%, EU, Central America and Caribbean

Imports: $7.38 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: capital goods 21%, crude oil 11%, foodstuffs
  9%, consumer goods, chemicals

Imports--partners: US 48%, EU, Central America and Caribbean, Japan

Debt--external: $7.26 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $197.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 balboa (B) = 100 centesimos

Exchange rates: balboas (B) per US$1--1.000 (fixed rate)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 273,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: domestic and international facilities well
  developed
  domestic: NA
  international: 1 coaxial submarine cable; satellite earth stations--2
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean); connected to the Central American
  Microwave System

Radio broadcast stations: AM 91, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 564,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 9 (in addition, there are 17
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 420,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 355 km
  broad gauge: 76 km 1.524-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 279 km 0.914-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 11,100 km
  paved: 3,730 km (including 30 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 7,370 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 800 km navigable by shallow draft vessels; 82 km
  Panama Canal

Pipelines: crude oil 130 km

Ports and harbors: Balboa, Cristobal, Coco Solo, Manzanillo (part
  of Colon area), Vacamonte

Merchant marine:
  total: 4,632 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 98,433,972
  GRT/149,800,820 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1,335, cargo 1,028, chemical tanker 288,
  combination bulk 68, combination ore/oil 15, container 507,
  liquefied gas tanker 176, livestock carrier 9, multifunction
  large-load carrier 6, oil tanker 498, passenger 41, passenger-cargo
  5, railcar carrier 2, refrigerated cargo 312, roll-on/roll-off cargo
  102, short-sea passenger 40, specialized tanker 23, vehicle carrier
  177
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 71
  countries among which are Japan 1,262, Greece 378, Hong Kong 244,
  South Korea 259, Taiwan 229, China 193, Singapore 103, US 116,
  Switzerland 78, and Indonesia 53 (1998 est.)

Airports: 110 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 43
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 14
  under 914 m: 22 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 67
  914 to 1,523 m: 17
  under 914 m: 50 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: an amendment to the Constitution abolished the
  armed forces, but there are security forces (Panamanian Public
  Forces or PPF includes the National Police, National Maritime
  Service, and National Air Service)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 746,910 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 511,866 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $132 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.6% (1997)

Military--note: in October 1994, a month after President PEREZ
  BALLADARES assumed office, Panama's Legislative Assembly approved a
  constitutional amendment prohibiting the creation of a standing
  military force, but allowing the temporary establishment of a
  "special police force" to counter acts of "external aggression"



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: major cocaine transshipment point and major
  drug-money-laundering center; no recent signs of coca cultivation;
  monitoring of financial transactions is improving



======================================================================




@Papua New Guinea
----------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, group of islands including the
  eastern half of the island of New Guinea between the Coral Sea and
  the South Pacific Ocean, east of Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 147 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 462,840 sq km
  land: 452,860 sq km
  water: 9,980 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 820 km
  border countries: Indonesia 820 km

Coastline: 5,152 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; northwest monsoon (December to March),
  southeast monsoon (May to October); slight seasonal temperature
  variation

Terrain: mostly mountains with coastal lowlands and rolling
  foothills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Wilhelm 4,509 m

Natural resources: gold, copper, silver, natural gas, timber,
  oil, fisheries

Land use:
  arable land: 0.1%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 92.9%
  other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: active volcanism; situated along the Pacific
  "Rim of Fire"; the country is subject to frequent and sometimes
  severe earthquakes; mud slides

Environment--current issues: rain forest subject to deforestation
  as a result of growing commercial demand for tropical timber;
  pollution from mining projects; severe drought

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: shares island of New Guinea with Indonesia; one
  of world's largest swamps along southwest coast



People



Population: 4,705,126 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 39% (male 951,532; female 902,841)
  15-64 years: 58% (male 1,411,053; female 1,298,937)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 64,101; female 76,662) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.26% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 32.04 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.47 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 55.58 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 58.47 years
  male: 57.58 years
  female: 59.4 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.17 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Papua New Guinean(s)
  adjective: Papua New Guinean

Ethnic groups: Melanesian, Papuan, Negrito, Micronesian,
  Polynesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 22%, Lutheran 16%,
  Presbyterian/Methodist/London Missionary Society 8%, Anglican 5%,
  Evangelical Alliance 4%, Seventh-Day Adventist 1%, other Protestant
  sects 10%, indigenous beliefs 34%

Languages: English spoken by 1%-2%, pidgin English widespread,
  Motu spoken in Papua region
  note: 715 indigenous languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 72.2%
  male: 81%
  female: 62.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Independent State of Papua New Guinea
  conventional short form: Papua New Guinea
  abbreviation: PNG

Data code: PP

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Port Moresby

Administrative divisions: 20 provinces; Bougainville, Central,
  Chimbu, Eastern Highlands, East New Britain, East Sepik, Enga, Gulf,
  Madang, Manus, Milne Bay, Morobe, National Capital, New Ireland,
  Northern, Sandaun, Southern Highlands, Western, Western Highlands,
  West New Britain

Independence: 16 September 1975 (from the Australian-administered
  UN trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 16 September (1975)

Constitution: 16 September 1975

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Silas ATOPARE (since 13 November
  1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Bill SKATE (since 22 July 1997);
  Deputy Prime Minister Iairo LASARO (since 20 October 1998)
  cabinet: National Executive Council appointed by the governor
  general on the recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the National Executive Council; prime minister and
  deputy prime minister appointed by the governor general for up to
  five years on the basis of majority support in National Parliament

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament--sometimes
  referred to as the House of Assembly (109 seats--89 elected from open
  electorates and 20 from provincial electorates; members elected by
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 14-28 June 1997 (next to be held NA June 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PPP 15%, Pangu Pati 14%,
  NA 14%, PDM 8%, PNC 6%, PAP 5%, UP 3%, NP 1%, PUP 1%, independents
  33%; seats by party--PPP 16, Pangu Pati 15, NA 15, PDM 9, PNC 7, PAP
  5, UP 3, NP 1, PUP 1, independents 37; note--association with
  political parties is very fluid

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, the chief justice is appointed by
  the governor general on the proposal of the National Executive
  Council after consultation with the minister responsible for
  justice, other judges are appointed by the Judicial and Legal
  Services Commission

Political parties and leaders: Bougainville Unity Alliance or BUA
  MUMURIK]

International organization participation: ACP, APEC, AsDB, ASEAN
  (observer), C, CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OPCW, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Nagora Y. BOGAN
  chancery: 1779 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Arma Jane KARAER
  embassy: Douglas Street, Port Moresby
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1492, Port Moresby

Flag description: divided diagonally from upper hoist-side
  corner; the upper triangle is red with a soaring yellow bird of
  paradise centered; the lower triangle is black with five white
  five-pointed stars of the Southern Cross constellation centered



Economy



Economy--overview: Papua New Guinea is richly endowed with natural
  resources, but exploitation has been hampered by the rugged terrain
  and the high cost of developing infrastructure. Agriculture provides
  a subsistence livelihood for the bulk of the population. Mineral
  deposits, including oil, copper, and gold, account for 72% of export
  earnings. Budgetary support from Australia and development aid under
  World Bank auspices have helped sustain the economy. In 1995, Port
  Moresby reached agreement with the IMF and World Bank on a
  structural adjustment program, of which the first phase was
  successfully completed in 1996. In 1997, droughts caused by the El
  Nino weather pattern wreaked havoc on Papua New Guinea's coffee,
  cocoa, and coconut production, the mainstays of the
  agricultural-based economy and major sources of export earnings. The
  coffee crop was slashed by up to 50% in 1997. Despite problems with
  drought, the year 1998 saw a small recovery in GDP.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$11.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 28.2%
  industry: 34.5%
  services: 37.3% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.7%
  highest 10%: 40.5% (1996)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 12% (FY97/98 est.)

Labor force: 1.941 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 64% (1993 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $1.5 billion
  expenditures: $1.35 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: copra crushing, palm oil processing, plywood
  production, wood chip production; mining of gold, silver, and
  copper; crude oil production; construction, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 70.59%
  hydro: 29.41%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, tea,
  rubber, sweet potatoes, fruit, vegetables; poultry, pork

Exports: $2.2 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: gold, copper ore, oil, logs, palm oil,
  coffee, cocoa, crayfish and prawns

Exports--partners: Australia, Japan, Germany, UK, South Korea,
  China

Imports: $1.5 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  manufactured goods, food, fuels, chemicals

Imports--partners: Australia, Singapore, Japan, US, New Zealand,
  Malaysia

Debt--external: $3.2 billion (1995)

Economic aid--recipient: $376.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 kina (K) = 100 toea

Exchange rates: kina (K) per US$1--0.47 (December 1998), 0.6975
  (1997), 0.7588 (1996), 0.7835 (1995), 0.9950 (1994); note--the
  government floated the kina on 10 October 1994

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 63,212 (1986 est.)

Telephone system: services are adequate and being improved;
  facilities provide radiotelephone and telegraph, coastal radio,
  aeronautical radio, and international radio communication services
  domestic: mostly radiotelephone
  international: submarine cables to Australia and Guam; satellite
  earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean); international radio
  communication service

Radio broadcast stations: AM 31, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 298,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1997)

Televisions: 10,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 19,600 km
  paved: 686 km
  unpaved: 18,914 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 10,940 km

Ports and harbors: Kieta, Lae, Madang, Port Moresby, Rabaul

Merchant marine:
  total: 20 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 35,400 GRT/50,869 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 2, cargo 6, chemical tanker 1, combination
  ore/oil 5, container 1, oil tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 492 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 19
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 473
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
  914 to 1,523 m: 60
  under 914 m: 400 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Papua New Guinea Defense Force (includes
  Ground, Naval, and Air Forces, and Special Forces Unit)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,238,683 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 687,978 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $41.5 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Paracel Islands
---------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, group of small islands and reefs in
  the South China Sea, about one-third of the way from central Vietnam
  to the northern Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 16 30 N, 112 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: NA sq km
  land: NA sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 518 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: tropical

Terrain: NA

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Rocky Island 14 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: typhoons

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there are scattered Chinese garrisons



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Paracel Islands

Data code: PF



Economy



Economy--overview: China announced plans in 1997 to open the
  islands for tourism.



Transportation



Ports and harbors: small Chinese port facilities on Woody Island
  and Duncan Island being expanded

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: occupied by China



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: occupied by China, but claimed by Taiwan
  and Vietnam



======================================================================




@Paraguay
--------





Geography



Location: Central South America, northeast of Argentina

Geographic coordinates: 23 00 S, 58 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 406,750 sq km
  land: 397,300 sq km
  water: 9,450 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,920 km
  border countries: Argentina 1,880 km, Bolivia 750 km, Brazil 1,290 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical; substantial rainfall in the eastern
  portions, becoming semiarid in the far west

Terrain: grassy plains and wooded hills east of Rio Paraguay;
  Gran Chaco region west of Rio Paraguay mostly low, marshy plain near
  the river, and dry forest and thorny scrub elsewhere

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: junction of Rio Paraguay and Rio Parana 46 m
  highest point: Cerro San Rafael 850 m

Natural resources: hydropower, timber, iron ore, manganese,
  limestone

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 55%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 7% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 670 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: local flooding in southeast (early September to
  June); poorly drained plains may become boggy (early October to June)

Environment--current issues: deforestation (an estimated 2 million
  hectares of forest land have been lost from 1958-85); water
  pollution; inadequate means for waste disposal present health risks
  for many urban residents

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban

Geography--note: landlocked; lies between Argentina, Bolivia, and
  Brazil



People



Population: 5,434,095 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 39% (male 1,086,107; female 1,049,833)
  15-64 years: 56% (male 1,528,127; female 1,517,213)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 116,761; female 136,054) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.65% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 31.87 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.23 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.09 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.86 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 36.35 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.43 years
  male: 70.47 years
  female: 74.49 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.22 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Paraguayan(s)
  adjective: Paraguayan

Ethnic groups: mestizo (mixed Spanish and Amerindian) 95%, white
  plus Amerindian 5%

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Mennonite and other Protestant
  denominations

Languages: Spanish (official), Guarani

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 92.1%
  male: 93.5%
  female: 90.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Paraguay
  conventional short form: Paraguay
  local long form: Republica del Paraguay
  local short form: Paraguay

Data code: PA

Government type: republic

Capital: Asuncion

Administrative divisions: 18 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento); Alto Paraguay, Alto Parana, Amambay,
  Asuncion, Boqueron, Caaguazu, Caazapa, Canindeyu, Central,
  Concepcion, Cordillera, Guaira, Itapua, Misiones, Neembucu,
  Paraguari, Presidente Hayes, San Pedro

Independence: 14 May 1811 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Days, 14-15 May (1811)

Constitution: promulgated 20 June 1992

Legal system: based on Argentine codes, Roman law, and French
  codes; judicial review of legislative acts in Supreme Court of
  Justice; does not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory up to age 60

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Luis GONZALEZ Macchi (since 28 March
  1999); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Luis GONZALEZ Macchi (since 28 March
  1999); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the president
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 10 May 1998
  (next to be held NA May 2003)
  election results: Raul CUBAS Grau elected president; percent of
  vote--55.3%; resigned 28 March 1999
  note: President Luis GONZALEZ Macchi, formerly president of the
  Chamber of Senators, constitutionally succeeded President Raul CUBAS
  Grau, who resigned following the assassination of Vice President
  Luis Maria ARGANA; the successor to ARGANA will be decided in an
  election to be held in late 1999

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress or Congreso consists of
  the Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (45 seats; members
  are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and the
  Chamber of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (80 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Chamber of Senators--last held 10 May 1998 (next to be
  held NA May 2003); Chamber of Deputies--last held 10 May 1998 (next
  to be held NA May 2003)
  election results: Chamber of Senators--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--Colorado Party 24, PLRA/PEN 20, other 1; Chamber of
  Deputies--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--Colorado Party
  45, PLRA/PEN 35

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justicia), judges appointed on the proposal of the Counsel of
  Magistrates (Consejo de la Magistratura)

Political parties and leaders: National Republican
  Maria LJUBETIC]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Unitary Workers Central or
  CUT; Roman Catholic Church; National Workers Central or CNT;
  Paraguayan Workers Confederation or CPT

International organization participation: CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-77,
  IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU,
  LAES, LAIA, Mercosur, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  chancery: 2400 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, Miami, New Orleans, New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Maura A. HARTY
  embassy: 1776 Avenida Mariscal Lopez, Casilla Postal 402, Asuncion
  mailing address: Unit 4711, APO AA 34036-0001

Flag description: three equal, horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and blue with an emblem centered in the white band; unusual
  flag in that the emblem is different on each side; the obverse
  (hoist side at the left) bears the national coat of arms (a yellow
  five-pointed star within a green wreath capped by the words
  REPUBLICA DEL PARAGUAY, all within two circles); the reverse (hoist
  side at the right) bears the seal of the treasury (a yellow lion
  below a red Cap of Liberty and the words Paz y Justicia (Peace and
  Justice) capped by the words REPUBLICA DEL PARAGUAY, all within two
  circles)



Economy



Economy--overview: Paraguay has a market economy marked by a large
  informal sector. The informal sector features both reexport of
  imported consumer goods (electronics, whiskeys, perfumes,
  cigarettes, and office equipment) to neighboring countries as well
  as the activities of thousands of microenterprises and urban street
  vendors. The formal sector is largely oriented toward services. A
  large percentage of the population derive their living from
  agricultural activity, often on a subsistence basis. The formal
  economy has grown an average of about 3% over the past six years,
  but GDP declined in 1998. However, population has increased at about
  the same rate over the same period, leaving per capita income nearly
  stagnant. The new government of Raul CUBAS Grau was pursuing an
  economic reform agenda, albeit with limited success because of
  in-fighting in the ruling party and resistance from the opposition.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$19.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -0.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 27%
  industry: 30%
  services: 43% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 21.8% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.7%
  highest 10%: 46.6% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 14.6% (1998)

Labor force: 1.8 million (1995 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 45%

Unemployment rate: 8.2% (urban) (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.25 billion
  expenditures: $1.66 billion, including capital expenditures of $357
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: meat packing, oilseed crushing, milling, brewing,
  textiles, other light consumer goods, cement, construction

Industrial production growth rate: 5.1% (1995)

Electricity--production: 45.03 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.07%
  hydro: 99.93%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 4.768 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 40.262 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, sugarcane, soybeans, corn, wheat,
  tobacco, cassava (tapioca), fruits, vegetables; beef, pork, eggs,
  milk; timber

Exports: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: cotton, soybeans, timber, vegetable oils,
  meat products, coffee, tung oil

Exports--partners: Brazil 48%, Netherlands 22%, Argentina 9%, US
  4%, Uruguay 3%, Chile 2% (1997)

Imports: $2.5 billion (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: capital goods, consumer goods, foodstuffs,
  raw materials, fuels

Imports--partners: Brazil 29%, US 22%, Argentina 14%, Hong Kong 9%
  (1995)

Debt--external: $1.3 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $180.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 guarani (G) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: guaranies (G) per US$--2,866.3 (January 1999),
  2,755.7 (1998), 2,191.0 (1997), 2,062.8 (1996), 1,970.4 (1995),
  1,911.5 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 88,730 (1985 est.)

Telephone system: meager telephone service; principal switching
  center is Asuncion
  domestic: fair microwave radio relay network
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 40, FM 0, shortwave 7

Radios: 775,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 10 (1997)

Televisions: 370,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 971 km
  standard gauge: 441 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 60 km 1.000-m gauge
  note: there are 470 km of various gauges that are privately owned

Highways:
  total: 29,500 km
  paved: 2,803 km
  unpaved: 26,697 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 3,100 km

Ports and harbors: Asuncion, Villeta, San Antonio, Encarnacion

Merchant marine:
  total: 21 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 30,287 GRT/32,510 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 15, chemical tanker 1, oil tanker 4,
  roll-on/roll-off 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 941 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  over 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 931
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 29
  914 to 1,523 m: 349
  under 914 m: 552 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air and Marines),
  Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,311,382 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 947,347 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 55,065 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $125 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis for the international
  drug trade; transshipment country for Bolivian cocaine headed for
  Europe and the US



======================================================================




@Peru
----





Geography



Location: Western South America, bordering the South Pacific
  Ocean, between Chile and Ecuador

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 S, 76 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 1,285,220 sq km
  land: 1.28 million sq km
  water: 5,220 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Alaska

Land boundaries:
  total: 6,940 km
  border countries: Bolivia 900 km, Brazil 1,560 km, Chile 160 km,
  Colombia 2,900 km, Ecuador 1,420 km

Coastline: 2,414 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: varies from tropical in east to dry desert in west

Terrain: western coastal plain (costa), high and rugged Andes in
  center (sierra), eastern lowland jungle of Amazon Basin (selva)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Nevado Huascaran 6,768 m

Natural resources: copper, silver, gold, petroleum, timber, fish,
  iron ore, coal, phosphate, potash

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 21%
  forests and woodland: 66%
  other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes, tsunamis, flooding, landslides,
  mild volcanic activity

Environment--current issues: deforestation; overgrazing of the
  slopes of the costa and sierra leading to soil erosion;
  desertification; air pollution in Lima; pollution of rivers and
  coastal waters from municipal and mining wastes

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: shares control of Lago Titicaca, world's highest
  navigable lake, with Bolivia



People



Population: 26,624,582 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 4,786,048; female 4,637,280)
  15-64 years: 60% (male 8,045,747; female 7,939,760)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 557,252; female 658,495) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.93% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.09 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.7 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 38.97 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.38 years
  male: 68.08 years
  female: 72.78 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.23 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Peruvian(s)
  adjective: Peruvian

Ethnic groups: Amerindian 45%, mestizo (mixed Amerindian and
  white) 37%, white 15%, black, Japanese, Chinese, and other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: Spanish (official), Quechua (official), Aymara

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 88.7%
  male: 94.5%
  female: 83% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Peru
  conventional short form: Peru
  local long form: Republica del Peru
  local short form: Peru

Data code: PE

Government type: republic

Capital: Lima

Administrative divisions: 24 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento) and 1 constitutional province* (provincia
  constitucional); Amazonas, Ancash, Apurimac, Arequipa, Ayacucho,
  Cajamarca, Callao*, Cusco, Huancavelica, Huanuco, Ica, Junin, La
  Libertad, Lambayeque, Lima, Loreto, Madre de Dios, Moquegua, Pasco,
  Piura, Puno, San Martin, Tacna, Tumbes, Ucayali
  note: the 1979 constitution mandated the creation of regions
  (regiones, singular--region) to function eventually as autonomous
  economic and administrative entities; so far, 12 regions have been
  constituted from 23 of the 24 departments--Amazonas (from Loreto),
  Andres Avelino Caceres (from Huanuco, Pasco, Junin), Arequipa (from
  Arequipa), Chavin (from Ancash), Grau (from Tumbes, Piura), Inca
  (from Cusco, Madre de Dios, Apurimac), La Libertad (from La
  Libertad), Los Libertadores-Huari (from Ica, Ayacucho,
  Huancavelica), Mariategui (from Moquegua, Tacna, Puno), Nor Oriental
  del Maranon (from Lambayeque, Cajamarca, Amazonas), San Martin (from
  San Martin), Ucayali (from Ucayali); formation of another region has
  been delayed by the reluctance of the constitutional province of
  Callao to merge with the department of Lima; because of inadequate
  funding from the central government and organizational and political
  difficulties, the regions have yet to assume major responsibilities;
  the 1993 constitution retains the regions but limits their
  authority; the 1993 constitution also reaffirms the roles of
  departmental and municipal governments

Independence: 28 July 1821 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 28 July (1821)

Constitution: 31 December 1993

Legal system: based on civil law system; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Alberto Kenyo FUJIMORI Fujimori (since 28
  July 1990); note--the president is both the chief of state and head
  of government
  head of government: President Alberto Kenyo FUJIMORI Fujimori (since
  28 July 1990); note--the president is both the chief of state and
  head of government
  note: Prime Minister Victor JOYWAY (since 4 January 1999) does not
  exercise executive power; this power is in the hands of the president
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 9 April 1995 (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: President FUJIMORI reelected; percent of
  vote--Alberto FUJIMORI 64.42%, Javier PEREZ de CUELLAR 21.80%,
  Mercedes CABANILLAS 4.11%, other 9.67%

Legislative branch: unicameral Democratic Constituent Congress or
  Congresso Constituyente Democratico (120 seats; members are elected
  by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 9 April 1995 (next to be held NA April 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--C90/NM 52.1%, UPP 14%,
  other parties 33.9%; seats by party--C90/NM 67, UPP 17, APRA 8, FIM
  6, CODE-Pais Posible 5, AP 4, PPC 3, Renovation 3, IU 2, OBRAS 2,
  other parties 3

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justicia), judges are appointed by the National Council of the
  Judiciary

Political parties and leaders: Change 90-New Majority or C90/NM

Political pressure groups and leaders: leftist guerrilla groups
  RAMIREZ Durand (top leader at-large)]; Tupac Amaru Revolutionary
  (top leader at-large)]

International organization participation: APEC, CAN, CCC, ECLAC,
  FAO, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24, G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO (correspondent), ITU, LAES, LAIA,
  NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ricardo V. LUNA MENDOZA
  chancery: 1700 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami, New
  York, Paterson (New Jersey), San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dennis C. JETT
  embassy: Avenida Encalada, Cuadra 17, Monterrico, Lima
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1995, Lima 1; American Embassy (Lima),
  APO AA 34031-5000

Flag description: three equal, vertical bands of red (hoist
  side), white, and red with the coat of arms centered in the white
  band; the coat of arms features a shield bearing a llama, cinchona
  tree (the source of quinine), and a yellow cornucopia spilling out
  gold coins, all framed by a green wreath



Economy



Economy--overview: The Peruvian economy has become increasingly
  market-oriented, with major privatizations completed since 1990 in
  the mining, electricity, and telecommunications industries. An
  austerity program implemented shortly after the FUJIMORI government
  took office in July 1990 contributed to a short-lived contraction of
  economic activity, but the slide came to a halt late that year, and
  in 1991 output rose 2.4%. By working with the IMF and World Bank on
  new financial conditions and arrangements, the government succeeded
  in ending its arrears by March 1993. In 1992, GDP fell by 2.8%, in
  part because a warmer-than-usual El Nino current resulted in a 30%
  drop in the fish catch, but the economy rebounded as strong foreign
  investment helped push growth to 7% in 1993, about 13% in 1994, and
  6.8% in 1995. Growth slowed to 2.8% in 1996 as the government
  adopted tight fiscal and monetary policy to reduce the current
  account deficit and meet its IMF targets. Growth then rebounded to
  7.3% in 1997 even as inflation fell to its lowest level in 23 years.
  Capital inflows surged to record levels in early 1997 and have
  remained strong. In 1998, El Nino's impact on agriculture, the
  financial crisis in Asia, and instability in Brazilian markets
  undercut growth. While Lima publicly projects a rebound to 5% in
  1999, private sector analysts believe this figure is overly
  optimistic.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$111.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7%
  industry: 37%
  services: 56% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 54% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.9%
  highest 10%: 34.3% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 6.7% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 7.6 million (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture, mining and quarrying,
  manufacturing, construction, transport, services

Unemployment rate: 8.2%; extensive underemployment (1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $8.5 billion
  expenditures: $9.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $2
  billion (1996 est.)

Industries: mining of metals, petroleum, fishing, textiles,
  clothing, food processing, cement, auto assembly, steel,
  shipbuilding, metal fabrication

Industrial production growth rate: 1.2% (1996)

Electricity--production: 16.211 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 19.25%
  hydro: 80.75%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 16.211 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, cotton, sugarcane, rice, wheat,
  potatoes, plantains, coca; poultry, beef, dairy products, wool; fish

Exports: $6.8 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: copper, zinc, fishmeal, crude petroleum and
  byproducts, lead, refined silver, coffee, cotton

Exports--partners: US 20%, Japan 7%, UK 7%, China 7%, Germany 5%
  (1996)

Imports: $10.3 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transport equipment, foodstuffs,
  petroleum, iron and steel, chemicals, pharmaceuticals

Imports--partners: US 31%, Colombia 7%, Chile 6%, Venezuela 6%, UK
  6% (1996)

Debt--external: $25.7 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $895.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 nuevo sol (S/.) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: nuevo sol (S/.) per US$1--3.250 (January 1999),
  2.930 (1998), 2.664 (1997), 2.453 (1996), 2.253 (1995), 2.195 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 779,306 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: adequate for most requirements
  domestic: nationwide microwave radio relay system and a domestic
  satellite system with 12 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 273, FM 0, shortwave 144

Radios: 5.7 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 13 (in addition, there are 112
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 2 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,041 km
  standard gauge: 1,726 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 315 km 0.914-m gauge (1997)

Highways:
  total: 72,146 km
  paved: 7,353 km
  unpaved: 64,793 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 8,600 km of navigable tributaries of Amazon system and
  208 km of Lago Titicaca

Pipelines: crude oil 800 km; natural gas and natural gas liquids
  64 km

Ports and harbors: Callao, Chimbote, Ilo, Matarani, Paita, Puerto
  Maldonado, Salaverry, San Martin, Talara, Iquitos, Pucallpa,
  Yurimaguas
  note: Iquitos, Pucallpa, and Yurimaguas are all on the upper reaches
  of the Amazon and its tributaries

Merchant marine:
  total: 7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 51,518 GRT/75,018 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 6, oil tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 244 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 44
  over 3,047 m: 7
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 15
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 200
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 24
  914 to 1,523 m: 73
  under 914 m: 99 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (Ejercito Peruano), Navy (Marina de
  Guerra del Peru; includes Naval Air, Marines, and Coast Guard), Air
  Force (Fuerza Aerea del Peru), National Police

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 6,913,471 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,657,649 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 268,624 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $913 million (1998);
  note--may not include off-budget purchases related to military
  modernization program

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: on 26 October 1998, Peru and Ecuador
  concluded treaties on commerce and navigation and on boundary
  integration, to complete a package of agreements settling the
  long-standing boundary dispute between them; demarcation of the
  agreed-upon boundary was scheduled to begin in mid-January 1999

Illicit drugs: until recently the world's largest coca leaf
  producer, Peru has reduced the area of coca under cultivation by
  26%, from 68,800 hectares in 1997 to 51,000 hectares at the end of
  1998; most of cocaine base is shipped to neighboring Colombia and
  Brazil for processing into cocaine for the international drug
  market, but exports of finished cocaine are increasing



======================================================================




@Philippines
-----------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, archipelago between the Philippine
  Sea and the South China Sea, east of Vietnam

Geographic coordinates: 13 00 N, 122 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 300,000 sq km
  land: 298,170 sq km
  water: 1,830 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Arizona

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 36,289 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  continental shelf: to depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: irregular polygon extending up to 100 nm from
  coastline as defined by 1898 treaty; since late 1970s has also
  claimed polygonal-shaped area in South China Sea up to 285 nm in
  breadth

Climate: tropical marine; northeast monsoon (November to April);
  southwest monsoon (May to October)

Terrain: mostly mountains with narrow to extensive coastal
  lowlands

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Philippine Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Apo 2,954 m

Natural resources: timber, petroleum, nickel, cobalt, silver,
  gold, salt, copper

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 12%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 46%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 15,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: astride typhoon belt, usually affected by 15 and
  struck by five to six cyclonic storms per year; landslides; active
  volcanoes; destructive earthquakes; tsunamis

Environment--current issues: uncontrolled deforestation in
  watershed areas; soil erosion; air and water pollution in Manila;
  increasing pollution of coastal mangrove swamps which are important
  fish breeding grounds

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94,
  Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification



People



Population: 79,345,812 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 37% (male 15,057,698; female 14,555,430)
  15-64 years: 59% (male 23,168,043; female 23,715,877)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 1,269,522; female 1,579,242) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27.88 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.45 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 33.89 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 66.58 years
  male: 63.79 years
  female: 69.5 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.46 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Filipino(s)
  adjective: Philippine

Ethnic groups: Christian Malay 91.5%, Muslim Malay 4%, Chinese
  1.5%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 83%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 5%, Buddhist
  and other 3%

Languages: Pilipino (official, based on Tagalog), English
  (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 94.6%
  male: 95%
  female: 94.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of the Philippines
  conventional short form: Philippines
  local long form: Republika ng Pilipinas
  local short form: Pilipinas

Data code: RP

Government type: republic

Capital: Manila

Administrative divisions: 72 provinces and 61 chartered cities*;
  Abra, Agusan del Norte, Agusan del Sur, Aklan, Albay, Angeles*,
  Antique, Aurora, Bacolod*, Bago*, Baguio*, Bais*, Basilan, Basilan
  City*, Bataan, Batanes, Batangas, Batangas City*, Benguet, Bohol,
  Bukidnon, Bulacan, Butuan*, Cabanatuan*, Cadiz*, Cagayan, Cagayan de
  Oro*, Calbayog*, Caloocan*, Camarines Norte, Camarines Sur,
  Camiguin, Canlaon*, Capiz, Catanduanes, Cavite, Cavite City*, Cebu,
  Cebu City*, Cotabato*, Dagupan*, Danao*, Dapitan*, Davao City*
  Davao, Davao del Sur, Davao Oriental, Dipolog*, Dumaguete*, Eastern
  Samar, General Santos*, Gingoog*, Ifugao, Iligan*, Ilocos Norte,
  Ilocos Sur, Iloilo, Iloilo City*, Iriga*, Isabela, Kalinga-Apayao,
  La Carlota*, Laguna, Lanao del Norte, Lanao del Sur, Laoag*,
  Lapu-Lapu*, La Union, Legaspi*, Leyte, Lipa*, Lucena*, Maguindanao,
  Mandaue*, Manila*, Marawi*, Marinduque, Masbate, Mindoro Occidental,
  Mindoro Oriental, Misamis Occidental, Misamis Oriental, Mountain,
  Naga*, Negros Occidental, Negros Oriental, North Cotabato, Northern
  Samar, Nueva Ecija, Nueva Vizcaya, Olongapo*, Ormoc*, Oroquieta*,
  Ozamis*, Pagadian*, Palawan, Palayan*, Pampanga, Pangasinan, Pasay*,
  Puerto Princesa*, Quezon, Quezon City*, Quirino, Rizal, Romblon,
  Roxas*, Samar, San Carlos* (in Negros Occidental), San Carlos* (in
  Pangasinan), San Jose*, San Pablo*, Silay*, Siquijor, Sorsogon,
  South Cotabato, Southern Leyte, Sultan Kudarat, Sulu, Surigao*,
  Surigao del Norte, Surigao del Sur, Tacloban*, Tagaytay*,
  Tagbilaran*, Tangub*, Tarlac, Tawitawi, Toledo*, Trece Martires*,
  Zambales, Zamboanga*, Zamboanga del Norte, Zamboanga del Sur

Independence: 4 July 1946 (from US)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 June (1898) (from Spain)

Constitution: 2 February 1987, effective 11 February 1987

Legal system: based on Spanish and Anglo-American law; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA (since 30 June
  1998) and Vice President Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (since 30 June
  1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA (since 30 June
  1998) and Vice President Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO (since 30 June
  1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president with the consent of the
  Commission of Appointments
  elections: president and vice president elected on separate tickets
  by popular vote for six-year terms; election last held 11 May 1998
  (next to be held 11 May 2004)
  election results: Joseph Ejercito ESTRADA elected president; percent
  of vote--NA%; Gloria MACAPAGAL-ARROYO elected vice president; percent
  of vote--NA%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress or Kongreso consists of
  the Senate or Senado (24 seats--one-half elected every three years;
  members elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and the
  House of Representatives or Kapulungan Ng Mga Kinatawan (221 seats;
  members elected by popular vote to serve three-year terms; note--an
  additional 50 members may be appointed by the president)
  elections: Senate--last held 11 May 1998 (next to be held 11 May
  2001); House of Representatives--elections last held 11 May 1998
  (next to be held 11 May 2001)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--LAMP 12, Lakas 5, PRP 2, LP 1, other 3; note--the Senate now
  has only 23 members with one seat vacated when Gloria
  MACAPAGAL-ARROYO became vice president; the seat can only be filled
  by election and is likely to remain open until the next regular
  election in 2001; House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--LAMP 135, Lakas 37, LP 13, Aksyon
  Demokratiko 1, other 35

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed for
  four-year terms by the president on the recommendation of the
  Judicial and Bar Council

Political parties and leaders: Laban Ng Masang Pilipino or LAMP
  Eduardo "Danding" COJUANGO, chairman, Edgardo ANGARA, party
  MACAPAGAL-ARROYO, secretary general, Jose DE VENECIA, party
  SALONGA, chairman, Florencio ABAD, secretary general]; People's

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC,
  CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Raul Chaves RABE
  chancery: 1600 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Honolulu, Los Angeles, New York, San
  Francisco, and Tamuning (Guam)
  consulate(s): San Diego and Susupe (Saipan)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas C. HUBBARD
  embassy: 1201 Roxas Boulevard, Ermita Manila 1000
  mailing address: FPO 96515

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of blue (top) and
  red with a white equilateral triangle based on the hoist side; in
  the center of the triangle is a yellow sun with eight primary rays
  (each containing three individual rays) and in each corner of the
  triangle is a small yellow five-pointed star



Economy



Economy--overview: In 1998 the Philippine economy?a mixture of
  agriculture, light industry, and supporting services--deteriorated as
  a result of spillover from the Asian financial crisis and poor
  weather conditions. Growth fell to about -0.5% in 1998 from 5% in
  1997, but is expected to recover to more than 2% in 1999. The
  government has promised to continue its economic reforms to help the
  Philippines match the pace of development in the newly
  industrialized countries of East Asia. The strategy includes
  improving infrastructure, overhauling the tax system to bolster
  government revenues, and moving toward further deregulation and
  privatization of the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$270.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -0.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 20%
  industry: 32%
  services: 48% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 32% (1997 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.4%
  highest 10%: 33.5% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9.7% (1998)

Labor force: 31.3 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 39.8%, government and
  social services 19.4%, services 17.7%, manufacturing 9.8%,
  construction 5.8%, other 7.5% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: 9.6% (October 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $14.5 billion
  expenditures: $12.6 billion (1998 est.)

Industries: textiles, pharmaceuticals, chemicals, wood products,
  food processing, electronics assembly, petroleum refining, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: -1.7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 32.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 62.11%
  hydro: 20.19%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 17.7% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 32.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, coconuts, corn, sugarcane, bananas,
  pineapples, mangoes; pork, eggs, beef; fish

Exports: $25 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: electronics and telecommunications 51%,
  machinery and transport 10%, garments 9%, other 30%

Exports--partners: US 34%, Japan 17%, EU 17%, ASEAN 14%, Hong Kong
  4%, Taiwan 4% (1997 est.)

Imports: $29 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: raw materials and intermediate goods 43%,
  capital goods 36%, consumer goods 9%, fuels 9%

Imports--partners: Japan 21%, US 20%, ASEAN 12%, EU 10%, Taiwan
  5%, Hong Kong 4%, Saudi Arabia 4% (1997 est.)

Debt--external: $46.4 billion (September 1998)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $1.1 billion (1998)

Currency: 1 Philippine peso (P) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Philippine pesos (P) per US$1--38.404 (January
  1999), 40.893 (1998), 29.471 (1997), 26.216 (1996), 25.714 (1995),
  26.417 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.9 million (1997)

Telephone system: good international radiotelephone and submarine
  cable services; domestic and interisland service adequate
  domestic: domestic satellite system with 11 earth stations
  international: submarine cables to Hong Kong, Guam, Singapore,
  Taiwan, and Japan; satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1 Indian
  Ocean and 2 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 261, FM 55, shortwave 0

Radios: 9.03 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 37 (includes six stations of the
  US Armed Forces Radio and TV Service) (1997)

Televisions: 9.2 million (1998)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 897 km of which 492 km in operation
  narrow gauge: 492 km 1.067-m gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 161,313 km
  paved: 290 km
  unpaved: 161,023 km (1997)

Waterways: 3,219 km; limited to shallow-draft (less than 1.5 m)
  vessels

Pipelines: petroleum products 357 km

Ports and harbors: Batangas, Cagayan de Oro, Cebu, Davao,
  Guimaras Island, Iligan, Iloilo, Jolo, Legaspi, Manila, Masao,
  Puerto Princesa, San Fernando, Subic Bay, Zamboanga

Merchant marine:
  total: 513 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 6,544,029
  GRT/10,052,418 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 179, cargo 131, chemical tanker 6, combination
  bulk 13, container 9, liquefied gas tanker 12, livestock carrier 10,
  oil tanker 48, passenger 4, passenger-cargo 13, refrigerated cargo
  19, roll-on/roll-off cargo 17, short-sea passenger 31, specialized
  tanker 1, vehicle carrier 20
  note: a flag of convenience registry; Japan owns 19 ships, Hong Kong
  5, Cyprus 1, Denmark 1, Greece 1, Netherlands 1, Singapore 1, and UK
  1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 260 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 75
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 26
  914 to 1,523 m: 30
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 185
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 61
  under 914 m: 121 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Coast Guard and Marine
  Corps), Air Force

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 20,228,797 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 14,261,514 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 818,006 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $995 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.5% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: involved in a complex dispute over the
  Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, Taiwan, Vietnam, and possibly
  Brunei; claim to Malaysia's Sabah State has not been fully revoked

Illicit drugs: exports locally produced marijuana and hashish to
  East Asia, the US, and other Western markets; serves as a transit
  point for heroin and crystal methamphetamine



======================================================================




@Pitcairn Islands
----------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
  one-half of the way from Peru to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 25 04 S, 130 06 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 47 sq km
  land: 47 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 51 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical, hot, humid; modified by southeast trade winds;
  rainy season (November to March)

Terrain: rugged volcanic formation; rocky coastline with cliffs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pawala Valley Ridge 347 m

Natural resources: miro trees (used for handicrafts), fish
  note: manganese, iron, copper, gold, silver, and zinc have been
  discovered offshore

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons (especially November to March)

Environment--current issues: deforestation (only a small portion
  of the original forest remains because of burning and clearing for
  settlement)

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 49 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -2.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA years
  male: NA years
  female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Pitcairn Islander(s)
  adjective: Pitcairn Islander

Ethnic groups: descendants of the Bounty mutineers and their
  Tahitian wives

Religions: Seventh-Day Adventist 100%

Languages: English (official), Pitcairnese, Tahitian, 18th
  century English dialect



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Pitcairn, Henderson, Ducie, and Oeno Islands
  conventional short form: Pitcairn Islands

Data code: PC

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Adamstown

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen
  (second Saturday in June)

Constitution: Local Government Ordinance of 1964

Legal system: local island by-laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal with three years residency

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by UK High Commissioner to New Zealand and Governor
  (nonresident) of the Pitcairn Islands Robert John ALSTON (since NA
  August 1994); Commissioner (nonresident) G. D. HARRAWAY (since NA;
  is the liaison person between the governor and the Island Council)
  head of government: Island Magistrate and Chairman of the Island
  Council Jay WARREN (since NA)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; high commissioner and
  commissioner appointed by the monarch; island magistrate elected by
  popular vote for a three-year term; last known election held NA
  December 1993 (next to be held NA December 1996)
  election results: Jay WARREN reelected island magistrate; percent of
  vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Island Council (10 seats--6 elected
  by popular vote, 1 appointed by the 6 elected members, 2 appointed
  by the governor, and 1 seat for the Island Secretary; members serve
  one-year terms)
  elections: take place each December; last held NA December 1998
  (next to be held NA December 1999)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--all independents

Judicial branch: Island Court, island magistrate presides over
  the court and is elected every three years

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Pitcairn Islander coat of arms centered
  on the outer half of the flag; the coat of arms is yellow, green,
  and light blue with a shield featuring a yellow anchor



Economy



Economy--overview: The inhabitants exist on fishing and
  subsistence farming. The fertile soil of the valleys produces a wide
  variety of fruits and vegetables, including citrus, sugarcane,
  watermelons, bananas, yams, and beans. Bartering is an important
  part of the economy. The major sources of revenue are the sale of
  postage stamps to collectors and the sale of handicrafts to passing
  ships.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 14 able-bodied men (1993)

Labor force--by occupation: no business community in the usual
  sense; some public works; subsistence farming and fishing

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $729,884
  expenditures: $878,119, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: postage stamps, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: wide variety of fruits and vegetables

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: fruits, vegetables, curios

Exports--partners: NA

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: fuel oil, machinery, building materials,
  flour, sugar, other foodstuffs

Imports--partners: NA

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1--1.8560
  (January 1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5083 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235
  (1995), 1.6844 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 24

Telephone system: party line telephone service on the island
  domestic: NA
  international: radiotelephone

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 6.4 km
  paved: 0 km
  unpaved: 6.4 km

Ports and harbors: Bounty Bay

Merchant marine: none

Airports: none



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Poland
------





Geography



Location: Central Europe, east of Germany

Geographic coordinates: 52 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 312,683 sq km
  land: 304,510 sq km
  water: 8,173 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,888 km
  border countries: Belarus 605 km, Czech Republic 658 km, Germany 456
  km, Lithuania 91 km, Russia (Kaliningrad Oblast) 206 km, Slovakia
  444 km, Ukraine 428 km

Coastline: 491 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: defined by international treaties
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate with cold, cloudy, moderately severe winters
  with frequent precipitation; mild summers with frequent showers and
  thundershowers

Terrain: mostly flat plain; mountains along southern border

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Raczki Elblaskie -2 m
  highest point: Rysy 2,499 m

Natural resources: coal, sulfur, copper, natural gas, silver,
  lead, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 47%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 29%
  other: 10% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: situation has improved since 1989 due
  to decline in heavy industry and increased environmental concern by
  postcommunist governments; air pollution nonetheless remains serious
  because of sulfur dioxide emissions from coal-fired power plants,
  and the resulting acid rain has caused forest damage; water
  pollution from industrial and municipal sources is also a problem,
  as is disposal of hazardous wastes

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: historically, an area of conflict because of flat
  terrain and the lack of natural barriers on the North European Plain



People



Population: 38,608,929 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 3,921,093; female 3,734,223)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 13,076,231; female 13,243,716)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 1,762,135; female 2,871,531) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.05% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.61 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.72 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 12.76 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.06 years
  male: 68.93 years
  female: 77.41 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.45 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Pole(s)
  adjective: Polish

Ethnic groups: Polish 97.6%, German 1.3%, Ukrainian 0.6%,
  Byelorussian 0.5% (1990 est.)

Religions: Roman Catholic 95% (about 75% practicing), Eastern
  Orthodox, Protestant, and other 5%

Languages: Polish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 98% (1978 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Poland
  conventional short form: Poland
  local long form: Rzeczpospolita Polska
  local short form: Polska

Data code: PL

Government type: democratic state

Capital: Warsaw

Administrative divisions: 16 provinces (wojewodztwa,
  singular--wojewodztwo); Dolnoslaskie, Kujawsko-Pomorskie, Lodzkie,
  Lubelskie, Lubuskie, Malopolskie, Mazowieckie, Opolskie,
  Podkarpackie, Podlaskie, Pomorskie, Slaskie, Swietokrzyskie,
  Warminsko-Mazurskie, Wielkopolskie, Zachodniopomorskie

Independence: 11 November 1918 (independent republic proclaimed)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 3 May (1791); Independence
  Day, November 11 (1918)

Constitution: 16 October 1997; adopted by the National Assembly
  on 2 April 1997; passed by national referendum 23 May 1997

Legal system: mixture of Continental (Napoleonic) civil law and
  holdover communist legal theory; changes being gradually introduced
  as part of broader democratization process; limited judicial review
  of legislative acts although under the new constitution, the
  Constitutional Tribunal ruling will become final as of October 1999;
  court decisions can be appealed to the European Court of Justice in
  Strasbourg

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI (since 23 December
  1995)
  head of government: Prime Minister Jerzy BUZEK (since NA October
  1997), Deputy Prime Ministers Leszek BALCEROWICZ (since 31 October
  1997), Janusz TOMASZEWSKI (since 31 October 1997)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers responsible to the prime minister and
  the Sejm; the prime minister proposes, the president appoints, and
  the Sejm approves the Council of Ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election first round held 5 November 1995, second round held 19
  November 1995 (next to be held NA November 2000); prime minister and
  deputy prime ministers appointed by the president and confirmed by
  the Sejm
  election results: Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI elected president in 1995;
  percent of popular vote, second round--Aleksander KWASNIEWSKI 51.7%,
  Lech WALESA 48.3%; Jerzy BUZEK selected prime minister in 1997

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Zgromadzenie
  Narodowe consists of the Sejm (460 seats; members are elected under
  a complex system of proportional representation to serve four-year
  terms) and the Senate or Senat (100 seats; members are elected by a
  majority vote on a provincial basis to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Sejm elections last held 21 September 1997 (next to be
  held by NA September 2001); Senate--last held 21 September 1997 (next
  to be held by NA September 2001)
  election results: Sejm--percent of vote by party--AWS 33.8%, SLD
  27.1%, UW 13.4%, PSL 7.3%, ROP 5.6%, MN 0.4%, other 12.4%; seats by
  party--AWS 201, SLD 164, UW 60, PSL 27, ROP 6, MN 2; Senate--percent
  of vote by party--NA; seats by party--AWS 51, SLD 28, UW 8, ROP 5, PSL
  3, independents 5; note--seats by party in the Sejm as of December
  1997: AWS 200, SLD 164, UW 60, PSL 26, ROP 4, MN 2, other 4
  note: four seats are constitutionally assigned to ethnic German
  parties

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president on the recommendation of the National Council of the
  Judiciary for an indefinite period; Constitutional Tribunal, judges
  are chosen by the Sejm for nine-year terms

Political parties and leaders:
  post-Communist: Democratic Left Alliance or SLD (Social Democracy of
  KALINOWSKI]
  post-Solidarity parties: Freedom Union or UW; note--Democratic Union
  non-Communist, non-Solidarity: Movement for the Reconstruction of

Political pressure groups and leaders: powerful Roman Catholic
  Church; Solidarity (trade union); All Poland Trade Union Alliance or
  OPZZ (trade union)

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  BSEC (observer), CBSS, CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU
  (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA
  (observer), IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO, MONUA, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNDOF, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIFIL, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG,
  UNPREDEP, UPU, WCL, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Jerzy KOZMINSKI
  chancery: 2640 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Daniel FRIED
  embassy: Aleje Ujazdowskie 29/31 00-054, Warsaw P1
  mailing address: American Embassy Warsaw, US Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5010 (pouch)
  consulate(s) general: Krakow

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and
  red; similar to the flags of Indonesia and Monaco which are red
  (top) and white



Economy



Economy--overview: Poland today stands out as one of the most
  successful and open transition economies. The privatization of small
  and medium state-owned companies and a liberal law on establishing
  new firms marked the rapid development of a private sector now
  responsible for 70% of economic activity. In contrast to the vibrant
  expansion of private non-farm activity, the large agriculture
  component remains handicapped by structural problems, surplus labor,
  inefficient small farms, and lack of investment. The government's
  determination to enter the EU as soon as possible affects all
  aspects of its economic policies. Improving Poland's worsening
  current account deficit also is a priority. To date, the government
  has resisted pressure for protectionist solutions and continues to
  support regional free trade initiatives. The government export
  strategy emphasizes a more aggressive export assistance program.
  Warsaw continues to hold the budget deficit to less than 2% of GDP.
  Further progress on public finance depends mainly on comprehensive
  reform of the social welfare system and privatization of Poland's
  remaining state sector. Restructuring and privatization of
  "sensitive sectors" (e.g., coal, steel, and telecommunications) has
  begun. Long-awaited privatizations in aviation and energy are
  scheduled for 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$263 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5.1%
  industry: 26.6%
  services: 68.3% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 23.8% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4%
  highest 10%: 22.1% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 11% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 17.4 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: industry and construction 29.9%,
  agriculture 26%, services 44.1% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $36.5 billion
  expenditures: $38.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: machine building, iron and steel, coal mining,
  chemicals, shipbuilding, food processing, glass, beverages, textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 7.9% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 134.731 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 97.09%
  hydro: 2.91%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 132.291 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 7.925 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 5.485 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: potatoes, fruits, vegetables, wheat;
  poultry, eggs, pork, beef, milk, cheese

Exports: $27.2 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: manufactured goods, chemicals 57%, machinery
  and equipment 21%, food and live animals 12%, mineral fuels 7%,
  other 3%

Exports--partners: Germany 32.9%, Russia 8.4%, Italy 5.9%, Ukraine
  4.7%, Netherlands 4.7%, France 4.4%

Imports: $38.5 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, chemical 43%, machinery
  and equipment 36%, mineral fuels 9%, food and live animals 8%, other
  4%

Imports--partners: Germany 24.1%, Italy 9.9%, Russia 6.3%, UK
  5.5%, US 4.5%, France 5.9%

Debt--external: $42 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $4.312 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 zloty (Zl) = 100 groszy

Exchange rates: zlotych (Zl) per US$1--3.5409 (January 1999),
  3.4754 (1998), 3.2793 (1997), 2.6961 (1996), 2.4250 (1995); note--a
  currency reform on 1 January 1995 replaced 10,000 old zlotys with 1
  new zloty; 22,723 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 8.2 million (1996)

Telephone system: underdeveloped and outmoded system; government
  aims to have 10 million telephones in service by 2000; the process
  of partial privatization of the state-owned telephone monopoly has
  begun
  domestic: cable, open wire, and microwave radio relay; 3 cellular
  networks
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat, NA Eutelsat, 2
  Inmarsat (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions), and 1 Intersputnik
  (Atlantic Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 27, FM 75, shortwave 1 (1994 est.)

Radios: 9.9 million registered (1996)

Television broadcast stations: 150 (1997)

Televisions: 9.4 million registered (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 24,313 km
  broad gauge: 652 km 1.520-m gauge
  standard gauge: 22,243 km 1.435-m gauge (11,648 km electrified;
  8,978 km double track)
  narrow gauge: 1,418 km various gauges including 1.000-m, 0.785-m,
  0.750-m, and 0.600-m (1996)

Highways:
  total: 377,048 km
  paved: 247,721 km (including 264 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 129,327 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 3,812 km navigable rivers and canals (1996)

Pipelines: crude oil and petroleum products 2,280 km; natural gas
  17,000 km (1996)

Ports and harbors: Gdansk, Gdynia, Gliwice, Kolobrzeg, Szczecin,
  Swinoujscie, Ustka, Warsaw, Wrocaw

Merchant marine:
  total: 61 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,162,954 GRT/1,866,462
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 53, cargo 3, chemical tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 1, short-sea passenger 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 92 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 74
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 25
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 38
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Force

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 10,417,314 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 8,104,484 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 334,420 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3.3 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: major illicit producer of amphetamines for the
  international market; transshipment point for Asian and Latin
  American illicit drugs to Western Europe



======================================================================




@Portugal
--------





Geography



Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the North Atlantic
  Ocean, west of Spain

Geographic coordinates: 39 30 N, 8 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 92,391 sq km
  land: 91,951 sq km
  water: 440 sq km
  note: includes Azores and Madeira Islands

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Indiana

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,214 km
  border countries: Spain 1,214 km

Coastline: 1,793 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: maritime temperate; cool and rainy in north, warmer and
  drier in south

Terrain: mountainous north of the Tagus River, rolling plains in
  south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Ponta do Pico (Pico or Pico Alto) on Ilha do Pico in
  the Azores 2,351 m

Natural resources: fish, forests (cork), tungsten, iron ore,
  uranium ore, marble

Land use:
  arable land: 26%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 36%
  other: 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 6,300 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: Azores subject to severe earthquakes

Environment--current issues: soil erosion; air pollution caused by
  industrial and vehicle emissions; water pollution, especially in
  coastal areas

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol, Environmental Modification, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Tropical Timber 94

Geography--note: Azores and Madeira Islands occupy strategic
  locations along western sea approaches to Strait of Gibraltar



People



Population: 9,918,040 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 866,115; female 820,438)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 3,283,345; female 3,428,427)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 619,086; female 900,629) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.13% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.49 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.25 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.51 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.73 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.88 years
  male: 72.51 years
  female: 79.46 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.34 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Portuguese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Portuguese

Ethnic groups: homogeneous Mediterranean stock; citizens of black
  African descent who immigrated to mainland during decolonization
  number less than 100,000

Religions: Roman Catholic 97%, Protestant denominations 1%, other
  2%

Languages: Portuguese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 85%
  male: 89%
  female: 82% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Portuguese Republic
  conventional short form: Portugal
  local long form: Republica Portuguesa
  local short form: Portugal

Data code: PO

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Lisbon

Administrative divisions: 18 districts (distritos,
  singular--distrito) and 2 autonomous regions* (regioes autonomas,
  singular--regiao autonoma); Aveiro, Acores (Azores)*, Beja, Braga,
  Braganca, Castelo Branco, Coimbra, Evora, Faro, Guarda, Leiria,
  Lisboa, Madeira*, Portalegre, Porto, Santarem, Setubal, Viana do
  Castelo, Vila Real, Viseu

Dependent areas: Macau (scheduled to revert to China on 20
  December 1999)

Independence: 1140 (independent republic proclaimed 5 October
  1910)

National holiday: Day of Portugal, 10 June (1580)

Constitution: 25 April 1976, revised 30 October 1982, 1 June
  1989, 5 November 1992, and 3 September 1997

Legal system: civil law system; the Constitutional Tribunal
  reviews the constitutionality of legislation; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jorge SAMPAIO (since 9 March 1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Antonio Manuel de Oliviera
  GUTERRES (since 28 October 1995)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  note: there is also a Council of State that acts as a consultative
  body to the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 14 January 1996 (next to be held NA January
  2001); following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
  party or leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime
  minister by the president
  election results: Jorge SAMPAIO elected president; percent of
  vote--Jorge SAMPAIO (Socialist) 53.8%, Anibal CAVACO SILVA (Social
  Democrat) 46.2%

Legislative branch: unicameral Assembly of the Republic or
  Assembleia da Republica (230 seats; members are elected by popular
  vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 1 October 1995 (next to be held by 1 October
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PSD 34.0%, PS 43.8%, CDU
  8.6%, CDS/PP 9.1%; seats by party--PSD 88, PS 112, CDU 15, CDS/PP 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Supremo Tribunal de Justica,
  judges appointed for life by the Conselho Superior da Magistratura

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party or PSD
  Popular Party or PP (formerly known as Center Democratic Party or
  SERGIO]; United Democratic Coalition or CDU (communists; includes

International organization participation: AfDB, Australia Group,
  BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, EU, FAO, IADB,
  IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU,
  LAIA (observer), MINURCA, MINURSO, MONUA, MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO,
  NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UN Security
  Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNPREDEP,
  UPU, WCL, WEU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Fernando Antonio de Lacerda ANDRESEN
  GUIMARAES
  chancery: 2125 Kalorama Road NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Boston, New York, Newark (New Jersey), New
  Bedford (Massachusetts), Providence (Rhode Island), and San Francisco
  consulate(s): Los Angeles

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Gerald S. MCGOWAN
  embassy: Avenida das Forcas Armadas, 1600 Lisbon
  mailing address: PSC 83, APO AE 09726
  consulate(s): Ponta Delgada (Azores)

Flag description: two vertical bands of green (hoist side,
  two-fifths) and red (three-fifths) with the Portuguese coat of arms
  centered on the dividing line



Economy



Economy--overview: Portugal, in 1998, continued to see strong
  economic growth, falling interest rates, and low unemployment. The
  country qualified for the European Monetary Union (EMU) in 1998 and
  joined with 10 other European countries in launching the euro on 1
  January 1999. Portugal's inflation rate for 1998, 2.8%, was low but
  higher than most of its European partners. The country continues to
  run a trade deficit and a balance of payments deficit. The
  government is working to modernize capital plant and increase the
  country's competitiveness in the increasingly integrated world
  markets. Growth is expected to slow to 3% in 1999 because of a
  slowdown in public investment and sluggish demand for exports.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$144.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$14,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 36%
  services: 60% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.75 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 56%, manufacturing 22%,
  agriculture, forestry, fisheries 12%, construction 9%, mining 1%
  (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: 5% (August 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $48 billion
  expenditures: $52 billion, including capital expenditures of $7.4
  billion (1996 est.)

Industries: textiles and footwear; wood pulp, paper, and cork;
  metalworking; oil refining; chemicals; fish canning; wine; tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 4.1% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 32.839 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 55%
  hydro: 45%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1998 est.)

Electricity--consumption: 31.92 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--exports: 3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 4.2 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, potatoes, olives, grapes; sheep,
  cattle, goats, poultry, beef, dairy products

Exports: $25 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: clothing and footwear, machinery, chemicals,
  cork and paper products, hides

Exports--partners: EU 81% (Germany 20%, Spain 15%, France 14%, UK
  12% Netherlands 5%, Benelux 5%, Italy 4%), US 5% (1997)

Imports: $34.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment,
  chemicals, petroleum, textiles, agricultural products

Imports--partners: EU 76% (Spain 24%, Germany 15%, France 11%,
  Italy 8%, UK 7%, Netherlands 5%), US 3%, Japan 2% (1997)

Debt--external: $13.1 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $271 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Portuguese escudo (Esc) = 100 centavos

Exchange rates: Portuguese escudos (Esc) per US$1--172.78 (January
  1999), 180.10 (1998), 175.31 (1997), 154.24 (1996), 151.11 (1995),
  165.99 (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 200.482 escudos per euro; the euro will replace the local
  currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 3.7 million (1996 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: generally adequate integrated network of coaxial cables,
  open wire, microwave radio relay, and domestic satellite earth
  stations
  international: 6 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--3
  Intelsat (2 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), NA Eutelsat;
  tropospheric scatter to Azores; note--an earth station for Inmarsat
  (Atlantic Ocean region) is planned

Radio broadcast stations: AM 57, FM 66 (repeaters 22), shortwave 0

Radios: 2.2 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 36 (in addition, there are 62
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 2,970,892 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,072 km
  broad gauge: 2,769 km 1.668-m gauge (528 km electrified; 426 km
  double track)
  narrow gauge: 303 km 1.000-m gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 68,732 km
  paved: 59,110 km (including 687 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 9,622 km (1995 est.)

Waterways: 820 km navigable; relatively unimportant to national
  economy, used by shallow-draft craft limited to 300 metric-ton cargo
  capacity

Pipelines: crude oil 22 km; petroleum products 58 km; natural gas
  700 km
  note: the secondary lines for the natural gas pipeline that will be
  300 km long have not yet been built

Ports and harbors: Aveiro, Funchal (Madeira Islands), Horta
  (Azores), Leixoes, Lisbon, Porto, Ponta Delgada (Azores), Praia da
  Vitoria (Azores), Setubal, Viana do Castelo

Merchant marine:
  total: 132 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 894,640 GRT/1,366,955
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 13, cargo 72, chemical tanker 14, container 7,
  liquefied gas tanker 7, oil tanker 9, refrigerated cargo 1,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 3, short-sea passenger 4, vehicle carrier 2
  note: Portugal has created a captive register on Madeira for
  Portuguese-owned ships; ships on the Madeira Register (MAR) will
  have taxation and crewing benefits of a flag of convenience (1998
  est.)

Airports: 66 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 40
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 18
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 26
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 25 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force,
  National Republican Guard

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,542,188 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,042,730 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 73,405 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.458 billion (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.6% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: as former colonial power, Portugal plays
  a key role in the issue of Indonesia's sovereignty over Timor Timur
  (East Timor Province), which has not been recognized by the UN

Illicit drugs: important gateway country for Latin American
  cocaine entering the European market; transshipment point for
  hashish from North Africa to Europe; consumer of Southwest Asian
  heroin



======================================================================




@Puerto Rico
-----------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, east of the Dominican Republic

Geographic coordinates: 18 15 N, 66 30 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 9,104 sq km
  land: 8,959 sq km
  water: 145 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than three times the size of
  Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 501 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine, mild; little seasonal temperature
  variation

Terrain: mostly mountains, with coastal plain belt in north;
  mountains precipitous to sea on west coast; sandy beaches along most
  coastal areas

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Cerro de Punta 1,338 m

Natural resources: some copper and nickel; potential for onshore
  and offshore oil

Land use:
  arable land: 4%
  permanent crops: 5%
  permanent pastures: 26%
  forests and woodland: 16%
  other: 49% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; hurricanes

Environment--current issues: erosion; occasional drought causing
  water shortages

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: important location along the Mona Passage?a key
  shipping lane to the Panama Canal; San Juan is one of the biggest
  and best natural harbors in the Caribbean; many small rivers and
  high central mountains ensure land is well watered; south coast
  relatively dry; fertile coastal plain belt in north



People



Population: 3,887,652 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 482,111; female 459,940)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 1,220,682; female 1,323,787)
  65 years and over: 11% (male 173,133; female 227,999) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.59% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 15.9 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.87 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.76 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.93 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.79 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.06 years
  male: 70.95 years
  female: 79.41 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.94 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Puerto Rican(s) (US citizens)
  adjective: Puerto Rican

Ethnic groups: Hispanic

Religions: Roman Catholic 85%, Protestant denominations and other
  15%

Languages: Spanish, English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 89%
  male: 90%
  female: 88% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Commonwealth of Puerto Rico
  conventional short form: Puerto Rico

Data code: RQ

Dependency status: commonwealth associated with the US

Government type: commonwealth

Capital: San Juan

Administrative divisions: none (commonwealth associated with the
  US); there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by
  the US Government, but there are 78 municipalities (municipios,
  singular--municipio) at the second order; Adjuntas, Aguada,
  Aguadilla, Aguas Buenas, Aibonito, Anasco, Arecibo, Arroyo,
  Barceloneta, Barranquitas, Bayamon, Cabo Rojo, Caguas, Camuy,
  Canovanas, Carolina, Catano, Cayey, Ceiba, Ciales, Cidra, Coamo,
  Comerio, Corozal, Culebra, Dorado, Fajardo, Florida, Guanica,
  Guayama, Guayanilla, Guaynabo, Gurabo, Hatillo, Hormigueros,
  Humacao, Isabela, Jayuya, Juana Diaz, Juncos, Lajas, Lares, Las
  Marias, Las Piedras, Loiza, Luquillo, Manati, Maricao, Maunabo,
  Mayaguez, Moca, Morovis, Naguabo, Naranjito, Orocovis, Patillas,
  Penuelas, Ponce, Quebradillas, Rincon, Rio Grande, Sabana Grande,
  Salinas, San German, San Juan, San Lorenzo, San Sebastian, Santa
  Isabel, Toa Alta, Toa Baja, Trujillo Alto, Utuado, Vega Alta, Vega
  Baja, Vieques, Villalba, Yabucoa, Yauco

Independence: none (commonwealth associated with the US)

National holiday: US Independence Day, 4 July (1776)

Constitution: ratified 3 March 1952; approved by US Congress 3
  July 1952; effective 25 July 1952

Legal system: based on Spanish civil code

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; indigenous inhabitants are
  US citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON of the US (since
  20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
  1993)
  head of government: Governor Pedro ROSSELLO (since 2 January 1993)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor elected by popular vote for a
  four-year term; election last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held
  7 November 2000)
  election results: Pedro ROSSELLO reelected governor; percent of
  vote--51.1%

Legislative branch: bicameral Legislative Assembly consists of
  the Senate (28 seats; members are directly elected by popular vote
  to serve four-year terms) and the House of Representatives (54
  seats; members are directly elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held 7
  November 2000); House of Representatives--last held 5 November 1996
  (next to be held 7 November 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PNP 19, PPD 8, PIP 1; House of Representatives--percent of vote
  by party--NA; seats by party--PNP 37, PPD 16, PIP 1
  note: Puerto Rico elects one nonvoting representative to the US
  House of Representatives; elections last held 5 November 1996 (next
  to be held 7 November 2000); results--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--PNP 1 (Carlos Romero BARCELO)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (justices appointed by the
  governor with the consent of the Senate); Superior Courts (justices
  appointed by the governor with the consent of the Senate); Municipal
  Courts (justices appointed by the governor with the consent of the
  Senate)

Political parties and leaders: National Republican Party of

Political pressure groups and leaders: Armed Forces for National
  Liberation or FALN; Volunteers of the Puerto Rican Revolution;
  Boricua Popular Army (also known as the Macheteros); Armed Forces of
  Popular Resistance

International organization participation: Caricom (observer),
  ECLAC (associate), FAO (associate), ICFTU, Interpol (subbureau),
  IOC, WCL, WFTU, WHO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (commonwealth
  associated with the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (commonwealth
  associated with the US)

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of red (top and
  bottom) alternating with white; a blue isosceles triangle based on
  the hoist side bears a large, white, five-pointed star in the
  center; design based on the US flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Puerto Rico has one of the most dynamic
  economies in the Caribbean region. A diverse industrial sector has
  surpassed agriculture as the primary locus of economic activity and
  income. Encouraged by duty-free access to the US and by tax
  incentives, US firms have invested heavily in Puerto Rico since the
  1950s. US minimum wage laws apply. Sugar production has lost out to
  dairy production and other livestock products as the main source of
  income in the agricultural sector. Tourism has traditionally been an
  important source of income for the island, with estimated arrivals
  of nearly 4 million tourists in 1993. Construction and tourism were
  the leading sectors in economic growth in 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$34.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$9,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.7% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.3 million (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: government 19%, manufacturing 13%,
  trade 17%, construction 5%, other 32%, unemployed 14% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 13% (FY96/97 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $6.7 billion
  expenditures: $9.6 billion (FY 1999/2000

Industries: pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel, food products;
  tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1994 est.)

Electricity--production: 18.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 98.36%
  hydro: 1.64%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 18.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, coffee, pineapples, plantains,
  bananas; livestock products, chickens

Exports: $30.3 billion (f.o.b. 1998)

Exports--commodities: pharmaceuticals, electronics, apparel,
  canned tuna, rum, beverage concentrates, medical equipment

Exports--partners: US 88% (1997 est.)

Imports: $21.8 billion (c.i.f. 1996)

Imports--commodities: chemicals, machinery and equipment,
  clothing, food, fish, petroleum products

Imports--partners: US 62% (1997 est.)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 US dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 1.389 million (1996 est.)

Telephone system: modern system, integrated with that of the US
  by high-capacity submarine cable and Intelsat with high-speed data
  capability
  domestic: digital telephone system with about 1 million lines (1990
  est.); cellular telephone service
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat; submarine cable
  to US

Radio broadcast stations: AM 50, FM 63, shortwave 0
  note: there were 118 radio stations in 1995

Radios: 2.6 million (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 18 (in addition, there are three
  stations of the US Armed Forces Radio and Television Service) (1997)

Televisions: 973,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 96 km
  narrow gauge: 96 km 1.000-m gauge, rural, narrow-gauge system for
  hauling sugarcane; no passenger service

Highways:
  total: 14,400 km
  paved: 14,400 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Guanica, Guayanilla, Guayama, Playa de Ponce,
  San Juan

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 30 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 21
  over 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 9
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: paramilitary National Guard, Police Force

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Qatar
-----





Geography



Location: Middle East, peninsula bordering the Persian Gulf and
  Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 25 30 N, 51 15 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 11,437 sq km
  land: 11,437 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Connecticut

Land boundaries:
  total: 60 km
  border countries: Saudi Arabia 60 km

Coastline: 563 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; hot, dry; humid and sultry in summer

Terrain: mostly flat and barren desert covered with loose sand
  and gravel

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
  highest point: Qurayn Abu al Bawl 103 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 94% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 80 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: haze, dust storms, sandstorms common

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water resources
  are increasing dependence on large-scale desalination facilities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone
  Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: strategic location in central Persian Gulf near
  major petroleum deposits



People



Population: 723,542 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 99,232; female 95,421)
  15-64 years: 71% (male 367,213; female 145,925)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 11,047; female 4,704) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.62% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.75 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.57 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 23.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 2.52 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 2.35 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.25 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 74.23 years
  male: 71.7 years
  female: 76.89 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.42 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Qatari(s)
  adjective: Qatari

Ethnic groups: Arab 40%, Pakistani 18%, Indian 18%, Iranian 10%,
  other 14%

Religions: Muslim 95%

Languages: Arabic (official), English commonly used as a second
  language

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 79.4%
  male: 79.2%
  female: 79.9% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: State of Qatar
  conventional short form: Qatar
  local long form: Dawlat Qatar
  local short form: Qatar
  note: closest approximation of the native pronunciation falls
  between cutter and gutter, but not like guitar

Data code: QA

Government type: traditional monarchy

Capital: Doha

Administrative divisions: 9 municipalities (baladiyat,
  singular--baladiyah); Ad Dawhah, Al Ghuwayriyah, Al Jumayliyah, Al
  Khawr, Al Wakrah, Ar Rayyan, Jarayan al Batinah, Madinat ash Shamal,
  Umm Salal

Independence: 3 September 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 3 September (1971)

Constitution: provisional constitution enacted 19 April 1972

Legal system: discretionary system of law controlled by the amir,
  although civil codes are being implemented; Islamic law is
  significant in personal matters

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Amir HAMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani (since 27 June 1995
  when, as crown prince, he ousted his father, Amir KHALIFA bin Hamad
  Al Thani, in a bloodless coup); Crown Prince JASSIM bin Hamad bin
  Khalifa Al Thani, third son of the monarch (selected crown prince by
  the monarch 22 October 1996); note--Amir HAMAD also holds the
  positions of minister of defense and commander-in-chief of the armed
  forces
  head of government: Prime Minister ABDALLAH bin Khalifa Al Thani,
  brother of the monarch (since 30 October 1996); Deputy Prime
  Minister MUHAMMAD bin Khalifa Al Thani, brother of the monarch
  (since 20 January 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary

Legislative branch: unicameral Advisory Council or Majlis
  al-Shura (35 seats; members appointed by the monarch)
  note: the constitution calls for elections for part of this
  consultative body, but no elections have been held since 1970, when
  there were partial elections to the body; Council members have had
  their terms extended every four years since

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
  CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFAD,
  IFRCS, IHO (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW,
  OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Saad Muhammad al-KUBAYSI
  chancery: Suite 200, 4200 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
  consulate(s) general: Houston

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Elizabeth MCKUNE
  embassy: 149 Ahmed Bin Ali St., Fariq Bin Omran (opposite the
  television station), Doha
  mailing address: P. O. Box 2399, Doha
  note: work week is Saturday-Wednesday

Flag description: maroon with a broad white serrated band (nine
  white points) on the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: Oil is the backbone of the economy and accounts
  for more than 30% of GDP, roughly 70% of export earnings, and 66% of
  government revenues. Proved oil reserves of 3.7 billion barrels
  should ensure continued output at current levels for 23 years. Oil
  has given Qatar a per capita GDP comparable to the leading West
  European industrial countries. Qatar's proved reserves of natural
  gas exceed 7 trillion cubic meters, more than 5% of the world total,
  third largest in the world. Production and export of natural gas are
  becoming increasingly important. Long-term goals feature the
  development of off-shore petroleum and the diversification of the
  economy. Lower world oil prices brought GDP down in 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$12 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$17,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1%
  industry: 49%
  services: 50% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.4% (1996)

Labor force: 233,000 (1993 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $3.4 billion
  expenditures: $4.3 billion, including capital expenditures of $700
  million (FY98/99 budget est.)

Industries: crude oil production and refining, fertilizers,
  petrochemicals, steel reinforcing bars, cement

Industrial production growth rate: -4% (1995)

Electricity--production: 5.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruits, vegetables; poultry, dairy
  products, beef; fish

Exports: $5.6 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum products 80%, fertilizers, steel

Exports--partners: Japan 49%, Singapore 12%, South Korea 12%,
  Thailand 4%, US 3% (1997)

Imports: $4.4 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, consumer goods,
  food, chemicals

Imports--partners: UK 25%, France 13%, Japan 10%, US 9%, Italy 6%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $11 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Qatari riyal (QR) = 100 dirhams

Exchange rates: Qatari riyals (QR) per US$1--3.6400 riyals (fixed
  rate)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 160,717 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: modern system centered in Doha
  domestic: NA
  international: tropospheric scatter to Bahrain; microwave radio
  relay to Saudi Arabia and UAE; submarine cable to Bahrain and UAE;
  satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian
  Ocean) and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 201,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in addition, there are three
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 205,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,230 km
  paved: 1,107 km
  unpaved: 123 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 235 km; natural gas 400 km

Ports and harbors: Doha, Halul Island, Umm Sa'id

Merchant marine:
  total: 22 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 713,014 GRT/1,112,829
  DWT
  ships by type: cargo 10, combination ore/oil 2, container 5, oil
  tanker 5 (1998 est.)

Airports: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Public Security

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 301,451 (1999 est.)
  note: includes non-nationals

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 158,114 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 6,125 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $940 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 9.6% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: territorial dispute with Bahrain over the
  Hawar Islands and maritime boundary dispute with Bahrain currently
  before the International Court of Justice (ICJ); in 1996, agreed
  with Saudi Arabia to demarcate border per 1992 accord; that process
  is ongoing



======================================================================




@Reunion
-------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
  Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 21 06 S, 55 36 E

Map references: World

Area:
  total: 2,510 sq km
  land: 2,500 sq km
  water: 10 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 201 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, but temperature moderates with elevation; cool
  and dry from May to November, hot and rainy from November to April

Terrain: mostly rugged and mountainous; fertile lowlands along
  coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Piton des Neiges 3,069 m

Natural resources: fish, arable land

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 35%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 60 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic, devastating cyclones (December to
  April); Piton de la Fournaise on the southeastern coast is an active
  volcano

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 717,723 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 32% (male 118,401; female 112,878)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 218,952; female 225,292)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 17,506; female 24,694) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.75% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.16 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.64 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.9 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.73 years
  male: 72.69 years
  female: 78.93 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.64 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Reunionese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Reunionese

Ethnic groups: French, African, Malagasy, Chinese, Pakistani,
  Indian

Religions: Roman Catholic 86%, Hindu, Islam, Buddhist (1995)

Languages: French (official), Creole widely used

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 79%
  male: 76%
  female: 80% (1982 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Department of Reunion
  conventional short form: Reunion
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ile de la Reunion

Data code: RE

Dependency status: overseas department of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Saint-Denis

Administrative divisions: none (overseas department of France);
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the
  US Government, but there are four arrondissements, 24 communes, and
  47 cantons

Independence: none (overseas department of France)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by Prefect Robert POMMIES (since NA 1996)
  head of government: President of the General Council Christophe
  PAYET (since 4 April 1994) and President of the Regional Council
  Margarite SUDRE (since 25 June 1993)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
  French Ministry of the Interior; the presidents of the General and
  Regional Councils are elected by the members of those councils

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council (47 seats; members
  are elected by direct popular vote to serve six-year terms) and
  unicameral Regional Council (45 seats; members are elected by direct
  popular vote to serve six-year terms)
  elections: General Council--last held NA March 1994 (next to be held
  NA 2000); Regional Council--last held 25 June 1993 (next to be held
  NA 1999)
  election results: General Council--percent of vote by party--NA; seats
  by party--PCR 12, PS 12, UDF 11, RPR 5, others 7; Regional
  Council--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--UPF 17, Free-Dom
  Movement 13, PCR 9, PS 6
  note: Reunion elects three representatives to the French Senate;
  elections last held 14 April 1996 (next to be held NA);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR 1, PCR 2;
  Reunion also elects five deputies to the French National Assembly;
  elections last held 25 May and 1 June 1997 (next to be held NA2002);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PCR 3, PS 1, and
  RPR-UDF 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeals or Cour d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR

International organization participation: FZ, InOC, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas department of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas department
  of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy has traditionally been based on
  agriculture. Sugarcane has been the primary crop for more than a
  century, and in some years it accounts for 85% of exports. The
  government has been pushing the development of a tourist industry to
  relieve high unemployment, which recently amounted to one-third of
  the labor force. The gap in Reunion between the well-off and the
  poor is extraordinary and accounts for the persistent social
  tensions. The white and Indian communities are substantially better
  off than other segments of the population, often approaching
  European standards, whereas indigenous groups suffer the poverty and
  unemployment typical of the poorer nations of the African continent.
  The outbreak of severe rioting in February 1991 illustrates the
  seriousness of socioeconomic tensions. The economic well-being of
  Reunion depends heavily on continued financial assistance from
  France.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$3.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 261,000 (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 8%, industry 19%, services
  73% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 35% (1994)

Budget:
  revenues: $856.7 million
  expenditures: $2.2437 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1993)

Industries: sugar, rum, cigarettes, handicraft items, flower oil
  extraction

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 54.55%
  hydro: 45.45%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.1 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, vanilla, tobacco, tropical
  fruits, vegetables, corn

Exports: $171.78 million (f.o.b., 1994)

Exports--commodities: sugar 63%, rum and molasses 4%, perfume
  essences 2%, lobster 3%, (1993)

Exports--partners: France 74%, Japan 6%, Comoros 4% (1994)

Imports: $2.35 billion (c.i.f., 1994)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, food, beverages,
  tobacco, machinery and transportation equipment, raw materials, and
  petroleum products

Imports--partners: France 67%, Bahrain 4%, Italy 3% (1994)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA; note?substantial annual subsidies
  from France

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 219,000 (1995)

Telephone system: adequate system; principal center is Saint-Denis
  domestic: modern open wire and microwave radio relay network
  international: radiotelephone communication to Comoros, France,
  Madagascar; new microwave route to Mauritius; satellite earth
  station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 13, shortwave 0

Radios: 158,000 (1994)

Television broadcast stations: 22 (in addition, there are 18
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 116,181 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 2,784 km
  paved: 2,187 km
  unpaved: 597 km (1987 est.)

Ports and harbors: Le Port, Pointe des Galets

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 chemical tanker (l,000 GRT or over) totaling 28,264
  GRT/44,885 DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: French forces (Army, Navy, Air Force, and
  Gendarmerie)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 185,800 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 95,068 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 5,902 (1999 est.)

Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Romania
-------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between
  Bulgaria and Ukraine

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 25 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 237,500 sq km
  land: 230,340 sq km
  water: 7,160 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,508 km
  border countries: Bulgaria 608 km, Hungary 443 km, Moldova 450 km,
  Serbia and Montenegro 476 km (all with Serbia), Ukraine (north) 362
  km, Ukraine (east) 169 km

Coastline: 225 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; cold, cloudy winters with frequent snow and
  fog; sunny summers with frequent showers and thunderstorms

Terrain: central Transylvanian Basin is separated from the Plain
  of Moldavia on the east by the Carpathian Mountains and separated
  from the Walachian Plain on the south by the Transylvanian Alps

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
  highest point: Moldoveanu 2,544 m

Natural resources: petroleum (reserves declining), timber,
  natural gas, coal, iron ore, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 41%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 21%
  forests and woodland: 29%
  other: 6% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 31,020 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: earthquakes most severe in south and southwest;
  geologic structure and climate promote landslides

Environment--current issues: soil erosion and degradation; water
  pollution; air pollution in south from industrial effluents;
  contamination of Danube delta wetlands

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Geography--note: controls most easily traversable land route
  between the Balkans, Moldova, and Ukraine



People



Population: 22,334,312 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 2,117,289; female 2,027,940)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 7,563,695; female 7,663,491)
  65 years and over: 13% (male 1,234,760; female 1,727,137) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.23% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.09 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 11.55 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.87 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.12 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.83 years
  male: 67.05 years
  female: 74.81 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.27 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Romanian(s)
  adjective: Romanian

Ethnic groups: Romanian 89.1%, Hungarian 8.9%, German 0.4%,
  Ukrainian, Serb, Croat, Russian, Turk, and Gypsy 1.6%

Religions: Romanian Orthodox 70%, Roman Catholic 6% (of which 3%
  are Uniate), Protestant 6%, unaffiliated 18%

Languages: Romanian, Hungarian, German

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 98%
  female: 95% (1992 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Romania
  local long form: none
  local short form: Romania

Data code: RO

Government type: republic

Capital: Bucharest

Administrative divisions: 40 counties (judete, singular--judet)
  and 1 municipality* (municipiu); Alba, Arad, Arges, Bacau, Bihor,
  Bistrita-Nasaud, Botosani, Braila, Brasov, Bucuresti*, Buzau,
  Calarasi, Caras-Severin, Cluj, Constanta, Covasna, Dimbovita, Dolj,
  Galati, Gorj, Giurgiu, Harghita, Hunedoara, Ialomita, Iasi,
  Maramures, Mehedinti, Mures, Neamt, Olt, Prahova, Salaj, Satu Mare,
  Sibiu, Suceava, Teleorman, Timis, Tulcea, Vaslui, Vilcea, Vrancea

Independence: 1881 (from Turkey; republic proclaimed 30 December
  1947)

National holiday: National Day of Romania, 1 December (1990)

Constitution: 8 December 1991

Legal system: former mixture of civil law system and communist
  legal theory; is now based on the constitution of France's Fifth
  Republic

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Emil CONSTANTINESCU (since 29 November
  1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Radu VASILE (since 17 April 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 3 November 1996, with runoff between the top two
  candidates held 17 November 1996 (next to be held NA
  November/December 2000); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: percent of vote--Emil CONSTANTINESCU 54.4%, Ion
  ILIESCU 45.6%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Parlament consists of
  the Senate or Senat (143 seats; members are elected by direct
  popular vote on a proportional representation basis to serve
  four-year terms) and the Chamber of Deputies or Adunarea Deputatilor
  (343 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote on a
  proportional representation basis to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 3 November 1996 (next to be held NA
  2000); Chamber of Deputies--last held 3 November 1996 (next to be
  held NA 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--CDR 30.7%, PDSR
  23.1%, USD 13.2%, UDMR 6.8%, PRM 4.5%, PUNR 4.2%, others 17.5%;
  seats by party--CDR 53, PDSR 41, USD 23, UDMR 11, PRM 8, PUNR 7;
  Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by party--CDR 30.2%, PDSR 21.5%,
  USD 12.9%, UDMR 6.6% PRM 4.5%, PUNR 4.4%, others 19.9%; seats by
  party--CDR 122, PDSR 91, USD 53, UDMR 25, PRM 19, PUNR 18, ethnic
  minorities 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice, judges are appointed
  by the president on the recommendation of the Superior Council of
  Magistrates

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party or PD [Petre
  DIACONESCU]; Romania Mare Party (Greater Romanian Party) or PRM
  note: to increase their voting strength several of the
  above-mentioned parties united under umbrella organizations: PNTCD,
  PNL, and PNL-CD form the bulk of the Democratic Convention or CDR
  other small parties failed to gain representation in the most recent
  election

Political pressure groups and leaders: various human rights and
  professional associations

International organization participation: ACCT, BIS, BSEC, CCC,
  CE, CEI, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU (applicant), FAO, G- 9, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer),
  MONUA, NAM (guest), NSG, OAS (observer), OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UPU, WCL, WEU (associate partner),
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mircea Dan GEOANA
  chancery: 1607 23rd Street NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James C. ROSAPEPE
  embassy: Strada Tudor Arghezi 7-9, Bucharest
  mailing address: American Embassy Bucharest, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5260 (pouch)
  branch office: Cluj-Napoca

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of blue (hoist
  side), yellow, and red; the national coat of arms that used to be
  centered in the yellow band has been removed; now similar to the
  flags of Andorra and Chad



Economy



Economy--overview: After the collapse of the Soviet Bloc in
  1989-91, Romania was left with an obsolete industrial base and a
  pattern of industrial capacity wholly unsuited to its needs. In
  February 1997, Romania embarked on a comprehensive macroeconomic
  stabilization and structural reform program, but reform subsequently
  has been a stop-and-go process. Restructuring programs include
  liquidating large energy-intensive industries and major agricultural
  and financial sector reforms. Today, Romania is continuing its
  difficult transition to a market-based economy. GDP contracted by an
  estimated 7.3% in 1998 after a 6.6% decline in 1997. Tight monetary
  policy and slower exchange rate depreciation earlier in 1998 helped
  lower inflation to an estimated 41% from 152% in 1997. The large
  current account deficit and concerns about meeting debt payments in
  1999 contributed to increased pressure on the exchange rate towards
  the end of 1998. Replacing the IMF standby agreement (suspended
  because of lack of progress on structural reforms), servicing large
  debt payments, and bringing the budget under control are key
  priorities for 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$90.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -7.3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,050 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 41%
  services: 40% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 21.5% (1994 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.8%
  highest 10%: 20.2% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 41% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 10.1 million (1996 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: NA%

Unemployment rate: 9% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $10 billion
  expenditures: $11.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.3
  billion (1997 est.)

Industries: mining, timber, construction materials, metallurgy,
  chemicals, machine building, food processing, petroleum production
  and refining

Industrial production growth rate: -17% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 59.245 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 72.11%
  hydro: 26.35%
  nuclear: 1.54%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 60.045 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 800 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, corn, sugar beets, sunflower seed,
  potatoes, grapes; milk, eggs, beef

Exports: $8.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: textiles and footwear 23%, metals and metal
  products 18%, machinery and equipment 9%, chemicals 7% (1997)

Exports--partners: Italy 20%, Germany 17%, France 6%, Turkey 4%
  (1997)

Imports: $10.8 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 23%, fuels and
  minerals 19%, chemicals 8%, foodstuffs (1997)

Imports--partners: Germany 16%, Italy 16%, Russia 12%, France 6%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $10 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $510.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 leu (L) = 100 bani

Exchange rates: lei (L) per US$1--11,353.6 (January 1999), 8,875.6
  (1998), 7,167.9 (1997), 3,084.2 (1996), 2,033.3 (1995), 1,655.1
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2.6 million (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: poor service; 89% of telephone network is automatic; trunk
  network is microwave radio relay; roughly 3,300 villages with no
  service (February 1990 est.)
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat; new digital
  international direct-dial exchanges are in Bucharest (1993 est.)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 5, shortwave 0
  note: in 1995, 135 local radio stations were registered

Radios: 4.64 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 130 (in addition, there are about
  400 low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 4.58 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 11,376 km
  broad gauge: 60 km 1.524-m gauge
  standard gauge: 10,889 km 1.435-m gauge (3,723 km electrified; 3,060
  km double track)
  narrow gauge: 427 km 0.760-m gauge (1994)

Highways:
  total: 153,358 km
  paved: 78,213 km (including 113 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 75,145 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,724 km (1984)

Pipelines: crude oil 2,800 km; petroleum products 1,429 km;
  natural gas 6,400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Braila, Constanta, Galati, Mangalia, Sulina,
  Tulcea

Merchant marine:
  total: 199 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,996,157
  GRT/2,917,895 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 35, cargo 141, container 2, oil tanker 7,
  passenger 1, passenger-cargo 1, railcar carrier 2, roll-on/roll-off
  cargo 9, specialized tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 27 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 21
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 11 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air and Air Defense Forces,
  Paramilitary Forces, Civil Defense

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,876,912 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,938,953 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 193,264 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $650 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.5% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute with Ukraine over continental
  shelf of the Black Sea under which significant gas and oil deposits
  may exist; agreed in 1997 to two-year negotiating period, after
  which either party can refer dispute to the International Court of
  Justice

Illicit drugs: important transshipment point for Southwest Asian
  heroin transiting the Balkan route and small amounts of Latin
  American cocaine bound for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Russia
------





Introduction



Background: Russia, a vast Eurasian expanse of field, forest,
  desert, and tundra, has endured many "times of trouble"--the Mongol
  rule of the 13th to 15th century; czarist reigns of terror; massive
  invasions by Swedes, French, and Germans; and the deadly communist
  period (1917-91) in which Russia dominated an immense Soviet Union.
  General Secretary Mikhail GORBACHEV, in charge during 1985-91,
  introduced glasnost (openness) and perestroika (restructuring) in an
  attempt to modernize communism, but also inadvertently released
  forces that shattered the USSR into 15 independent republics in
  December 1991. Russia has struggled in its efforts to build a
  democratic political system and market economy to replace the strict
  social, political, and economic controls of the communist period.
  These reform efforts have resulted in contradictory and confusing
  economic and political regulations and practices. Industry,
  agriculture, the military, the central government, and the ruble
  have suffered, but Russia has successfully held one presidential,
  two legislative, and numerous regional elections since 1991. The
  severe illnesses of President Boris YEL'TSIN have contributed to a
  lack of policy focus at the center.



Geography



Location: Northern Asia (that part west of the Urals is sometimes
  included with Europe), bordering the Arctic Ocean, between Europe
  and the North Pacific Ocean

Geographic coordinates: 60 00 N, 100 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 17,075,200 sq km
  land: 16,995,800 sq km
  water: 79,400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than 1.8 times the size of the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 19,917 km
  border countries: Azerbaijan 284 km, Belarus 959 km, China
  (southeast) 3,605 km, China (south) 40 km, Estonia 294 km, Finland
  1,313 km, Georgia 723 km, Kazakhstan 6,846 km, North Korea 19 km,
  Latvia 217 km, Lithuania (Kaliningrad Oblast) 227 km, Mongolia 3,441
  km, Norway 167 km, Poland (Kaliningrad Oblast) 206 km, Ukraine 1,576
  km

Coastline: 37,653 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: ranges from steppes in the south through humid
  continental in much of European Russia; subarctic in Siberia to
  tundra climate in the polar north; winters vary from cool along
  Black Sea coast to frigid in Siberia; summers vary from warm in the
  steppes to cool along Arctic coast

Terrain: broad plain with low hills west of Urals; vast
  coniferous forest and tundra in Siberia; uplands and mountains along
  southern border regions

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caspian Sea -28 m
  highest point: Mount El'brus 5,633 m

Natural resources: wide natural resource base including major
  deposits of oil, natural gas, coal, and many strategic minerals,
  timber
  note: formidable obstacles of climate, terrain, and distance hinder
  exploitation of natural resources

Land use:
  arable land: 8%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 46%
  other: 42% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: permafrost over much of Siberia is a major
  impediment to development; volcanic activity in the Kuril Islands;
  volcanoes and earthquakes on the Kamchatka Peninsula

Environment--current issues: air pollution from heavy industry,
  emissions of coal-fired electric plants, and transportation in major
  cities; industrial, municipal, and agricultural pollution of inland
  waterways and sea coasts; deforestation; soil erosion; soil
  contamination from improper application of agricultural chemicals;
  scattered areas of sometimes intense radioactive contamination

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic
  Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine
  Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution,
  Tropical Timber 83, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Climate
  Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: largest country in the world in terms of area but
  unfavorably located in relation to major sea lanes of the world;
  despite its size, much of the country lacks proper soils and
  climates (either too cold or too dry) for agriculture



People



Population: 146,393,569 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 14,224,033; female 13,666,440)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 48,407,409; female 51,768,664)
  65 years and over: 13% (male 5,698,356; female 12,628,667) (1999
  est.)

Population growth rate: -0.33% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.64 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 14.96 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.45 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.88 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 65.12 years
  male: 58.83 years
  female: 71.72 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.34 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Russian(s)
  adjective: Russian

Ethnic groups: Russian 81.5%, Tatar 3.8%, Ukrainian 3%, Chuvash
  1.2%, Bashkir 0.9%, Byelorussian 0.8%, Moldavian 0.7%, other 8.1%

Religions: Russian Orthodox, Muslim, other

Languages: Russian, other

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 100%
  female: 97% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Russian Federation
  conventional short form: Russia
  local long form: Rossiyskaya Federatsiya
  local short form: Rossiya
  former: Russian Soviet Federative Socialist Republic

Data code: RS

Government type: federation

Capital: Moscow

Administrative divisions: oblasts (oblastey, singular--oblast'),
  21 autonomous republics* (avtonomnyk respublik, singular--avtonomnaya
  respublika), 10 autonomous okrugs**(avtonomnykh okrugov,
  singular--avtonomnyy okrug), 6 krays*** (krayev, singular--kray), 2
  federal cities (singular--gorod)****, and 1 autonomous
  oblast*****(avtonomnaya oblast'); Adygeya (Maykop)*, Aginskiy
  Buryatskiy (Aginskoye)**, Altay (Gorno-Altaysk)*, Altayskiy
  (Barnaul)***, Amurskaya (Blagoveshchensk), Arkhangel'skaya,
  Astrakhanskaya, Bashkortostan (Ufa)*, Belgorodskaya, Bryanskaya,
  Buryatiya (Ulan-Ude)*, Chechnya (Groznyy)*, Chelyabinskaya,
  Chitinskaya, Chukotskiy (Anadyr')**, Chuvashiya (Cheboksary)*,
  Dagestan (Makhachkala)*, Evenkiyskiy (Tura)**, Ingushetiya
  (Nazran')*, Irkutskaya, Ivanovskaya, Kabardino-Balkariya
  (Nal'chik)*, Kaliningradskaya, Kalmykiya (Elista)*, Kaluzkskaya,
  Kamchatskaya (Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy), Karachayevo-Cherkesiya
  (Cherkessk)*, Kareliya (Petrozavodsk)*, Kemerovskaya,
  Khabarovskiy***, Khakasiya (Abakan)*, Khanty-Mansiyskiy
  (Khanty-Mansiysk)**, Kirovskaya, Komi (Syktyvkar)*, Koryakskiy
  (Palana)**, Kostromskaya, Krasnodarskiy***, Krasnoyarskiy***,
  Kurganskaya, Kurskaya, Leningradskaya, Lipetskaya, Magadanskaya,
  Mariy-El (Yoshkar-Ola)*, Mordoviya (Saransk)*, Moskovskaya, Moskva
  (Moscow)****, Murmanskaya, Nenetskiy (Nar'yan-Mar)**,
  Nizhegorodskaya, Novgorodskaya, Novosibirskaya, Omskaya,
  Orenburgskaya, Orlovskaya (Orel), Penzenskaya, Permskaya,
  Komi-Permyatskiy (Kudymkar)**, Primorskiy (Vladivostok)***,
  Pskovskaya, Rostovskaya, Ryazanskaya, Sakha (Yakutsk)*,
  Sakhalinskaya (Yuzhno-Sakhalinsk), Samarskaya, Sankt-Peterburg
  (Saint Petersburg)****, Saratovskaya, Severnaya Osetiya-Alaniya
  (Vladikavkaz)*, Smolenskaya, Stavropol'skiy***, Sverdlovskaya
  (Yekaterinburg), Tambovskaya, Tatarstan (Kazan')*, Taymyrskiy
  (Dudinka)**, Tomskaya, Tul'skaya, Tverskaya, Tyumenskaya, Tyva
  (Kyzyl)*, Udmurtiya (Izhevsk)*, Ul'yanovskaya, Ust'-Ordynskiy
  Buryatskiy (Ust'-Ordynskiy)**, Vladimirskaya, Volgogradskaya,
  Vologodskaya, Voronezhskaya, Yamalo-Nenetskiy (Salekhard)**,
  Yaroslavskaya, Yevreyskaya*****; note--when using a place name with
  an adjectival ending 'skaya' or 'skiy,' the word Oblast' or
  Avonomnyy Okrug or Kray should be added to the place name
  note: the autonomous republics of Chechnya and Ingushetiya were
  formerly the autonomous republic of Checheno-Ingushetia (the
  boundary between Chechnya and Ingushetia has yet to be determined);
  administrative divisions have the same names as their administrative
  centers (exceptions have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses)

Independence: 24 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, June 12 (1990)

Constitution: adopted 12 December 1993

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Boris Nikolayevich YEL'TSIN (since 12 June
  1991)
  head of government: Premier Yevgeniy Maksimovich PRIMAKOV (since 11
  September 1998), First Deputy Premiers Yuriy Dmitriyevich MASLYUKOV
  (since 11 September 1998) and Vadim Anatol'yevich GUSTOV (since 11
  September 1998); Deputy Premiers Vladimir Broisovich BULGAK (since
  11 September 1998), Gennadiy Vasil'yevich KULIK (since 11 September
  1998), and Valentin Ivanovna MATVIYENKO (since 11 September 1998)
  cabinet: Ministries of the Government or "Government" composed of
  the premier and his deputies, ministers, and other agency heads; all
  are appointed by the president
  note: there is also a Presidential Administration (PA) that provides
  staff and policy support to the president, drafts presidential
  decrees, and coordinates policy among government agencies; a
  Security Council also reports directly to the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a four-year term;
  election last held 16 June 1996 with runoff election on 3 July 1996
  (next to be held NA June 2000); note--no vice president; if the
  president dies in office, cannot exercise his powers because of ill
  health, is impeached, or resigns, the premier succeeds him; the
  premier serves as acting president until a new presidential election
  is held, which must be within three months; premier and deputy
  premiers appointed by the president with the approval of the Duma
  election results: Boris Nikolayevich YEL'TSIN elected president;
  percent of vote in runoff--YEL'TSIN 54%, Gennadiy Andreyevich
  ZYUGANOV 40%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Federal'noye
  Sobraniye consists of the Federation Council or Sovet Federatsii
  (178 seats, filled ex-officio by the top executive and legislative
  officials in each of the 89 federal administrative units--oblasts,
  krays, republics, autonomous okrugs and oblasts, and the federal
  cities of Moscow and St. Petersburg; members serve four-year terms)
  and the State Duma or Gosudarstvennaya Duma (450 seats, half elected
  in single-member districts and half elected from national party
  lists; members are elected by direct popular vote to serve four-year
  terms)
  elections: State Duma--last held 17 December 1995 (next to be held NA
  December 1999)
  election results: State Duma--percent of vote received by parties
  clearing the 5% threshold entitling them to a proportional share of
  the 225 party list seats--Communist Party of the Russian Federation
  22.3%, Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 11.2%, Our Home Is Russia
  10.1%, Yabloko Bloc 6.9%; seats by party--Communist Party of the
  Russian Federation 157, independents 78, Our Home Is Russia 55,
  Liberal Democratic Party of Russia 51, Yabloko Bloc 45, Agrarian
  Party of Russia 20, Russia's Democratic Choice 9, Power To the
  People 9, Congress of Russian Communities 5, Forward, Russia! 3,
  Women of Russia 3, other parties 15

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges are appointed for
  life by the Federation Council on the recommendation of the
  president; Supreme Court, judges are appointed for life by the
  Federation Council on the recommendation of the president; Superior
  Court of Arbitration, judges are appointed for life by the
  Federation Council on the recommendation of the president

Political parties and leaders:
  YAVLINSKIY]; Pravoye Delo (Just Cause), a coalition of reformist,
  Borisovich CHUBAYS, Boris Yefimovich NEMTSOV, Sergey Vladlenovich
  KIRIYENKO]
  anti-market and/or ultranationalist: Communist Party of the Russian
  BARKASHOV]
  note: some 150 political parties, blocs, and movements registered
  with the Justice Ministry as of the 19 December 1998 deadline to be
  eligible to participate in the scheduled December 1999 Duma
  elections; in 1995, 43 political organizations qualified to run
  slates of candidates on the Duma party list ballot; among the
  parties not listed above but holding seats in the Duma were Russia's
  Democratic Choice, Power To the People, Congress of Russian
  Communities, Forward, Russia!, and Women of Russia

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: APEC, BIS, BSEC, CBSS,
  CCC, CE, CERN (observer), CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MINURSO,
  MONUA, MTCR, NSG, OAS (observer), OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UN
  Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNITAR,
  UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNOMIG, UNOMSIL, UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UPU, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant), ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Yuliy Mikhaylovich VORONTSOV
  chancery: 2650 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: New York, San Francisco, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James F. COLLINS
  embassy: Novinskiy Bul'var 19/23, Moscow
  mailing address: APO AE 09721
  consulate(s) general: St. Petersburg, Vladivostok, Yekaterinburg

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top),
  blue, and red



Economy



Economy--overview: Seven years after the collapse of the USSR,
  Russia is still struggling to establish a modern market economy and
  achieve strong economic growth. Russian GDP has contracted an
  estimated 43% since 1991, including a 5% drop in 1998, despite the
  country's wealth of natural resources, its well-educated population,
  and its diverse--although increasingly dilapidated--industrial base.
  By the end of 1997, Russia had achieved some progress. Inflation had
  been brought under control, the ruble was stabilized, and an
  ambitious privatization program had transferred thousands of
  enterprises to private ownership. Some important market-oriented
  laws were also passed, including a commercial code governing
  business relations and an arbitration court for resolving economic
  disputes. But in 1998, the Asian financial crisis swept through the
  country, contributing to a sharp decline in russia's earnings from
  oil exports and resulting in an exodus of foreign investors. Matters
  came to a head in August 1998 when the government allowed the ruble
  to fall precipitously and stopped payment on $40 billion in ruble
  bonds. Ongoing problems include an undeveloped legal and financial
  system, poor progress on restructuring the military-industrial
  complex, and persistently large budget deficits, largely reflecting
  the inability of successive governments to collect sufficient taxes.
  Russia's transition to a market economy has also been slowed by the
  growing prevalence of payment arrears and barter and by widespread
  corruption. The severity of Russia's economic problems is dramatized
  by the large annual decline in population, estimated by some
  observers at 800,000 people, caused by environmental hazards, the
  decline in health care, and the unwillingness of people to have
  children.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$593.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 7%
  industry: 39%
  services: 54% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 28.6% (1998 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3%
  highest 10%: 22.2% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 84% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 66 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 11.5% (1998 est.) with considerable additional
  underemployment

Budget:
  revenues: $40 billion
  expenditures: $63 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: complete range of mining and extractive industries
  producing coal, oil, gas, chemicals, and metals; all forms of
  machine building from rolling mills to high-performance aircraft and
  space vehicles; shipbuilding; road and rail transportation
  equipment; communications equipment; agricultural machinery,
  tractors, and construction equipment; electric power generating and
  transmitting equipment; medical and scientific instruments; consumer
  durables, textiles, foodstuffs, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: -5.5% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 834 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 68.14%
  hydro: 19%
  nuclear: 12.82%
  other: 0.04% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 788.036 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 24.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 6.6 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, sugar beets, sunflower seed,
  vegetables, fruits; beef, milk

Exports: $71.8 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products, natural
  gas, wood and wood products, metals, chemicals, and a wide variety
  of civilian and military manufactures

Exports--partners: Ukraine, Germany, US, Belarus, other Western
  and less developed countries

Imports: $58.5 billion (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, consumer goods,
  medicines, meat, grain, sugar, semifinished metal products

Imports--partners: Europe, North America, Japan, and less
  developed countries

Debt--external: $164 billion (yearend 1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $8.523 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 ruble (R) = 100 kopeks

Exchange rates: rubles per US$1--22.2876 (January 1999), 9.7051
  (1998), 5,785 (1997), 5,121 (1996), 4,559 (1995), 2,191 (1994)
  note: the post-1 January 1998 ruble is equal to 1,000 of the pre-1
  January 1998 rubles

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 23.8 million (1997 est.)

Telephone system: the telephone system has undergone significant
  changes in the 1990's; there are more than 1,000 companies licensed
  to offer communication services; access to digital lines has
  improved, particularly in urban centers; Internet and e-mail
  services are improving; Russia has made progress toward building the
  telecommunications infrastructure necessary for a market economy
  domestic: cross country digital trunk lines run from St. Petersburg
  to Khabarovsk, and from Moscow to Novorossiysk; the telephone
  systems in 60 regional capitals have modern digital infrastructures;
  cellular services, both analog and digital, are available in many
  areas; in rural areas, the telephone services are still outdated,
  inadequate, and low density
  international: Russia is connected internationally by three undersea
  fiber-optic cables; digital switches in several cities provide more
  than 50,000 lines for international calls; satellite earth stations
  provide access to Intelsat, Intersputnik, Eutelsat, Inmarsat, and
  Orbita

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note--there
  are about 1,050 (including AM, FM, and shortwave) radio broadcast
  stations throughout the country

Radios: 50 million (1993 est.) (74.3 million radio receivers with
  multiple speaker systems for program diffusion)

Television broadcast stations: 11,000 (1996 est.)

Televisions: 54.85 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 150,000 km; note--87,000 km in common carrier service; 63,000
  km serve specific industries and are not available for common
  carrier use
  broad gauge: 150,000 km 1.520-m gauge (January 1997 est.)

Highways:
  total: 948,000 km (including 416,000 km which serve specific
  industries or farms and are not maintained by governmental highway
  maintenance departments)
  paved: 336,000 km
  unpaved: 612,000 km (including 411,000 km of graveled or some other
  form of surfacing and 201,000 km of unstabilized earth) (1995 est.)

Waterways: total navigable routes in general use 101,000 km;
  routes with navigation guides serving the Russian River Fleet 95,900
  km; routes with night navigational aids 60,400 km; man-made
  navigable routes 16,900 km (January 1994 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 48,000 km; petroleum products 15,000 km;
  natural gas 140,000 km (June 1993 est.)

Ports and harbors: Arkhangel'sk, Astrakhan', Kaliningrad, Kazan',
  Khabarovsk, Kholmsk, Krasnoyarsk, Moscow, Murmansk, Nakhodka,
  Nevel'sk, Novorossiysk, Petropavlovsk-Kamchatskiy, St. Petersburg,
  Rostov, Sochi, Tuapse, Vladivostok, Volgograd, Vostochnyy, Vyborg

Merchant marine:
  total: 617 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 4,146,329
  GRT/5,278,909 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 1, bulk 19, cargo 309, combination bulk
  21, combination ore/oil 6, container 25, multifunction large-load
  carrier 1, oil tanker 149, passenger 35, passenger-cargo 3,
  refrigerated cargo 16, roll-on/roll-off cargo 25, short-sea
  passenger 7 (1998 est.)

Airports: 2,517 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 630
  over 3,047 m: 54
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 202
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 108
  914 to 1,523 m: 115
  under 914 m: 151 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1,887
  over 3,047 m: 25
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 45
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 134
  914 to 1,523 m: 291
  under 914 m: 1,392 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ground Forces, Navy, Air Forces, Strategic
  Rocket Forces
  note: the Air Defense Force merged into the Air Force in March 1998

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 38,665,138 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 30,173,495 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 1,149,536 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA
  note: the Intelligence Community estimates that defense spending in
  Russia fell by about 10% in real terms in 1996, reducing Russian
  defense outlays to about one-sixth of peak Soviet levels in the late
  1980s (1997 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute over at least two small sections
  of the boundary with China remain to be settled, despite 1997
  boundary agreement; islands of Etorofu, Kunashiri, and Shikotan and
  the Habomai group occupied by the Soviet Union in 1945, now
  administered by Russia, claimed by Japan; Caspian Sea boundaries are
  not yet determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and
  Turkmenistan; Estonian and Russian negotiators reached a technical
  border agreement in December 1996 which has not been ratified; draft
  treaty delimiting the boundary with Latvia has not been signed; has
  made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but has reserved the right
  to do so) and does not recognize the claims of any other nation;
  1997 border agreement with Lithuania not yet ratified; Svalbard is
  the focus of a maritime boundary dispute in the Barents Sea between
  Norway and Russia

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of illicit cannabis and opium
  poppy and producer of amphetamines, mostly for domestic consumption;
  government has active eradication program; increasingly used as
  transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast Asian opiates and
  cannabis and Latin American cocaine to Western Europe, possibly to
  the US, and growing domestic market



======================================================================




@Rwanda
------





Introduction



Background: Throughout their colonial rule, first Germany and
  then Belgium favored Rwanda's minority Tutsi ethnic group in
  education and employment. In 1959, the majority ethnic group, the
  Hutus, overthrew the ruling Tutsi monarch. The Hutus killed hundreds
  of Tutsis and drove tens of thousands into exile in neighboring
  countries. The children of these exiles later formed a rebel group,
  the Rwandan Patriotic Front (RPF), and began a civil war in October
  1990. The war, along with several political and economic upheavals,
  exasperated ethnic tensions culminating in April 1994 in a genocide
  in which roughly 800,000 Tutsis and moderate Hutus were killed. The
  Tutsi rebels defeated the Hutu regime and ended the genocide in July
  1994, but approximately 2 million Hutu refugees--many fearing Tutsi
  retribution--fled to neighboring Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, and
  Zaire, now called the Democratic Republic of the Congo (DROC).
  According to the UN Office of the High Commissioner for Refugees, in
  1996 and early 1997 nearly 1.3 million Hutus returned to Rwanda.
  Even with substantial international aid, these civil dislocations
  have hindered efforts to foster reconciliation and to boost
  investment and agricultural output. Although much of the country is
  now at peace, members of the former regime continue to destabilize
  the northwest area of the country through a low-intensity
  insurgency. Rwandan troops are currently involved in a crisis
  engulfing neighboring DROC.



Geography



Location: Central Africa, east of Democratic Republic of the Congo

Geographic coordinates: 2 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 26,340 sq km
  land: 24,950 sq km
  water: 1,390 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries:
  total: 893 km
  border countries: Burundi 290 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo
  217 km, Tanzania 217 km, Uganda 169 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; two rainy seasons (February to April,
  November to January); mild in mountains with frost and snow possible

Terrain: mostly grassy uplands and hills; relief is mountainous
  with altitude declining from west to east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Rusizi River 950 m
  highest point: Volcan Karisimbi 4,519 m

Natural resources: gold, cassiterite (tin ore), wolframite
  (tungsten ore), methane, hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 35%
  permanent crops: 13%
  permanent pastures: 18%
  forests and woodland: 22%
  other: 12% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts; the volcanic Birunga
  mountains are in the northwest along the border with Democratic
  Republic of the Congo

Environment--current issues: deforestation results from
  uncontrolled cutting of trees for fuel; overgrazing; soil
  exhaustion; soil erosion; widespread poaching

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Nuclear Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked; predominantly rural population



People



Population: 8,154,933 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 1,807,695; female 1,793,590)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 2,148,477; female 2,179,119)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 92,490; female 133,562) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.43% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 38.97 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 19.53 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.91 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: following the outbreak of genocidal strife in Rwanda in April
  1994 between Tutsi and Hutu factions, more than 2 million refugees
  fled to neighboring Burundi, Tanzania, Uganda, and Democratic
  Republic of the Congo (formerly Zaire); according to the UN High
  Commission on Refugees, in 1996 and early 1997 nearly 1.3 million
  Hutus returned to Rwanda--of these 720,000 returned from Democratic
  Republic of the Congo, 480,000 from Tanzania, 88,000 from Burundi,
  and 10,000 from Uganda; probably fewer than 100,000 Rwandans
  remained outside of Rwanda by the end of 1997

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.69 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 112.86 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 41.31 years
  male: 40.84 years
  female: 41.8 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.8 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Rwandan(s)
  adjective: Rwandan

Ethnic groups: Hutu 80%, Tutsi 19%, Twa (Pygmoid) 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 65%, Protestant 9%, Muslim 1%,
  indigenous beliefs and other 25%

Languages: Kinyarwanda (official) universal Bantu vernacular,
  French (official), English (official), Kiswahili (Swahili) used in
  commercial centers

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 60.5%
  male: 69.8%
  female: 51.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Rwandese Republic
  conventional short form: Rwanda
  local long form: Republika y'u Rwanda
  local short form: Rwanda

Data code: RW

Government type: republic; presidential, multiparty system

Capital: Kigali

Administrative divisions: 12 prefectures (in French--prefectures,
  singular--prefecture; in Kinyarwanda--plural--NA,
  singular--prefegitura); Butare, Byumba, Cyangugu, Gikongoro, Gisenyi,
  Gitarama, Kibungo, Kibuye, Kigali, Kigaliville, Umutara, Ruhengeri

Independence: 1 July 1962 (from Belgium-administered UN
  trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 July (1962)

Constitution: on 5 May 1995, the Transitional National Assembly
  adopted a new constitution which included elements of the
  constitution of 18 June 1991 as well as provisions of the 1993
  Arusha peace accord and the November 1994 multi-party protocol of
  understanding

Legal system: based on German and Belgian civil law systems and
  customary law; judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme
  Court; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Pasteur BIZIMUNGU (since 19 July 1994);
  Vice President Maj. Gen. Paul KAGAME (since 19 July 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Celestin RWIGEMA (since 1
  September 1995)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: normally the president is elected by popular vote for a
  five-year term; election last held in December 1988 (next to be held
  NA); prime minister is appointed by the president
  election results: Juvenal HABYARIMANA elected president; percent of
  vote--99.98% (HABYARIMANA was the sole candidate)
  note: President HABYARIMANA was killed in a plane crash on 6 April
  1994 which ignited the genocide and was replaced by President
  BIZIMUNGU who was installed by the military forces of the ruling
  Rwandan Patriotic Front on 19 July 1994

Legislative branch: unicameral Transitional National Assembly or
  Assemblee Nationale de Transition (a power-sharing body with 70
  seats established on 12 December 1994 following a multi-party
  protocol understanding; members were predetermined by the Arusha
  peace accord)
  elections: the last national legislative elections were held 16
  December 1988 for the National Development Council (the legislature
  prior to the advent of the Transitional National Assembly); no
  elections have been held for the Transitional National Assembly as
  the distribution of seats was predetermined by the Arusha peace
  accord
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPF
  19, MDR 13, PSD 13, PL 13, PDC 6, PSR 2, PDI 2, other 2; note--the
  distribution of seats was predetermined

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, consists of the Court of
  Cassation and the Council of State in joint session

Political parties and leaders: significant parties include:

Political pressure groups and leaders: Rwanda Patriotic Army or
  Return (RDR)

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  CEEAC, CEPGL, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU,
  NAM, OAU, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Theogene N. RUDASINGWA
  chancery: 1714 New Hampshire Ave. NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador George M. STAPLES
  embassy: Boulevard de la Revolution, Kigali
  mailing address: B. P. 28, Kigali

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of red (hoist side),
  yellow, and green with a large black letter R centered in the yellow
  band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia; similar to
  the flag of Guinea, which has a plain yellow band



Economy



Economy--overview: Rwanda is a rural country with about 90% of the
  population engaged in (mainly subsistence) agriculture. It is the
  most densely populated country in Africa; is landlocked, and has few
  natural resources and minimal industry. Primary exports are coffee
  and tea. The 1994 genocide decimated Rwanda's fragile economic base,
  severely impoverished the population, particularly women, and eroded
  the country's ability to attract private and external investment.
  However, Rwanda has made significant progress in stabilizing and
  rehabilitating its economy. GDP has rebounded, and inflation has
  been curbed. In June 1998, Rwanda signed an Enhanced Structural
  Adjustment Facility (ESAF) with the IMF. Rwanda has also embarked
  upon an ambitious privatization program with the World Bank.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$5.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 10.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$690 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 36%
  industry: 24%
  services: 40% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 51.2% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.2%
  highest 10%: 24.2% (1983-85)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 10% (1998)

Labor force: 3.6 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 90%, government and
  services, industry and commerce

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $231 million
  expenditures: $319 million, including capital expenditures of $13
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: production of cement, processing of agricultural
  products, small-scale beverage production, manufacture of soap,
  furniture, shoes, plastic goods, textiles, cigarettes

Industrial production growth rate: 4.9% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 164 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 2.44%
  hydro: 97.56%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 177 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 15 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, tea, pyrethrum (insecticide made
  from chrysanthemums), bananas, beans, sorghum, potatoes; livestock

Exports: $82.1 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: coffee 55%, tea 21%, hides, tin ore (1997)

Exports--partners: Brazil 49%, Germany 16%, US, Netherlands, UK
  (1996)

Imports: $326 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, steel,
  petroleum products, cement and construction material (1997)

Imports--partners: Italy, Kenya, Tanzania, US, Belgium-Luxembourg
  (1997)

Debt--external: $1.2 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $711.2 million (1995); note?since 1994,
  World Bank financing to Rwanda has totaled more than $120 million;
  in June 1998, Rwanda signed an Enhanced Structural Adjustment
  Facility (ESAF) with the IMF; in summer 1998, Rwanda presented its
  policy objectives and development priorities to donor governments
  resulting in multi-year pledges in the amount of $250 million

Currency: 1 Rwandan franc (RF) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Rwandan francs (RF) per US$1--320.63 (February
  1999), 312.31 (1998), 301.53 (1997), 306.82 (1996), 262.20 (1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 6,400 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: telephone system primarily serves business and
  government
  domestic: the capital, Kigali, is connected to the centers of the
  prefectures by microwave radio relay; the remainder of the network
  depends on wire and HF radiotelephone
  international: international connections employ microwave radio
  relay to neighboring countries and satellite communications to more
  distant countries; satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Indian
  Ocean) in Kigali (includes telex and telefax service)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 630,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 12,000 km
  paved: 1,000 km
  unpaved: 11,000 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: Lac Kivu navigable by shallow-draft barges and native
  craft

Ports and harbors: Cyangugu, Gisenyi, Kibuye

Airports: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Gendarmerie

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,964,118 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,000,204 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $92 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.8% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Rwandan military forces are supporting
  the rebel forces in the civil war in the Democratic Republic of the
  Congo



======================================================================




@Saint Helena
------------





Geography



Location: islands in the South Atlantic Ocean, about mid-way
  between South America and Africa

Geographic coordinates: 15 56 S, 5 42 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 410 sq km
  land: 410 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Ascension, Gough Island, Inaccessible Island,
  Nightingale Island, and Tristan da Cunha Island

Area--comparative: slightly more than two times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 60 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: Saint Helena--tropical; marine; mild, tempered by trade
  winds; Tristan da Cunha--temperate; marine, mild, tempered by trade
  winds (tends to be cooler than Saint Helena)

Terrain: Saint Helena--rugged, volcanic; small scattered plateaus
  and plains
  note: the other islands of the group have a volcanic origin

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Queen Mary's Peak on Tristan da Cunha 2,060 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 6%
  other: 82% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: active volcanism on Tristan da Cunha

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: Napoleon Bonaparte's place of exile and burial
  (his remains were taken to Paris in 1840); harbors at least 40
  species of plants unknown anywhere else in the world; Ascension is a
  breeding ground for sea turtles and sooty terns



People



Population: 7,145 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 713; female 690)
  15-64 years: 72% (male 2,664; female 2,449)
  65 years and over: 8% (male 259; female 370) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.74% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.86 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.44 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.04 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 27.98 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.88 years
  male: 72.78 years
  female: 79.13 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.5 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Saint Helenian(s)
  adjective: Saint Helenian

Ethnic groups: African descent, white

Religions: Anglican (majority), Baptist, Seventh-Day Adventist,
  Roman Catholic

Languages: English

Literacy:
  definition: age 20 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 97%
  female: 98% (1987 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Saint Helena

Data code: SH

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Jamestown

Administrative divisions: 1 administrative area and 2
  dependencies*; Ascension*, Saint Helena, Tristan da Cunha*

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen
  (second Saturday in June)

Constitution: 1 January 1989

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: NA years of age

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952)
  head of government: Governor and Commander in Chief David Leslie
  SMALLMAN (since NA 1995)
  cabinet: Executive Council consists of the governor, two ex officio
  officers, and six elected members of the Legislative Council
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor is appointed by
  the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (15 seats,
  including the governor, 2 ex officio and 12 elected members; members
  are elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 9 July 1997 (next to be held NA July 2001)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 15

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: ICFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the Saint Helenian shield centered on the
  outer half of the flag; the shield features a rocky coastline and
  three-masted sailing ship



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy depends largely on financial
  assistance from the UK, which amounted to about $5 million in 1998.
  The local population earns income from fishing, the raising of
  livestock, and sales of handicrafts. Because there are few jobs, a
  large proportion of the work force has left to seek employment
  overseas.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$13.9 million (FY94/95 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,000 (FY94/95 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 2,416 (1991 est.)
  note: a large proportion of the work force has left to seek
  employment overseas

Labor force--by occupation: professional, technical, and related
  workers 8.7%, managerial, administrative, and clerical 12.8%, sales
  people 8.1%, farmers, fishermen 5.4%, craftspersons, production
  process workers 14.7%, others 50.3% (1987)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $11.2 million
  expenditures: $11 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY92/93)

Industries: crafts (furniture, lacework, fancy woodwork), fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 6 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: maize, potatoes, vegetables; timber; fish,
  crawfish (on Tristan da Cunha)

Exports: $704,000 (f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: fish (frozen, canned, and salt-dried
  skipjack, tuna), coffee, handicrafts

Exports--partners: South Africa, UK

Imports: $14.434 million (c.i.f., 1995)

Imports--commodities: food, beverages, tobacco, fuel oils, animal
  feed, building materials, motor vehicles and parts, machinery and
  parts

Imports--partners: UK, South Africa

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $12.6 million (1995); note?$5.3 million
  from UK (1997)

Currency: 1 Saint Helenian pound (LS) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: Saint Helenian pounds (LS) per US$1--0.6057
  (January 1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6047 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335
  (1995), 0.6529 (1994); note--the Saint Helenian pound is at par with
  the British pound

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 550

Telephone system:
  domestic: automatic network; HF radiotelephone from Saint Helena to
  Ascension, then into worldwide submarine cable and satellite networks
  international: major coaxial submarine cable relay point between
  South Africa, Portugal, and UK at Ascension; satellite earth
  stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 2,500 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: NA

Communications--note: Gough Island has a meteorological station



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km (Saint Helena 118 km, Ascension NA km, Tristan da Cunha
  NA km)
  paved: 180.7 km (Saint Helena 98 km, Ascension 80 km, Tristan da
  Cunha 2.70 km)
  unpaved: NA km (Saint Helena 20 km, Ascension NA km, Tristan da
  Cunha NA km)

Ports and harbors: Georgetown (on Ascension), Jamestown

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  over 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Saint Kitts and Nevis
---------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, islands in the Caribbean Sea, about
  one-third of the way from Puerto Rico to Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 17 20 N, 62 45 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 269 sq km
  land: 269 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 135 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  territorial sea: 12 nm
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm

Climate: subtropical tempered by constant sea breezes; little
  seasonal temperature variation; rainy season (May to November)

Terrain: volcanic with mountainous interiors

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Liamuiga 1,156 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 22%
  permanent crops: 17%
  permanent pastures: 3%
  forests and woodland: 17%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hurricanes (July to October)

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 42,838 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 7,178; female 6,826)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 13,226; female 13,083)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 1,020; female 1,505) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.34% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.6 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.15 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.05 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 17.39 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 67.94 years
  male: 64.87 years
  female: 71.21 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.42 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Kittitian(s), Nevisian(s)
  adjective: Kittitian, Nevisian

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Anglican, other Protestant sects, Roman Catholic

Languages: English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 97%
  male: 97%
  female: 98% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Federation of Saint Kitts and Nevis
  conventional short form: Saint Kitts and Nevis
  former: Federation of Saint Christopher and Nevis

Data code: SC

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Basseterre

Administrative divisions: 14 parishes; Christ Church Nichola
  Town, Saint Anne Sandy Point, Saint George Basseterre, Saint George
  Gingerland, Saint James Windward, Saint John Capisterre, Saint John
  Figtree, Saint Mary Cayon, Saint Paul Capisterre, Saint Paul
  Charlestown, Saint Peter Basseterre, Saint Thomas Lowland, Saint
  Thomas Middle Island, Trinity Palmetto Point

Independence: 19 September 1983 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 19 September (1983)

Constitution: 19 September 1983

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Dr. Cuthbert Montraville SEBASTIAN
  (since 1 January 1996)
  head of government: Prime Minister Dr. Denzil DOUGLAS (since 6 July
  1995) and Deputy Prime Minister Sam CONDOR (since 6 July 1995)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general in consultation
  with the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor general is
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the governor general; deputy
  prime minister appointed by the governor general

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (14 seats, 11
  popularly elected from single-member constituencies; members serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 3 July 1995 (next to be held by July 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--SKLNP 58%, PAM 41%; seats
  by party--SKNLP 7, PAM 1, NRP 1, CCM 2

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based on Saint
  Lucia) (one judge of the Supreme Court resides in Saint Kitts)

Political parties and leaders: People's Action Movement or PAM

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, Interpol, IOC, OAS, OECS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edwards ERSTEIN
  chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Saint Kitts and Nevis; US interests are monitored by the
  embassy in Bridgetown (Barbados)

Flag description: divided diagonally from the lower hoist side by
  a broad black band bearing two white, five-pointed stars; the black
  band is edged in yellow; the upper triangle is green, the lower
  triangle is red



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy has traditionally depended on the
  growing and processing of sugarcane; decreasing world prices have
  hurt the industry in recent years. Tourism, export-oriented
  manufacturing, and offshore banking activity have assumed larger
  roles. Most food is imported. The government has undertaken a
  program designed to revitalize the faltering sugar sector. It is
  also working to improve revenue collection in order to better fund
  social programs. In 1997 some leaders in Nevis were urging
  separation from Saint Kitts on the basis that Nevis was paying far
  more in taxes than it was receiving in government services, but the
  vote on cessation failed in August 1998. In late September 1998,
  Hurricane Georges caused approximately $445 million in damages.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$235 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6.3% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5.5%
  industry: 22.5%
  services: 72% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 11.3% (1997)

Labor force: 18,172 (June 1995)

Labor force--by occupation: services 69%, manufacturing 31%

Unemployment rate: 4% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $64.1 million
  expenditures: $73.3 million, including capital expenditures of $10.4
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: sugar processing, tourism, cotton, salt, copra,
  clothing, footwear, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 81 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 81 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, rice, yams, vegetables, bananas;
  fish

Exports: $43.7 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: machinery, food, electronics, beverages and
  tobacco

Exports--partners: US 68.5%, UK 22.3%, Caricom nations 5.5% (1995
  est.)

Imports: $129.6 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery, manufactures, food, fuels

Imports--partners: US 42.4%, Caricom nations 17.2%, UK 11.3% (1995
  est.)

Debt--external: $56 million (1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $5.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 3,800 (1986 est.)

Telephone system: good interisland VHF/UHF/SHF radiotelephone
  connections and international link via Antigua and Barbuda and Saint
  Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands Antilles)
  domestic: interisland links are handled by VHF/UHF/SHF radiotelephone
  international: international calls are carried by radiotelephone to
  Antigua and Barbuda and from there switched to submarine cable or to
  Intelsat, or carried to Saint Martin (Guadeloupe and Netherlands
  Antilles) by radiotelephone and switched to Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 25,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are three
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 9,500 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 58 km
  narrow gauge: 58 km 0.762-m gauge on Saint Kitts to serve sugarcane
  plantations (1995)

Highways:
  total: 320 km
  paved: 136 km
  unpaved: 184 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Basseterre, Charlestown

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Defense Force,
  Royal Saint Kitts and Nevis Police Force, Coast Guard

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment points for South American drugs
  destined for the US



======================================================================




@Saint Lucia
-----------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, island between the Caribbean Sea and North
  Atlantic Ocean, north of Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 13 53 N, 60 68 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 620 sq km
  land: 610 sq km
  water: 10 sq km

Area--comparative: 3.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 158 km

Maritime claims: 200 nm
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical, moderated by northeast trade winds; dry season
  from January to April, rainy season from May to August

Terrain: volcanic and mountainous with some broad, fertile valleys

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Gimie 950 m

Natural resources: forests, sandy beaches, minerals (pumice),
  mineral springs, geothermal potential

Land use:
  arable land: 8%
  permanent crops: 21%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 13%
  other: 53% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes and volcanic activity

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion,
  particularly in the northern region

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 154,020 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 26,068; female 25,359)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 46,265; female 48,100)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 3,097; female 5,131) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.09% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.63 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.58 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.19 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.6 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.55 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 71.81 years
  male: 68.14 years
  female: 75.74 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.27 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Saint Lucian(s)
  adjective: Saint Lucian

Ethnic groups: black 90%, mixed 6%, East Indian 3%, white 1%

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Protestant 7%, Anglican 3%

Languages: English (official), French patois

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 67%
  male: 65%
  female: 69% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Saint Lucia

Data code: ST

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Castries

Administrative divisions: 11 quarters; Anse-la-Raye, Castries,
  Choiseul, Dauphin, Dennery, Gros Islet, Laborie, Micoud, Praslin,
  Soufriere, Vieux Fort

Independence: 22 February 1979 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 22 February (1979)

Constitution: 22 February 1979

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Dr. Perlette LOUISY (since September
  1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Kenny ANTHONY (since 24 May 1997)
  and Deputy Prime Minister Mario MICHEL (since 24 May 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor general is
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party or leader of a majority coalition is
  usually appointed prime minister by the governor general

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (an 11-member body, six appointed on the advice of the prime
  minister, three on the advice of the leader of the opposition, and
  two after consultation with religious, economic, and social groups)
  and the House of Assembly (17 seats; members are elected by popular
  vote from single-member constituencies to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Assembly--last held 23 May 1997 (next to be held
  NA 2002)
  election results: House of Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--SLP 16, UWP 1

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (jurisdiction
  extends to Anguilla, Antigua and Barbuda, the British Virgin
  Islands, Dominica, Grenada, Montserrat, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint
  Lucia, and Saint Vincent and the Grenadines)

Political parties and leaders: United Workers Party or UWP

International organization participation: ACCT (associate), ACP,
  C, Caricom, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user),
  Interpol, IOC, ISO (subscriber), ITU, NAM, OAS, OECS, OPANAL, OPCW,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires Juliet
  Elaine MALLET PHILLIP
  chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Saint Lucia; the Ambassador to Saint Lucia resides in
  Bridgetown (Barbados)

Flag description: blue, with a gold isosceles triangle below a
  black arrowhead; the upper edges of the arrowhead have a white border



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy remains vulnerable due to its heavy
  dependence on banana production, which is subject to periodic
  droughts and tropical storms. Increased competition from Latin
  American bananas will probably further reduce market prices,
  exacerbating Saint Lucia's need to diversify its economy in coming
  years, e.g., by further expanding tourism, manufacturing, and
  construction. In 1997, strong activity in tourism and other service
  sectors offset the contraction in agriculture, manufacturing, and
  construction sectors. Improvement in the construction sector and
  growth of the tourism industry was expected to expand GDP in 1998.
  The agriculture sector registered its fifth year of decline in 1997
  primarily because of a severe decline in banana production.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$625 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.2% (1997)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,100 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 10.7%
  industry: 32.3%
  services: 57% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.9% (1997)

Labor force: 43,800

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 43.4%, services 38.9%,
  industry and commerce 17.7% (1983 est.)

Unemployment rate: 15% (1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $141.2 million
  expenditures: $146.7 million, including capital expenditures of
  $25.1 million (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: clothing, assembly of electronic components,
  beverages, corrugated cardboard boxes, tourism, lime processing,
  coconut processing

Industrial production growth rate: -8.9% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 110 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 110 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, coconuts, vegetables, citrus, root
  crops, cocoa

Exports: $70.1 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: bananas 41%, clothing, cocoa, vegetables,
  fruits, coconut oil

Exports--partners: UK 50%, US 24%, Caricom countries 16% (1995)

Imports: $292.4 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: food 23%, manufactured goods 21%, machinery
  and transportation equipment 19%, chemicals, fuels

Imports--partners: US 36%, Caricom countries 22%, UK 11%, Japan
  5%, Canada 4% (1995)

Debt--external: $159 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $51.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 26,000 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: system is automatically switched
  international: direct microwave radio relay link with Martinique and
  Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; tropospheric scatter to Barbados;
  international calls beyond these countries are carried by Intelsat
  from Martinique

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 104,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (of which two are commercial
  (1997)

Televisions: 26,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,210 km
  paved: 63 km
  unpaved: 1,147 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Castries, Vieux Fort

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Saint Lucia Police Force (includes
  Special Service Unit), Coast Guard

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $5 million (1991); note?for
  police force

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1991)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transit point for South American drugs destined
  for the US and Europe



======================================================================




@Saint Pierre and Miquelon
-------------------------





Geography



Location: Northern North America, islands in the North Atlantic
  Ocean, south of Newfoundland (Canada)

Geographic coordinates: 46 50 N, 56 20 W

Map references: North America

Area:
  total: 242 sq km
  land: 242 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes eight small islands in the Saint Pierre and the
  Miquelon groups

Area--comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 120 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: cold and wet, with much mist and fog; spring and autumn
  are windy

Terrain: mostly barren rock

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Morne de la Grande Montagne 240 m

Natural resources: fish, deepwater ports

Land use:
  arable land: 13%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 83% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: persistent fog throughout the year can be a
  maritime hazard

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: vegetation scanty



People



Population: 6,966 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.75% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12.27 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.41 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.59 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 8.12 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.13 years
  male: 75.58 years
  female: 79 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.58 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Frenchman(men), Frenchwoman(women)
  adjective: French

Ethnic groups: Basques and Bretons (French fishermen)

Religions: Roman Catholic 99%

Languages: French

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 99% (1982 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territorial Collectivity of Saint Pierre and
  Miquelon
  conventional short form: Saint Pierre and Miquelon
  local long form: Departement de Saint-Pierre et Miquelon
  local short form: Saint-Pierre et Miquelon

Data code: SB

Dependency status: self-governing territorial collectivity of
  France

Government type: NA

Capital: Saint-Pierre

Administrative divisions: none (territorial collectivity of
  France)
  note: there are no first-order administrative divisions approved by
  the US Government, but there are two communes--Saint Pierre, Miquelon

Independence: none (territorial collectivity of France; has been
  under French control since 1763)

National holiday: National Day, Taking of the Bastille, 14 July
  (1789)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French law with special adaptations for local
  conditions, such as housing and taxation

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by Prefect Remi THUAU (since NA)
  head of government: President of the General Council Bernard LE
  SOAVEC (since NA 1996)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; prefect appointed by the French president on the advice of the
  French Ministry of Interior; president of the General Council is
  elected by the members of the council

Legislative branch: unicameral General Council or Conseil General
  (19 seats--15 from Saint Pierre and 4 from Miquelon; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve six-year terms)
  elections: elections last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held NA
  April 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR
  15, other 4
  note: Saint Pierre and Miquelon elect 1 seat to the French Senate;
  elections last held NA September 1995 (next to be held NA September
  2004); results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--RPR 1;
  Saint Pierre and Miquelon also elects 1 seat to the French National
  Assembly; elections last held 25 May-1 June 1997 (next to be held NA
  2002); results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--UDF 1

Judicial branch: Superior Tribunal of Appeals or Tribunal
  Superieur d'Appel

Political parties and leaders: Socialist Party or PS [leader NA];

International organization participation: FZ, WFTU

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territorial
  collectivity of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territorial
  collectivity of France)

Flag description: a yellow sailing ship rides on a dark blue
  background with a black wave line under the ship; on the hoist side,
  a vertical band is divided into three parts: the top part is red
  with a green diagonal cross extending to the corners overlaid by a
  white cross dividing the square into four sections; the middle part
  has a white background with an ermine pattern; the third part has a
  red background with two stylized yellow lions outlined in black, one
  on top of the other; the flag of France is used for official
  occasions



Economy



Economy--overview: The inhabitants have traditionally earned their
  livelihood by fishing and by servicing fishing fleets operating off
  the coast of Newfoundland. The economy has been declining, however,
  because the number of ships stopping at Saint Pierre has dropped
  steadily over the years. In 1992, an arbitration panel awarded the
  islands an exclusive economic zone of 12,348 sq km to settle a
  longstanding territorial dispute with Canada, although it represents
  only 25% of what France had sought. The islands are heavily
  subsidized by France. Imports come primarily from Canada and France.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$74 million (1996 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$11,000 (1996 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 3,000 (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 9.8% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $70 million
  expenditures: $60 million, including capital expenditures of $24
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: fish processing and supply base for fishing fleets;
  tourism

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 39 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 39 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: vegetables; cattle, sheep, pigs; fish

Exports: $1.2 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: fish and fish products, fox and mink pelts

Exports--partners: US 58%, France 17%, UK 11%, Canada, Portugal
  (1990)

Imports: $60.5 million (c.i.f., 1996)

Imports--commodities: meat, clothing, fuel, electrical equipment,
  machinery, building materials

Imports--partners: Canada, France, US, Netherlands, UK

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 French franc (F) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: French francs (F) per US$1--5.65 (January 1999),
  5.8995 (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 3,650 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: radiotelephone communication with most countries in
  the world; 1 earth station in French domestic satellite system

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 3,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (there are, however, two
  repeaters which rebroadcast programs from France, Canada, and the
  US) (1997)

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 114 km
  paved: 69 km
  unpaved: 45 km (1994 est.)

Ports and harbors: Saint Pierre

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
--------------------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, islands in the Caribbean Sea, north of
  Trinidad and Tobago

Geographic coordinates: 13 15 N, 61 12 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 340 sq km
  land: 340 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 84 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; little seasonal temperature variation; rainy
  season (May to November)

Terrain: volcanic, mountainous

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Soufriere 1,234 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 18%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 36%
  other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 10 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hurricanes; Soufriere volcano on the island of
  Saint Vincent is a constant threat

Environment--current issues: pollution of coastal waters and
  shorelines from discharges by pleasure yachts and other effluents;
  in some areas, pollution is severe enough to make swimming
  prohibitive

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: the administration of the islands of the
  Grenadines group is divided between Saint Vincent and the Grenadines
  and Grenada



People



Population: 120,519 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 18,160; female 17,524)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 39,448; female 38,672)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 2,762; female 3,953) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.57% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 18.34 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.23 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -7.43 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 15.16 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.8 years
  male: 72.29 years
  female: 75.36 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.94 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Saint Vincentian(s) or Vincentian(s)
  adjective: Saint Vincentian or Vincentian

Ethnic groups: black, white, East Indian, Carib Amerindian

Religions: Anglican, Methodist, Roman Catholic, Seventh-Day
  Adventist

Languages: English, French patois

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 96%
  male: 96%
  female: 96% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Saint Vincent and the Grenadines

Data code: VC

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Kingstown

Administrative divisions: 6 parishes; Charlotte, Grenadines,
  Saint Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint Patrick

Independence: 27 October 1979 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 October (1979)

Constitution: 27 October 1979

Legal system: based on English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General David JACK (since NA)
  head of government: Prime Minister James F. MITCHELL (since 30 July
  1984)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the governor general is
  appointed by the monarch; following legislative elections, the
  leader of the majority party is usually appointed prime minister by
  the governor general; deputy prime minister appointed by the
  governor general on the advice of the prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Assembly (21 seats, 15
  elected representatives and 6 appointed senators; representatives
  are elected by popular vote from single-member constituencies to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 15 June 1998 (next to be held by NA May 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NDP 8,
  ULP 7

Judicial branch: Eastern Caribbean Supreme Court (based on Saint
  Lucia); one judge of the Supreme Court resides in Saint Vincent

Political parties and leaders: New Democratic Party or NDP [James
  Party or SVLP and the Movement for National Unity or MNU)

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CDB,
  ECLAC, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, OAS,
  OECS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Kingsley C. A. LAYNE
  chancery: 3216 New Mexico Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20016

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Saint Vincent and the Grenadines; the Ambassador to Saint
  Vincent and the Grenadines resides in Bridgetown (Barbados)

Flag description: three vertical bands of blue (hoist side), gold
  (double width), and green; the gold band bears three green diamonds
  arranged in a V pattern



Economy



Economy--overview: Agriculture, dominated by banana production, is
  the most important sector of this lower-middle-income economy. The
  services sector, based mostly on a growing tourist industry, is also
  important. The government has been relatively unsuccessful at
  introducing new industries, and high unemployment rates of 35%-40%
  continue. The continuing dependence on a single crop represents the
  biggest obstacle to the islands' development; tropical storms wiped
  out substantial portions of crops in both 1994 and 1995. The tourism
  sector has considerable potential for development over the next
  decade. Recent growth has been stimulated by strong activity in the
  construction sector and an improvement in tourism.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$289 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 10.6%
  industry: 17.5%
  services: 71.9% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.6% (1996)

Labor force: 67,000 (1984 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 26%, industry 17%,
  services 57% (1980 est.)

Unemployment rate: 35%-40% (1994 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $85.7 million
  expenditures: $98.6 million, including capital expenditures of $25.7
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: food processing, cement, furniture, clothing, starch

Industrial production growth rate: -0.9% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 62 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 67.74%
  hydro: 32.26%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 62 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, coconuts, sweet potatoes, spices;
  small numbers of cattle, sheep, pigs, goats; fish

Exports: $47.3 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: bananas 39%, eddoes and dasheen (taro),
  arrowroot starch, tennis racquets

Exports--partners: Caricom countries 49%, UK 16%, US 10% (1995)

Imports: $158.8 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment,
  chemicals and fertilizers, minerals and fuels

Imports--partners: US 36%, Caricom countries 28%, UK 13% (1995)

Debt--external: $83.6 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $47.5 million (1995); note?Stabex (EU),
  $34.5 million (1998)

Currency: 1 East Caribbean dollar (EC$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: East Caribbean dollars (EC$) per US$1--2.7000
  (fixed rate since 1976)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 6,189 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: islandwide, fully automatic telephone system; VHF/UHF
  radiotelephone from Saint Vincent to the other islands of the
  Grenadines
  international: VHF/UHF radiotelephone from Saint Vincent to
  Barbados; new SHF radiotelephone to Grenada and to Saint Lucia;
  access to Intelsat earth station in Martinique through Saint Lucia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 76,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (in addition, there are three
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 20,600 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,040 km
  paved: 320 km
  unpaved: 720 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Kingstown

Merchant marine:
  total: 814 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,726,930
  GRT/11,835,144 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 1, bulk 138, cargo 402, chemical tanker
  26, combination bulk 11, combination ore/oil 7, container 47,
  liquefied gas tanker 3, livestock carrier 4, multifunction
  large-load carrier 2, oil tanker 64, passenger 2, refrigerated cargo
  40, roll-on/roll-off cargo 51, short-sea passenger 10, specialized
  tanker 5, vehicle carrier 1
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 20
  countries among which are Croatia 17, Slovenia 7, China 5, Greece 5,
  UAE 3, Norway 2, Japan 2, and Ukraine 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Saint Vincent and the Grenadines Police
  Force (includes Special Service Unit), Coast Guard

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined for the US and Europe



======================================================================




@Samoa
-----





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean,
  about one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 13 35 S, 172 20 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 2,860 sq km
  land: 2,850 sq km
  water: 10 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 403 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (October to March), dry season
  (May to October)

Terrain: narrow coastal plain with volcanic, rocky, rugged
  mountains in interior

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mauga Silisili 1,857 m

Natural resources: hardwood forests, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 24%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 47%
  other: 10%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons; active volcanism

Environment--current issues: soil erosion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 229,979 (July 1999 est.)
  note: other estimates range as low as 162,000

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 39% (male 45,647; female 44,141)
  15-64 years: 57% (male 68,054; female 62,612)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 4,477; female 5,048) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.3% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 28.81 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.4 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.39 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.89 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.06 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 30.5 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.82 years
  male: 67.43 years
  female: 72.33 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.61 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Samoan(s)
  adjective: Samoan

Ethnic groups: Samoan 92.6%, Euronesians 7% (persons of European
  and Polynesian blood), Europeans 0.4%

Religions: Christian 99.7% (about one-half of population
  associated with the London Missionary Society; includes
  Congregational, Roman Catholic, Methodist, Latter-Day Saints,
  Seventh-Day Adventist)

Languages: Samoan (Polynesian), English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 97%
  female: 97% (1971 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Independent State of Samoa
  conventional short form: Samoa
  former: Western Samoa

Data code: WS

Government type: constitutional monarchy under native chief

Capital: Apia

Administrative divisions: 11 districts; A'ana, Aiga-i-le-Tai,
  Atua, Fa'asaleleaga, Gaga'emauga, Gagaifomauga, Palauli,
  Satupa'itea, Tuamasaga, Va'a-o-Fonoti, Vaisigano

Independence: 1 January 1962 (from New Zealand-administered UN
  trusteeship)

National holiday: National Day, 1 June (1962)

Constitution: 1 January 1962

Legal system: based on English common law and local customs;
  judicial review of legislative acts with respect to fundamental
  rights of the citizen; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Chief Susuga MALIETOA Tanumafili II (cochief of
  state from 1 January 1962 until becoming sole chief of state 5 April
  1963)
  head of government: Prime Minister TUILA'EPA Sailele Malielegaoi
  (since 24 November 1998); note--TUILA'EPA served as deputy prime
  minister since 1992; he assumed the prime ministership in November
  1998 when former Prime Minister TOFILAU Eti Alesana resigned in poor
  health; the post of deputy prime minister is currently vacant
  cabinet: Cabinet consists of 12 members, appointed by the chief of
  state with the prime minister's advice
  elections: upon the death of Chief Susuga MALIETOA Tanumafili II, a
  new chief of state will be elected by the Legislative Assembly to
  serve a five-year term; prime minister appointed by the chief of
  state with the approval of the Legislative Assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Fono (49
  seats--47 elected by Samoans, 2 elected by non-Samoans; only chiefs
  (matai) may stand for election to the Fono; members serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: last held 26 April 1996 (next to be held by NA April 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--HRPP 45.17%, SNDP 27.1%,
  independents 23.7%; seats by party--HRPP 25, SNDP 13, independents 11

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Human Rights Protection Party or

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, OPCW, Sparteca, SPC, SPF,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Tuiloma Neroni SLADE
  chancery: 820 Second Avenue, Suite 800D, New York, NY 10017

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Josiah Horton BEEMAN (Ambassador to New
  Zealand and Samoa, resides in Wellington, New Zealand)
  embassy: 5th floor, Beach Road, Apia
  mailing address: P.O. Box 3430, Apia

Flag description: red with a blue rectangle in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant bearing five white five-pointed stars
  representing the Southern Cross constellation



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy of Samoa has traditionally been
  dependent on development aid, private family remittances from
  overseas, and agricultural exports. The country is vulnerable to
  devastating storms. Agriculture employs two-thirds of the labor
  force, and furnishes 90% of exports, featuring coconut cream,
  coconut oil, and copra. Outside of a large automotive wire harness
  factory, the manufacturing sector mainly processes agricultural
  products. Tourism is an expanding sector; more than 70,0000 tourists
  visited the islands in 1996. The Samoan Government has called for
  deregulation of the financial sector, encouragement of investment,
  and continued fiscal discipline. Observers point to the flexibility
  of the labor market as a basic strength for future economic advances.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$470 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.4% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,100 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 40%
  industry: 25%
  services: 35% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.2% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 82,500 (1991 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, services 30%,
  industry 5% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $52 million
  expenditures: $99 million, including capital expenditures of $37
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: timber, tourism, food processing, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 14% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 65 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 61.54%
  hydro: 38.46%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 65 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, bananas, taro, yams

Exports: $14.6 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: coconut oil and cream, copra, fish, beer

Exports--partners: Australia 82%, New Zealand 6%, Slovakia,
  Germany, American Samoa (1996)

Imports: $99.7 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: intermediate goods, food, capital goods

Imports--partners: Australia 33%, New Zealand 25%, Japan 15%, Fiji
  8%, US 8% (1996)

Debt--external: $167 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $42.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 tala (WS$) = 100 sene

Exchange rates: tala (WS$) per US$1--2.9011 (January 1999), 2.9429
  (1998), 2.5562 (1997), 2.4618 (1996), 2.4722 (1995), 2.5349 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 7,500 (1988 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 76,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 6 (1997)

Televisions: 6,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 790 km
  paved: 332 km
  unpaved: 458 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Apia, Asau, Mulifanua, Salelologa

Airports: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 2
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular armed services; Samoa Police Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%

Military--note: Samoa has no formal defense structure or regular
  armed forces; informal defense ties exist with NZ, which is required
  to consider any Samoan request for assistance under the 1962 Treaty
  of Friendship



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@San Marino
----------





Geography



Location: Southern Europe, an enclave in central Italy

Geographic coordinates: 43 46 N, 12 25 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 60 sq km
  land: 60 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 0.3 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries:
  total: 39 km
  border countries: Italy 39 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: Mediterranean; mild to cool winters; warm, sunny summers

Terrain: rugged mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Torrente Ausa 55 m
  highest point: Monte Titano 749 m

Natural resources: building stone

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 83% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Nuclear Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution

Geography--note: landlocked; smallest independent state in Europe
  after the Holy See and Monaco; dominated by the Apennines



People



Population: 25,061 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 16% (male 2,008; female 2,036)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 8,501; female 8,294)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 1,774; female 2,448) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.64% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.41 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.22 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 4.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.72 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.39 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 81.47 years
  male: 77.59 years
  female: 85.35 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.51 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Sammarinese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Sammarinese

Ethnic groups: Sammarinese, Italian

Religions: Roman Catholic

Languages: Italian

Literacy:
  definition: age 10 and over can read and write
  total population: 96%
  male: 97%
  female: 95% (1976 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of San Marino
  conventional short form: San Marino
  local long form: Repubblica di San Marino
  local short form: San Marino

Data code: SM

Government type: republic

Capital: San Marino

Administrative divisions: 9 municipalities (castelli,
  singular--castello); Acquaviva, Borgo Maggiore, Chiesanuova,
  Domagnano, Faetano, Fiorentino, Monte Giardino, San Marino,
  Serravalle

Independence: 301 (by tradition)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Foundation of the Republic,
  3 September

Constitution: 8 October 1600; electoral law of 1926 serves some
  of the functions of a constitution

Legal system: based on civil law system with Italian law
  influences; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: cochiefs of state Captain Regent Pietro BERTI and
  Captain Regent Paolo BOLLINI (for the period 1 October 1998-31 March
  1999)
  head of government: Secretary of State for Foreign and Political
  Affairs Gabriele GATTI (since NA July 1986)
  cabinet: Congress of State elected by the Great and General Council
  for a five-year term
  elections: cochiefs of state (captain regents) elected by the Great
  and General Council for a six-month term; election last held NA
  September 1998 (next to be held NA March 1999); secretary of state
  for foreign and political affairs elected by the Great and General
  Council for a five-year term; election last held NA June 1998 (next
  to be held NA June 2003)
  election results: Pietro BERTI and Paolo BOLLINI elected captain
  regents; percent of legislative vote--NA; Gabriele GATTI reelected
  secretary of state for foreign and political affairs; percent of
  legislative vote--NA
  note: the popularly elected parliament (Great and General Council)
  selects two of its members to serve as the Captains Regent (cochiefs
  of state) for a six-month period; they preside over meetings of the
  Great and General Council and its cabinet (Congress of State) which
  has ten other members, all selected by the Great and General
  Council; assisting the captains regent are three secretaries of
  state--Foreign Affairs, Internal Affairs, and Finance--and several
  additional secretaries; the secretary of state for Foreign Affairs
  has assumed many of the prerogatives of a prime minister

Legislative branch: unicameral Great and General Council or
  Consiglio Grande e Generale (60 seats; members are elected by direct
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 31 May 1998 (next to be held by NA May 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PDCS 40.8%, PSS 23.3%,
  PPDS 18.6%, AP 9.8%, RC 3.3%, Reformist Socialists 4.2%; seats by
  party--PDCS 25, PSS 14, PPDS 11, AP 6, RC 2, RS 2

Judicial branch: Council of Twelve or Consiglio dei XII

Political parties and leaders: Christian Democratic Party or PDCS
  MACINA, secretary general]; Reformist Socialists or RS (formerly San

International organization participation: CE, ECE, ICAO, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM (guest), OPCW,
  OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US: San Marino does not have an
  embassy in the US
  honorary consulate(s) general: Washington, DC, and New York
  honorary consulate(s): Detroit

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in San Marino; the US Consul General in Florence (Italy) is
  accredited to San Marino

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of white (top) and
  light blue with the national coat of arms superimposed in the
  center; the coat of arms has a shield (featuring three towers on
  three peaks) flanked by a wreath, below a crown and above a scroll
  bearing the word LIBERTAS (Liberty)



Economy



Economy--overview: The tourist sector contributes over 50% of GDP.
  In 1995 more than 3.3 million tourists visited San Marino. The key
  industries are banking, wearing apparel, electronics, and ceramics.
  Main agricultural products are wine and cheeses. The per capita
  level of output and standard of living are comparable to those of
  Italy, which supplies much of its food.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$500 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$20,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5.3% (1995)

Labor force: 15,600 (1995)

Labor force--by occupation: services 55%, industry 43%,
  agriculture 2% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 3.6% (April 1996)

Budget:
  revenues: $320 million
  expenditures: $320 million, including capital expenditures of $26
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: tourism, textiles, electronics, ceramics, cement, wine

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh
  note: electricity supplied by Italy

Agriculture--products: wheat, grapes, maize, olives; cattle, pigs,
  horses, beef, cheese, hides

Exports: trade data are included with the statistics for Italy

Exports--commodities: building stone, lime, wood, chestnuts,
  wheat, wine, baked goods, hides, and ceramics

Imports: trade data are included with the statistics for Italy

Imports--commodities: wide variety of consumer manufactures, food

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Italian lira (Lit) = 100 centesimi; note--also mints
  its own coins

Exchange rates: Italian lire (Lit) per US$1--1,668.7 (January
  1998),1,736.2 (1998), 1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9
  (1995), 1,612.4 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 15,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: automatic telephone system completely integrated into
  Italian system
  international: microwave radio relay and cable connections to
  Italian network; no satellite earth stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 15,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (San Marino residents also
  receive broadcasts from Italy) (1997)

Televisions: 9,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km; note--there is a 1.5 km cable railway connecting
  the city of San Marino to Borgo Maggiore

Highways:
  total: 220 km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: none



Military



Military branches: Voluntary Military Force, Police Force

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3.7 million (1995)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Sao Tome and Principe
---------------------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, islands in the Gulf of Guinea,
  straddling the Equator, west of Gabon

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 7 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,000 sq km
  land: 1,000 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: more than five times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 209 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; one rainy season (October to May)

Terrain: volcanic, mountainous

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pico de Sao Tome 2,024 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 36%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 61% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 100 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion and
  exhaustion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Desertification, Environmental Modification, Law of the Sea
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change



People



Population: 154,878 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 37,322; female 36,423)
  15-64 years: 48% (male 36,067; female 38,730)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 2,876; female 3,460) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.14% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 43.31 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.08 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -3.88 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.93 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 52.93 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.71 years
  male: 63.18 years
  female: 66.28 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.14 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Sao Tomean(s)
  adjective: Sao Tomean

Ethnic groups: mestico, angolares (descendants of Angolan
  slaves), forros (descendants of freed slaves), servicais (contract
  laborers from Angola, Mozambique, and Cape Verde), tongas (children
  of servicais born on the islands), Europeans (primarily Portuguese)

Religions: Roman Catholic, Evangelical Protestant, Seventh-Day
  Adventist

Languages: Portuguese (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 73%
  male: 85%
  female: 62% (1991 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Democratic Republic of Sao Tome and Principe
  conventional short form: Sao Tome and Principe
  local long form: Republica Democratica de Sao Tome e Principe
  local short form: Sao Tome e Principe

Data code: TP

Government type: republic

Capital: Sao Tome

Administrative divisions: 2 provinces; Principe, Sao Tome
  note: Principe has had self-government since 29 April 1995

Independence: 12 July 1975 (from Portugal)

National holiday: Independence Day, 12 July (1975)

Constitution: approved March 1990; effective 10 September 1990

Legal system: based on Portuguese legal system and customary law;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Miguel TROVOADA (since 4 April 1991)
  head of government: Prime Minister Guilherma Posser da COSTA (since
  30 December 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  proposal of the prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 30 June and 15 July 1996 (next to be held in
  2001); prime minister chosen by the National Assembly and approved
  by the president
  election results: Miguel TROVOADA reelected president in Sao Tome's
  second multiparty presidential election; percent of vote--Miguel
  TROVOADA 52.74%, Manuel Pinto da COSTA 47.26%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assembleia
  Nacional (55 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 8 November 1998 (next to be held NA 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--MLSTP-PSD 56%, PCD
  14.5%%, ADI 29%; seats by party--MLSTP-PSD 31, ADI 16, PCD 8

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Party for Democratic Convergence
  Liberation of Sao Tome and Principe-Social Democratic Party or
  other small parties

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  CEEAC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ITU, NAM, OAU, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Sao Tome and Principe does
  not have an embassy in the US, but does have a Permanent Mission to
  the UN, headed by First Secretary Domingos AUGUSTO Ferreira, located
  at 122 East 42nd Street, Suite 1604, New York, NY 10168, telephone

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Sao Tome and Principe; the Ambassador to Gabon is
  accredited to Sao Tome and Principe on a nonresident basis and makes
  periodic visits to the islands

Flag description: three horizontal bands of green (top), yellow
  (double width), and green with two black five-pointed stars placed
  side by side in the center of the yellow band and a red isosceles
  triangle based on the hoist side; uses the popular pan-African
  colors of Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: This small poor island economy has become
  increasingly dependent on cocoa since independence over 20 years
  ago. However, cocoa production has substantially declined because of
  drought and mismanagement. The resulting shortage of cocoa for
  export has created a persistent balance-of-payments problem. Sao
  Tome has to import all fuels, most manufactured goods, consumer
  goods, and a significant amount of food. Over the years, it has been
  unable to service its external debt and has had to depend on
  concessional aid and debt rescheduling. Considerable potential
  exists for development of a tourist industry, and the government has
  taken steps to expand facilities in recent years. The government
  also has attempted to reduce price controls and subsidies, but
  economic growth has remained sluggish. Sao Tome is also optimistic
  that significant petroleum discoveries are forthcoming in its
  territorial waters in the oil-rich waters of the Gulf of Guinea.
  Corruption scandals continue to weaken the economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$164 million (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 23%
  industry: 19%
  services: 58% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 21% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: population mainly engaged in
  subsistence agriculture and fishing
  note: there are shortages of skilled workers

Unemployment rate: 50% in the formal business sector (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $58 million
  expenditures: $114 million, including capital expenditures of $54
  million (1993 est.)

Industries: light construction, textiles, soap, beer; fish
  processing; timber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 46.67%
  hydro: 53.33%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 15 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cocoa, coconuts, palm kernels, copra,
  cinnamon, pepper, coffee, bananas, papayas, beans; poultry; fish

Exports: $5.3 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: cocoa 90%, copra, coffee, palm oil (1997)

Exports--partners: Netherlands 51%, Germany 6%, Portugal 6% (1997)

Imports: $19.2 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and electrical equipment, food
  products, petroleum products

Imports--partners: Portugal 26%, France 18%, Angola, Belgium,
  Japan (1997)

Debt--external: $267 million (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $57.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 dobra (Db) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: dobras (Db) per US$1--6,873.5 (October 1998),
  4,552.5 (1997), 2,203.2 (1996), 1,420.3 (1995), 732.6 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2,200 (1986 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: minimal system
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 2, shortwave 0

Radios: 33,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 320 km
  paved: 218 km
  unpaved: 102 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Santo Antonio, Sao Tome

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 7,610 GRT/9,446
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Security Police

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 31,724 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 16,766 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $500,000 (1994)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.5% (1994)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Saudi Arabia
------------





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Persian Gulf and the Red
  Sea, north of Yemen

Geographic coordinates: 25 00 N, 45 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 1,960,582 sq km
  land: 1,960,582 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than one-fifth the size of the US

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,415 km
  border countries: Iraq 814 km, Jordan 728 km, Kuwait 222 km, Oman
  676 km, Qatar 60 km, UAE 457 km, Yemen 1,458 km

Coastline: 2,640 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 18 nm
  continental shelf: not specified
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: harsh, dry desert with great extremes of temperature

Terrain: mostly uninhabited, sandy desert

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
  highest point: Jabal Sawda' 3,133 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold, copper

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 56%
  forests and woodland: 1%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 4,350 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent sand and dust storms

Environment--current issues: desertification; depletion of
  underground water resources; the lack of perennial rivers or
  permanent water bodies has prompted the development of extensive
  seawater desalination facilities; coastal pollution from oil spills

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: extensive coastlines on Persian Gulf and Red Sea
  provide great leverage on shipping (especially crude oil) through
  Persian Gulf and Suez Canal



People



Population: 21,504,613 (July 1999 est.)
  note: includes 5,321,938 non-nationals (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 4,705,724; female 4,543,918)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 6,925,020; female 4,783,570)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 291,449; female 254,932) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.39% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 37.38 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.86 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.4 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.45 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.14 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.24 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 38.8 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.55 years
  male: 68.67 years
  female: 72.53 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.34 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Saudi(s)
  adjective: Saudi or Saudi Arabian

Ethnic groups: Arab 90%, Afro-Asian 10%

Religions: Muslim 100%

Languages: Arabic

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 62.8%
  male: 71.5%
  female: 50.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Saudi Arabia
  conventional short form: Saudi Arabia
  local long form: Al Mamlakah al Arabiyah as Suudiyah
  local short form: Al Arabiyah as Suudiyah

Data code: SA

Government type: monarchy

Capital: Riyadh

Administrative divisions: 13 provinces (mintaqat,
  singular--mintaqah); Al Bahah, Al Hudud ash Shamaliyah, Al Jawf, Al
  Madinah, Al Qasim, Ar Riyad, Ash Sharqiyah (Eastern Province),
  'Asir, Ha'il, Jizan, Makkah, Najran, Tabuk

Independence: 23 September 1932 (unification)

National holiday: Unification of the Kingdom, 23 September (1932)

Constitution: governed according to Shari'a (Islamic law); the
  Basic Law that articulates the government's rights and
  responsibilities was introduced in 1993

Legal system: based on Islamic law, several secular codes have
  been introduced; commercial disputes handled by special committees;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud
  (since 13 June 1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime Minister
  ABDALLAH bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the monarch, heir
  to the throne since 13 June 1982, regent from 1 January to 22
  February 1996); note--the monarch is both the chief of state and head
  of government
  head of government: King and Prime Minister FAHD bin Abd al-Aziz Al
  Saud (since 13 June 1982); Crown Prince and First Deputy Prime
  Minister ABDALLAH bin Abd al-Aziz Al Saud (half-brother to the
  monarch, heir to the throne since 13 June 1982, regent from 1
  January to 22 February 1996); note--the monarch is both the chief of
  state and head of government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers is appointed by the monarch and
  includes many royal family members
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary

Legislative branch: a consultative council (90 members and a
  chairman appointed by the monarch for four-year terms)

Judicial branch: Supreme Council of Justice

Political parties and leaders: none allowed

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, BIS, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-19, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OAS (observer), OIC, OPCW,
  OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador BANDAR bin Sultan bin Abd al-Aziz Al
  Saud
  chancery: 601 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037
  consulate(s) general: Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Wyche FOWLER, Jr.
  embassy: Collector Road M, Diplomatic Quarter, Riyadh
  mailing address: American Embassy Riyadh, Unit 61307, APO AE
  09803-1307; International Mail: P. O. Box 94309, Riyadh 11693
  consulate(s) general: Dhahran, Jiddah (Jeddah)

Flag description: green with large white Arabic script (that may
  be translated as There is no God but God; Muhammad is the Messenger
  of God) above a white horizontal saber (the tip points to the hoist
  side); green is the traditional color of Islam



Economy



Economy--overview: This is a well-to-do oil-based economy with
  strong government controls over major economic activities. Saudi
  Arabia has the largest reserves of petroleum in the world (26% of
  the proved total), ranks as the largest exporter of petroleum, and
  plays a leading role in OPEC. The petroleum sector accounts for
  roughly 75% of budget revenues, 40% of GDP, and 90% of export
  earnings. About 35% of GDP comes from the private sector. Roughly 4
  million foreign workers play an important role in the Saudi economy,
  for example, in the oil and service sectors. The Saudi economy was
  severely hit by the large decline in world oil prices in 1998. GDP
  fell by nearly 11%; the budget deficit rose to $12.3 billion; and
  the current account recorded a $13 billion deficit--the first in
  three years. The government announced plans to implement large
  spending cuts in 1999 because of weak oil prices and will continue
  to call on greater private sector involvement in the economy.
  Shortages of water and rapid population growth will constrain
  government efforts to increase self-sufficiency in agricultural
  products.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$186 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -10.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$9,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 6%
  industry: 53%
  services: 41% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.2% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 7 million
  note: 35% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
  (July 1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: government 40%, industry,
  construction, and oil 25%, services 30%, agriculture 5%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $32.3 billion
  expenditures: $44 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1999 budget est.)

Industries: crude oil production, petroleum refining, basic
  petrochemicals, cement, two small steel-rolling mills, construction,
  fertilizer, plastics

Industrial production growth rate: 1% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 95 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 95 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, tomatoes, melons, dates,
  citrus; mutton, chickens, eggs, milk

Exports: $59.7 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products 90%

Exports--partners: Japan 18%, US 15%, South Korea 11%, Singapore
  8%, India 4% (1997 est.)

Imports: $26.2 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, foodstuffs,
  chemicals, motor vehicles, textiles

Imports--partners: US 23%, UK 17%, Japan 8%, Germany 8%, Italy 5%
  (1997 est.)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--donor: pledged $100 million in 1993 to fund
  reconstruction of Lebanon; since 1993, Saudi Arabia has committed
  $208 million for assistance to the Palestinians

Currency: 1 Saudi riyal (SR) = 100 halalah

Exchange rates: Saudi riyals (SR) per US$1--3.7450 (fixed rate
  since June 1986)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.46 million (1993)

Telephone system: modern system
  domestic: extensive microwave radio relay and coaxial and
  fiber-optic cable systems
  international: microwave radio relay to Bahrain, Jordan, Kuwait,
  Qatar, UAE, Yemen, and Sudan; coaxial cable to Kuwait and Jordan;
  submarine cable to Djibouti, Egypt and Bahrain; satellite earth
  stations--5 Intelsat (3 Atlantic Ocean and 2 Indian Ocean), 1
  Arabsat, and 1 Inmarsat (Indian Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 43, FM 13, shortwave 0

Radios: 5 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 117 (1997)

Televisions: 4.5 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,390 km
  standard gauge: 1,390 km 1.435-m gauge (448 km double track) (1992)

Highways:
  total: 162,000 km
  paved: 69,174 km
  unpaved: 92,826 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 6,400 km; petroleum products 150 km; natural
  gas 2,200 km (includes natural gas liquids 1,600 km)

Ports and harbors: Ad Dammam, Al Jubayl, Duba, Jiddah, Jizan,
  Rabigh, Ra's al Khafji, Mishab, Ras Tanura, Yanbu' al Bahr, Madinat
  Yanbu' al Sinaiyah

Merchant marine:
  total: 73 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,124,110 GRT/1,467,121
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 13, chemical tanker 7, container 5,
  liquefied gas tanker 1, livestock carrier 4, oil tanker 17,
  passenger 1, refrigerated cargo 4, roll-on/roll-off cargo 12,
  short-sea passenger 8 (1998 est.)

Airports: 205 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 70
  over 3,047 m: 30
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 12
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 23
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 135
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 78
  914 to 1,523 m: 38
  under 914 m: 13 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Land Force (Army), Navy, Air Force, Air
  Defense Force, National Guard, Ministry of Interior Forces

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,696,772 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 3,171,860 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 197,386 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $18.1 billion (1997 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 12% (1997 est.)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: large section of boundary with Yemen not
  defined; location and status of boundary with UAE is not final, de
  facto boundary reflects 1974 agreement; Kuwaiti ownership of Qaruh
  and Umm al Maradim islands is disputed by Saudi Arabia; in 1996,
  agreed with Qatar to demarcate border per 1992 accord; that process
  is ongoing

Illicit drugs: death penalty for traffickers; increasing
  consumption of heroin and cocaine



======================================================================




@Senegal
-------





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Guinea-Bissau and Mauritania

Geographic coordinates: 14 00 N, 14 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 196,190 sq km
  land: 192,000 sq km
  water: 4,190 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than South Dakota

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,640 km
  border countries: The Gambia 740 km, Guinea 330 km, Guinea-Bissau
  338 km, Mali 419 km, Mauritania 813 km

Coastline: 531 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; rainy season (May to November) has
  strong southeast winds; dry season (December to April) dominated by
  hot, dry, harmattan wind

Terrain: generally low, rolling, plains rising to foothills in
  southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed feature near Nepen Diakha 581 m

Natural resources: fish, phosphates, iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 16%
  forests and woodland: 54%
  other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 710 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: lowlands seasonally flooded; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: wildlife populations threatened by
  poaching; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification;
  overfishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Dumping

Geography--note: The Gambia is almost an enclave of Senegal



People



Population: 10,051,930 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 2,403,384; female 2,416,791)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 2,360,113; female 2,594,278)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 134,765; female 142,599) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.32% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 43.88 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.71 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.95 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 59.81 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 57.83 years
  male: 54.95 years
  female: 60.78 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.11 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Senegalese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Senegalese

Ethnic groups: Wolof 43.3%, Pular 23.8%, Serer 14.7%, Diola 3.7%,
  Mandink 3%, Soninke 1.1%, European and Lebanese 1%, other 9.4%

Religions: Muslim 92%, indigenous beliefs 6%, Christian 2%
  (mostly Roman Catholic)

Languages: French (official), Wolof, Pulaar, Diola, Mandingo

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 33.1%
  male: 43%
  female: 23.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Senegal
  conventional short form: Senegal
  local long form: Republique du Senegal
  local short form: Senegal

Data code: SG

Government type: republic under multiparty democratic rule

Capital: Dakar

Administrative divisions: 10 regions (regions, singular--region);
  Dakar, Diourbel, Fatick, Kaolack, Kolda, Louga, Saint-Louis,
  Tambacounda, Thies, Ziguinchor

Independence: 4 April 1960 from France; complete independence was
  achieved upon dissolution of federation with Mali on 20 August 1960
  (The Gambia and Senegal signed an agreement on 12 December 1981 that
  called for the creation of a loose confederation to be known as
  Senegambia, but the agreement was dissolved on 30 September 1989)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 April (1960)

Constitution: 3 March 1963, revised 1991

Legal system: based on French civil law system; judicial review
  of legislative acts in Constitutional Court; the Council of State
  audits the government's accounting office; Senegal has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Abdou DIOUF (since 1 January 1981)
  head of government: Prime Minister Mamadou Lamine LOUM (since 4 July
  1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister in
  consultation with the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  election last held 21 February 1993 (next to be held NA February
  2000); prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Abdou DIOUF reelected president; percent of
  vote--Abdou DIOUF (PS) 58.4%, Abdoulaye WADE (PDS) 32.03%, other 9.57%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (140 seats; members are elected by direct popular vote to
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 24 May 1998 (next to be held NA May 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PS 50.19%, PDS 19%, UDS-R
  13%, And/Jef-PADS 5%, LD/MPT 4%, CDP/Garab-Gi 2%, FSD 1%, PDS-R 1%,
  RND 1%, BCG 1%, PIT 1% ; seats by party--PS 93, PDS 23, UDS-R 11,
  And-Jef/PADS 4, LD-MPT 3, CDP/Garab-Gi 1, FSD 1, PDS-R 1, RND 1, BCG
  1, PIT 1

Judicial branch: under the terms of a reform of the judicial
  system implemented in 1992, the principal organs of the judiciary
  are as follows; Constitutional Court; Council of State; Court of
  Final Appeals or Cour de Cassation; Court of Appeals

Political parties and leaders: African Party for Democracy and
  secretary general]; Democratic League-Labor Party Movement or LD-MPT

Political pressure groups and leaders: students; teachers; labor;
  Muslim brotherhoods

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, FAO, FZ, G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU,
  ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, MINURCA, MIPONUH, MONUA, NAM, OAU, OIC,
  OPCW, PCA, UN, UNAVEM III, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH,
  UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mamadou Mansour SECK
  chancery: 2112 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dane Farnsworth SMITH, Jr.
  embassy: Avenue Jean XXIII at the corner of Avenue Kleber, Dakar
  mailing address: B. P. 49, Dakar

Flag description: three equal vertical bands of green (hoist
  side), yellow, and red with a small green five-pointed star centered
  in the yellow band; uses the popular pan-African colors of Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: In January 1994, Senegal undertook a bold and
  ambitious economic reform program with the support of the
  international donor community. This reform began with a 50%
  devaluation of Senegal's currency, the CFA franc, which is linked at
  a fixed rate to the French franc. Government price controls and
  subsidies have been steadily dismantled. After seeing its economy
  contract by 2.1% in 1993, Senegal made an important turnaround,
  thanks to the reform program, with real growth in GDP averaging 5%
  annually in 1995-98. Annual inflation has been pushed below 2%, and
  the fiscal deficit has been cut to less than 1.5% of GDP. Investment
  rose steadily from 13.8% of GDP in 1993 to 16.5% in 1997. As a
  member of the West African Economic and Monetary Union (UEMOA),
  Senegal is working toward greater regional integration with a
  unified external tariff. Senegal also realized full Internet
  connectivity in 1996, creating a miniboom in information
  technology-based services. Private activity now accounts for 82% of
  GDP. On the negative side, Senegal faces deep-seated urban problems
  of chronic unemployment, juvenile delinquency, and drug addiction.
  Forecasters predict growth will continue in the 5% range in
  1999-2000.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$15.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 19%
  industry: 17%
  services: 64% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.4%
  highest 10%: 42.8% (1991)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 60%

Unemployment rate: NA%; urban youth 40%

Budget:
  revenues: $885 million
  expenditures: $885 million, including capital expenditures of $125
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: agricultural and fish processing, phosphate mining,
  fertilizer production, petroleum refining, construction materials

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.027 billion kWh (1997 est.)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 730 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1997)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1997)

Agriculture--products: peanuts, millet, corn, sorghum, rice,
  cotton, tomatoes, green vegetables; cattle, poultry, pigs; fish

Exports: $925 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: fish, ground nuts (peanuts), petroleum
  products, phosphates, cotton

Exports--partners: France 20%, other EU countries, India, Cote
  d'Ivoire, Mali (1996)

Imports: $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: foods and beverages, consumer goods, capital
  goods, petroleum products

Imports--partners: France 36%, other EU countries, Nigeria,
  Cameroon, Cote d'Ivoire, Algeria, US, China, Japan (1996)

Debt--external: $3.8 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $647.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (December 1998), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1966), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 81,988 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: above-average urban system; microwave radio relay, coaxial
  cable and fiber-optic cable in trunk system
  international: 4 submarine cables; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 6, shortwave 1

Radios: 850,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 61,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 904 km
  narrow gauge: 904 km 1.000-meter gauge (70 km double track) (1995)

Highways:
  total: 14,576 km
  paved: 4,271 km
  unpaved: 10,305 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 897 km total; 785 km on the Senegal river, and 112 km
  on the Saloum river

Ports and harbors: Dakar, Kaolack, Matam, Podor, Richard-Toll,
  Saint-Louis, Ziguinchor

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 bulk ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,995 GRT/3,775 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 20 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 10
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, National Gendarmerie,
  National Police (Surete Nationale)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,096,438 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,095,047 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 103,348 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $68 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: short section of boundary with The Gambia
  is indefinite

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for Southwest and Southeast
  Asian heroin moving to Europe and North America; illicit cultivator
  of cannabis



======================================================================




@Serbia and Montenegro
---------------------





Introduction



Background: Serbia and Montenegro have asserted the formation of
  a joint independent state, but this entity has not been formally
  recognized as a state by the US. The US view is that the Socialist
  Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has dissolved and that none of
  the successor republics represents its continuation.



Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, bordering the Adriatic Sea,
  between Albania and Bosnia and Herzegovina

Geographic coordinates: 44 00 N, 21 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 102,350 sq km (Serbia 88,412 sq km; Montenegro 13,938 sq km)
  land: 102,136 sq km (Serbia 88,412 sq km; Montenegro 13,724 sq km)
  water: 214 sq km (Serbia 0 sq km; Montenegro 214 sq km)

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Kentucky (Serbia is
  slightly larger than Maine; Montenegro is slightly smaller than
  Connecticut)

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,246 km
  border countries: Albania 287 km (114 km with Serbia, 173 km with
  Montenegro), Bosnia and Herzegovina 527 km (312 km with Serbia, 215
  km with Montenegro), Bulgaria 318 km (with Serbia), Croatia (north)
  241 km (with Serbia), Croatia (south) 25 km (with Montenegro),
  Hungary 151 km (with Serbia), The Former Yugoslav Republic of
  Macedonia 221 km (with Serbia), Romania 476 km (with Serbia)
  note: the internal boundary between Montenegro and Serbia is 211 km

Coastline: 199 km (Montenegro 199 km, Serbia 0 km)

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: in the north, continental climate (cold winter and hot,
  humid summers with well distributed rainfall); central portion,
  continental and Mediterranean climate; to the south, Adriatic
  climate along the coast, hot, dry summers and autumns and relatively
  cold winters with heavy snowfall inland

Terrain: extremely varied; to the north, rich fertile plains; to
  the east, limestone ranges and basins; to the southeast, ancient
  mountains and hills; to the southwest, extremely high shoreline with
  no islands off the coast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Daravica 2,656 m

Natural resources: oil, gas, coal, antimony, copper, lead, zinc,
  nickel, gold, pyrite, chrome

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: NA%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: destructive earthquakes

Environment--current issues: pollution of coastal waters from
  sewage outlets, especially in tourist-related areas such as Kotor;
  air pollution around Belgrade and other industrial cities; water
  pollution from industrial wastes dumped into the Sava which flows
  into the Danube

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: controls one of the major land routes from
  Western Europe to Turkey and the Near East; strategic location along
  the Adriatic coast



People



Population: 11,206,847 (Serbia--10,526,478; Montenegro?680,369)
  (July 1999 est.)
  note: all data dealing with population is subject to considerable
  error because of the dislocations caused by military action and
  ethnic cleansing

Age structure:
  0-14 years: Serbia--20% (male 1,102,109; female 1,025,069);
  Montenegro--21% (male 75,633; female 70,464)
  15-64 years: Serbia--67% (male 3,538,689; female 3,483,192);
  Montenegro--68% (male 232,223; female 227,371)
  65 years and over: Serbia--13% (male 595,200; female 782,219);
  Montenegro--11% (male 30,829; female 43,849) (July 1999 est.)

Population growth rate: Serbia--0.02%; Montenegro?0.07% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: Serbia--12.54 births/1,000 population; Montenegro?
  13.19 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: Serbia--9.68 deaths/1,000 population; Montenegro? 7.44
  deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: Serbia---2.65 migrants/1,000 population;
  Montenegro---5.09 migrants/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: Serbia--1.08 male(s)/female; Montenegro--1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: Serbia--1.08 male(s)/female; Montenegro--1.07
  male(s)/female
  15-64 years: Serbia--1.02 male(s)/female; Montenegro--1.02
  male(s)/female
  65 years and over: Serbia--0.76 male(s)/female; Montenegro--0.70
  male(s)/female
  total population: Serbia--0.99 male(s)/female; Montenegro--0.99
  male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: Serbia--16.49 deaths/1,000 live births;
  Montenegro--10.99 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: Serbia--73.45 years; Montenegro--76.32 years
  male: Serbia--71.03 years; Montenegro-- 72.87 years
  female: Serbia--76.05 years; Montenegro--80.07 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: Serbia--1.74 children born/woman;
  Montenegro--1.76 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Serb(s); Montenegrin(s)
  adjective: Serbian; Montenegrin

Ethnic groups: Serbs 63%, Albanians 14%, Montenegrins 6%,
  Hungarians 4%, other 13%

Religions: Orthodox 65%, Muslim 19%, Roman Catholic 4%,
  Protestant 1%, other 11%

Languages: Serbo-Croatian 95%, Albanian 5%

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Serbia and Montenegro
  local long form: none
  local short form: Srbija-Crna Gora
  note: Serbia and Montenegro has self-proclaimed itself the "Federal
  Republic of Yugoslavia" (FRY) but the US view is that the Socialist
  Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has dissolved and that none of
  the successor republics represents its continuation

Data code: Serbia--SR; Montenegro?MW

Government type: republic

Capital: Belgrade (Serbia), Podgorica (Montenegro)

Administrative divisions: 2 republics (republike,
  singular--republika); and 2 nominally autonomous provinces* (autonomn
  pokrajine, singular--autonomna pokrajina); Kosovo*, Montenegro,
  Serbia, Vojvodina*

Independence: 11 April 1992 (Federal Republic of Yugoslavia or
  FRY formed as self-proclaimed successor to the Socialist Federal
  Republic of Yugoslavia or SFRY)

National holiday: St. Vitus Day, 28 June

Constitution: 27 April 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 16 years of age, if employed; 18 years of age, universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Slobodan MILOSEVIC (since 23 July 1997);
  note--Milan MILUTINOVIC is president of Serbia (since 21 December
  1997); Milo DJUKANOVIC is president of Montenegro (since 21 December
  1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Momir BULATOVIC (since 20 May
  1998); Deputy Prime Ministers Nikola SAINOVIC (since 15 September
  1995), Vuk DRASKOVIC (since 1 February 1999), Jovan ZEBIC (since 9
  April 1998), and Vladan KUTLESIC (since 20 March 1997), Zoran LILIC
  (since 20 May 1998), Danilo VUKSANOVIC (since 20 May 1998)
  cabinet: Federal Executive Council
  elections: president elected by the Federal Assembly for a four-year
  term; election last held 23 July 1997 (next to be held NA 2001);
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Slobodan MILOSEVIC elected president; percent of
  legislative vote--Slobodan MILOSEVIC 90%

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or Savezna
  Skupstina consists of the Chamber of Republics or Vece Republika (40
  seats--20 Serbian, 20 Montenegrin; members distributed on the basis
  of party representation in the republican assemblies to serve
  four-year terms) and the Chamber of Citizens or Vece Gradjana (138
  seats -, 108 Serbian with half elected by constituency majorities
  and half by proportional representation, 30 Montenegrin with six
  elected by constituency and 24 proportionally; members serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: Chamber of Republics--last held 24 December 1996 (next to
  be held NA 2000); Chamber of Citizens--last held 3 November 1996
  (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: Chamber of Republics--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--NA; note--seats are filled on a proportional basis to
  reflect the composition of the legislatures of the republics of
  Montenegro and Serbia; Chamber of Citizens--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--SPS/JUL/ND 64, Zajedno 22, DPSCG 20, SRS
  16, NS 8, SVM 3, other 5; note--Zajedno coalition includes SPO, DS,
  GSS

Judicial branch: Federal Court or Savezni Sud, judges are elected
  by the Federal Assembly for nine-year terms; Constitutional Court,
  judges are elected by the Federal Assembly for nine-year terms

Political parties and leaders: Serbian Socialist Party or SPS

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ICFTU, IOC, OPCW

Diplomatic representation in the US: the US and Serbia and
  Montenegro do not maintain full diplomatic relations; the Embassy of
  the former Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia continues to
  function in the US
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Counselor, Charge d'Affaires
  ad interim Nebojsa VUJOVIC
  chancery: 2410 California St. NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US and Serbia and
  Montenegro do not maintain full diplomatic relations
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Chief of Mission Richard M.
  MILES
  embassy: Kneza Milosa 50, 11000 Belgrade
  mailing address: American Embassy, Belgrade, United States
  Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-5070 (pouch)



Economy



Economy--overview: The swift collapse of the Yugoslav federation
  in 1991 has been followed by highly destructive warfare, the
  destabilization of republic boundaries, and the breakup of important
  interrepublic trade flows. Output in Serbia and Montenegro dropped
  by half in 1992-93. Like the other former Yugoslav republics, it had
  depended on its sister republics for large amounts of energy and
  manufactures. Wide differences in climate, mineral resources, and
  levels of technology among the republics accentuated this
  interdependence, as did the communist practice of concentrating much
  industrial output in a small number of giant plants. The breakup of
  many of the trade links, the sharp drop in output as industrial
  plants lost suppliers and markets, and the destruction of physical
  assets in the fighting all have contributed to the economic
  difficulties of the republics. One singular factor in the economic
  situation of Serbia is the continuation in office of a government
  that is primarily interested in political and military mastery, not
  economic reform. Hyperinflation ended with the establishment of a
  new currency unit in June 1993; prices were relatively stable from
  1995 through 1997, but inflationary pressures resurged in 1998.
  Reliable statistics continue to be hard to come by, and the GDP
  estimate is extremely rough. The economic boom anticipated by the
  government after the suspension of UN sanctions in December 1995 has
  failed to materialize. Government mismanagement of the economy is
  largely to blame. Also, the Outer Wall sanctions that exclude
  Belgrade from international financial institutions and an investment
  ban and asset freeze imposed in 1998 because of Belgrade's
  repressive actions in Kosovo have added to economic difficulties.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$25.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 25%
  industry: 50%
  services: 25% (1994 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 48% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: industry 41%, services 35%, trade and
  tourism 12%, transportation and communication 7%, agriculture 5%
  (1994)

Unemployment rate: more than 35% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: machine building (aircraft, trucks, and automobiles;
  tanks and weapons; electrical equipment; agricultural machinery);
  metallurgy (steel, aluminum, copper, lead, zinc, chromium, antimony,
  bismuth, cadmium); mining (coal, bauxite, nonferrous ore, iron ore,
  limestone); consumer goods (textiles, footwear, foodstuffs,
  appliances); electronics, petroleum products, chemicals, and
  pharmaceuticals

Industrial production growth rate: 8% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 36.155 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 63.44%
  hydro: 36.56%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 35.999 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 156 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cereals, fruits, vegetables, tobacco,
  olives; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $2.3 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: manufactured goods, food and live animals,
  raw materials

Exports--partners: Bosnia and Herzegovina, Italy, The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia

Imports: $3.9 billion (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment, fuels and
  lubricants, manufactured goods, chemicals, food and live animals,
  raw materials

Imports--partners: Germany, Italy, Russia

Debt--external: $11.2 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Yugoslav New Dinar (YD) = 100 paras

Exchange rates: Yugoslav New Dinars (YD) per US $1--official rate:
  10.0 (December 1998), 5.85 (December 1997), 5.02 (September 1996),
  1.5 (early 1995); black market rate: 14.5 (December 1998), 8.9
  (December 1997), 2 to 3 (early 1995)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 700,000

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: 27 (public or state-owned 1, private 26)

Radios: 2.015 million

Television broadcast stations: more than 771 (consisting of 86
  strong stations, 685 low-power stations, and 20 repeaters in the
  principal networks; there are also numerous local or private
  stations in Serbia and Vojvodina) (1997)

Televisions: 1 million



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,987 km
  standard gauge: 3,987 km 1.435-m gauge (1,377 km partially
  electrified since 1992) (1998)

Highways:
  total: 50,414 km
  paved: 45,020 km (including 545 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 5,394 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: NA km

Pipelines: crude oil 415 km; petroleum products 130 km; natural
  gas 2,110 km

Ports and harbors: Bar, Belgrade, Kotor, Novi Sad, Pancevo,
  Tivat, Zelenika

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 short-sea passenger (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,437
  GRT/400 DWT (owned by Montenegro) (1998 est.)

Airports: 48 (Serbia 43, Montenegro 5) (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 18
  over 3,047 m: 2 (Serbia 2, Montenegro 0)
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5 (Serbia 3, Montenegro 2)
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5 (Serbia 4, Montenegro 1)
  914 to 1,523 m: 2 (Serbia 2, Montenegro 0)
  under 914 m: 4 (Serbia 4, Montenegro 0) (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 30
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (Serbia 2, Montenegro 0)
  914 to 1,523 m: 14 (Serbia 13, Montenegro 1)
  under 914 m: 14 (Serbia 13, Montenegro 1) (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army (including ground forces with border
  troops, naval forces, air and air defense forces)

Military manpower--military age: Serbia?NA years of age;
  Montenegro--19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: Serbia--2,727,292; Montenegro--187,198 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: Serbia--2,183,534; Montenegro--150,415 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: Serbia--NA; Montenegro--5,671 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $911 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 6.5% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: disputes with Bosnia and Herzegovina over
  Serbian populated areas; Albanian majority in Kosovo seeks
  independence from Serbian republic; Serbia and Montenegro is
  disputing Croatia's claim to the Prevlaka Peninsula in southern
  Croatia because it controls the entrance to Boka Kotorska in
  Montenegro; Prevlaka is currently under observation by the UN
  military observer mission in Prevlaka (UNMOP); the border commission
  formed by The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia and Serbia and
  Montenegro in April 1996 to resolve differences in delineation of
  their mutual border has made no progress so far

Illicit drugs: major transshipment point for Southwest Asian
  heroin moving to Western Europe on the Balkan route



======================================================================




@Seychelles
----------





Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, group of islands in the Indian Ocean,
  northeast of Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 4 35 S, 55 40 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 455 sq km
  land: 455 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 491 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical marine; humid; cooler season during southeast
  monsoon (late May to September); warmer season during northwest
  monsoon (March to May)

Terrain: Mahe Group is granitic, narrow coastal strip, rocky,
  hilly; others are coral, flat, elevated reefs

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Morne Seychellois 905 m

Natural resources: fish, copra, cinnamon trees

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 13%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: 11%
  other: 74% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies outside the cyclone belt, so severe storms
  are rare; short droughts possible

Environment--current issues: water supply depends on catchments to
  collect rain water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: 40 granitic and about 50 coralline islands



People



Population: 79,164 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 29% (male 11,712; female 11,569)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 24,879; female 26,038)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 1,709; female 3,257) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.65% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 19.39 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -6.32 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.52 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.65 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.95 years
  male: 66.61 years
  female: 75.42 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.97 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Seychellois (singular and plural)
  adjective: Seychelles

Ethnic groups: Seychellois (mixture of Asians, Africans,
  Europeans)

Religions: Roman Catholic 90%, Anglican 8%, other 2%

Languages: English (official), French (official), Creole

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 58%
  male: 56%
  female: 60% (1971 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Seychelles
  conventional short form: Seychelles

Data code: SE

Government type: republic

Capital: Victoria

Administrative divisions: 23 administrative districts; Anse aux
  Pins, Anse Boileau, Anse Etoile, Anse Louis, Anse Royale, Baie
  Lazare, Baie Sainte Anne, Beau Vallon, Bel Air, Bel Ombre, Cascade,
  Glacis, Grand' Anse (on Mahe), Grand' Anse (on Praslin), La Digue,
  La Riviere Anglaise, Mont Buxton, Mont Fleuri, Plaisance, Pointe La
  Rue, Port Glaud, Saint Louis, Takamaka

Independence: 29 June 1976 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 18 June (1993) (adoption of the
  constitution)

Constitution: 18 June 1993

Legal system: based on English common law, French civil law, and
  customary law

Suffrage: 17 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President France Albert RENE (since 5 June 1977);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President France Albert RENE (since 5 June
  1977); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 20-22 March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2003)
  election results: President France Albert RENE reelected; percent of
  vote--France Albert RENE (SPPF) 61%, Wavel RAMKALAWAN (UO) 27%, Sir
  James MANCHAM (DP) 12%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Assemblee
  Nationale (35 seats--25 elected by popular vote, 10 allocated on a
  proportional basis to parties winning at least nine percent of the
  vote; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 20-22 March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party
  (elected)--SPPF 24, DP 1; seats by party (awarded)--SPPF 6, DP 1, UO 3
  note: the 10 awarded seats are apportioned according to the share of
  each party in the total vote

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, judges are appointed by the
  president; Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: ruling party--Seychelles People's

Political pressure groups and leaders: trade unions; Roman
  Catholic Church

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, C,
  ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, InOC, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, NAM, OAU,
  OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Claude MOREL
  chancery: 800 Second Avenue, Suite 400C, New York, NY 10017

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Seychelles; the ambassador to Mauritius is accredited to
  Seychelles

Flag description: five oblique bands of blue (hoist side),
  yellow, red, white, and green (bottom) radiating from the bottom of
  the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: Since independence in 1976, per capita output
  in this Indian Ocean archipelago has expanded to roughly seven times
  the old near-subsistence level. Growth has been led by the tourist
  sector, which employs about 30% of the labor force and provides more
  than 70% of hard currency earnings, and by tuna fishing, which
  accounted for 70% of GDP in 1996-97. In recent years the government
  has encouraged foreign investment in order to upgrade hotels and
  other services. At the same time, the government has moved to reduce
  the dependence on tourism by promoting the development of farming,
  fishing, and small-scale manufacturing. The vulnerability of the
  tourist sector was illustrated by the sharp drop in 1991-92 due
  largely to the Gulf war. Although the industry has rebounded, the
  government recognizes the continuing need for upgrading the sector
  in the face of stiff international competition. Other issues facing
  the government are the curbing of the budget deficit and further
  privatization of public enterprises.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$550 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.3% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,000 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 15%
  services: 81% (1994)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0.6% (1997)

Labor force: 26,000 (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 19%, services 57%, government
  14%, fishing, agriculture, and forestry 10% (1989)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $220 million
  expenditures: $241 million, including capital expenditures of $36
  million (1994 est.)

Industries: fishing; tourism; processing of coconuts and vanilla,
  coir (coconut fiber) rope, boat building, printing, furniture;
  beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 4% (1992)

Electricity--production: 125 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 125 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coconuts, cinnamon, vanilla, sweet
  potatoes, cassava (tapioca), bananas; broiler chickens; tuna fish

Exports: $53 million ( f.o.b., 1995)

Exports--commodities: fish, cinnamon bark, copra, petroleum
  products (reexports)

Exports--partners: France, UK, China, Germany, Japan (1993)

Imports: $340 million (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, food, petroleum
  products, tobacco, beverages, machinery and transportation equipment

Imports--partners: China, Singapore, South Africa, UK (1993)

Debt--external: $170 million (1994 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $16.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Seychelles rupee (SRe) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Seychelles rupees (SRe) per US$1--5.4540 (January
  1999), 5.2622 (1998), 5.0263 (1997), 4.9700 (1996), 4.7620 (1995),
  5.0559 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 13,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: radiotelephone communications between islands in the
  archipelago
  international: direct radiotelephone communications with adjacent
  island countries and African coastal countries; satellite earth
  station--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 50,000 (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in addition, there are 9
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 12,000 (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 280 km
  paved: 176 km
  unpaved: 104 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Victoria

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 14 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 6
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 4
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Coast Guard, Marines, air wing, National
  Guard, Presidential Protection Unit, Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 22,420 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 11,242 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $13.7 million (1995)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims Chagos Archipelago in British
  Indian Ocean Territory



======================================================================




@Sierra Leone
------------





Introduction



Background: On 25 May 1997, the democratically-elected government
  of President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH was overthrown by a disgruntled
  coalition of army personnel from the Armed Forces Revolutionary
  Council (AFRC) and the Revolutionary United Front (RUF) under the
  command of Major Johnny Paul KOROMA; President KABBAH fled to exile
  in Guinea. The Economic Community of West African States Cease-Fire
  Monitoring Group (ECOMOG) forces, led by a strong Nigerian
  contingent, undertook the suppression of the rebellion. They were
  initially unsuccessful, but, by October 1997, they forced the rebels
  to agree to a cease-fire and to a plan to return the government to
  democratic control. President KABBAH returned to office on 10 March
  1998 to face the task of restoring order to a demoralized population
  and a disorganized and severely damaged economy. Many of the leaders
  of the coup were tried and executed in October 1998. In January
  1999, the situation had deteriorated even further, with commerce at
  a standstill, hundreds of thousands of people driven from their
  homes, and bitter fighting between the AFRC/RUF and ECOMOG troops
  intensifying by large-scale import of arms.



Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Guinea and Liberia

Geographic coordinates: 8 30 N, 11 30 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 71,740 sq km
  land: 71,620 sq km
  water: 120 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than South Carolina

Land boundaries:
  total: 958 km
  border countries: Guinea 652 km, Liberia 306 km

Coastline: 402 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; summer rainy season (May to
  December); winter dry season (December to April)

Terrain: coastal belt of mangrove swamps, wooded hill country,
  upland plateau, mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Loma Mansa (Bintimani) 1,948 m

Natural resources: diamonds, titanium ore, bauxite, iron ore,
  gold, chromite

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 31%
  forests and woodland: 28%
  other: 33% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 290 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dry, sand-laden harmattan winds blow from the
  Sahara (November to May); sandstorms, dust storms

Environment--current issues: rapid population growth pressuring
  the environment; overharvesting of timber, expansion of cattle
  grazing, and slash-and-burn agriculture have resulted in
  deforestation and soil exhaustion; civil war depleting natural
  resources; overfishing

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification



People



Population: 5,296,651 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 1,182,181; female 1,219,956)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 1,307,475; female 1,423,046)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 82,374; female 81,619) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.34% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 45.62 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.77 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 14.5 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.01 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 126.23 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 49.13 years
  male: 46.07 years
  female: 52.27 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.16 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Sierra Leonean(s)
  adjective: Sierra Leonean

Ethnic groups: 20 native African tribes 90% (Temne 30%, Mende
  30%, other 30%), Creole 10% (descendents of freed Jamaican slaves
  who were settled in the Freetown area in the late-eighteenth
  century), refugees from Liberia's recent civil war, small numbers of
  Europeans, Lebanese, Pakistanis, and Indians

Religions: Muslim 60%, indigenous beliefs 30%, Christian 10%

Languages: English (official, regular use limited to literate
  minority), Mende (principal vernacular in the south), Temne
  (principal vernacular in the north), Krio (English-based Creole,
  spoken by the descendents of freed Jamaican slaves who were settled
  in the Freetown area, a lingua franca and a first language for 10%
  of the population but understood by 95%)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write English, Mende,
  Temne, or Arabic
  total population: 31.4%
  male: 45.4%
  female: 18.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Sierra Leone
  conventional short form: Sierra Leone

Data code: SL

Government type: constitutional democracy

Capital: Freetown

Administrative divisions: 3 provinces and 1 area*; Eastern,
  Northern, Southern, Western*

Independence: 27 April 1961 (from UK)

National holiday: Republic Day, 27 April (1961)

Constitution: 1 October 1991; subsequently amended several times

Legal system: based on English law and customary laws indigenous
  to local tribes; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (since 29 March 1996,
  reinstated 10 March 1998); note--the president is both the chief of
  state and head of government
  head of government: President Ahmad Tejan KABBAH (since 29 March
  1996, reinstated 10 March 1998); note--the president is both the
  chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Ministers of State appointed by the president with the
  approval of the House of Representatives; the cabinet is responsible
  to the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election held 26-27 February 1996 (next to be held NA 2001);
  note--president's tenure of office is limited to two five-year terms
  election results: Ahmad Tejan KABBAH elected president; percent of
  vote--first round--KABBAH 36.0%, second round--KABBAH 59.5%

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives (80
  seats--68 elected by popular vote, 12 filled by paramount chiefs
  elected in separate elections; members serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 26-27 February 1996 (next to be held 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--SLPP
  27, UNPP 17, PDP 12, APC 5, NUP 4, DCP 3; note--first elections since
  the former House of Representatives was shut down by the military
  coup of 29 April 1992

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: 15 parties registered for the
  M. B. JALLOH]; National Alliance for Democracy Party or NADP

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  ECOWAS, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
  IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL,
  WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John Ernest LEIGH
  chancery: 1701 19th Street NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Joseph MELROSE; note--embassy closed in
  late December 1998
  embassy: Corner of Walpole and Siaka Stevens Streets, Freetown
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of light green
  (top), white, and light blue



Economy



Economy--overview: Sierra Leone has substantial mineral,
  agricultural, and fishery resources. However, the economic and
  social infrastructure is not well developed, and serious social
  disorders continue to hamper economic development. The period of
  AFRC/RUF junta rule (May 1997-February 1998) led to UN sanctions and
  20% drop in GDP in 1997. The continued fighting at yearend 1997 set
  back what small progress had been made by the KABBAH government in
  recovering from the junta period and reestablishing a viable
  economy. About two-thirds of the working-age population engages in
  subsistence agriculture. Manufacturing consists mainly of the
  processing of raw materials and of light manufacturing for the
  domestic market. Bauxite and rutile mines have been shut down by
  civil strife. The major source of hard currency is found in the
  mining of diamonds, the large majority of which are smuggled out of
  the country. The fate of the economy in 1999 depends on the outcome
  of negotiations to end the civil strife.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$2.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$530 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 52%
  industry: 16%
  services: 32% (1996)

Population below poverty line: 68% (1989 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 0.5%
  highest 10%: 43.6% (1989)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 37.4% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.369 million (1981 est.)
  note: only about 65,000 wage earners (1985)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry 19%,
  services 16% (1981 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $96 million
  expenditures: $150 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1996 est.)

Industries: mining (diamonds); small-scale manufacturing
  (beverages, textiles, cigarettes, footwear); petroleum refining

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 230 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 230 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, coffee, cocoa, palm kernels, palm
  oil, peanuts; poultry, cattle, sheep, pigs; fish

Exports: $41 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: diamonds, rutile, cocoa, coffee, fish

Exports--partners: Belgium 49%, Spain 10%, US 8%, UK 3% (1997)

Imports: $166 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, machinery and equipment, fuels
  and lubricants

Imports--partners: UK 16%, US 9%, Cote d'Ivoire 8%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 3% (1997)

Debt--external: $1.15 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $203.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 leone (Le) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: leones (Le) per US$1--1,630.5 (January 1999),
  1,597.2 (1998), 981.48 (1997), 920.73 (1996), 755.22 (1995), 586.74
  (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 17,526 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: marginal telephone and telegraph service
  domestic: national microwave radio relay system made unserviceable
  by military activities
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1, shortwave NA

Radios: 980,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 45,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 84 km used on a limited basis because the mine at Marampa is
  closed
  narrow gauge: 84 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 11,700 km
  paved: 1,287 km
  unpaved: 10,413 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 800 km; 600 km navigable year round

Ports and harbors: Bonthe, Freetown, Pepel

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 10 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  over 3,047 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,119,239 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 543,210 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $46 million (FY96/97)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (FY96/97)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Singapore
---------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, islands between Malaysia and
  Indonesia

Geographic coordinates: 1 22 N, 103 48 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 647.5 sq km
  land: 637.5 sq km
  water: 10 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than 3.5 times the size of
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 193 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: within and beyond territorial sea, as
  defined in treaties and practice
  territorial sea: 3 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid, rainy; no pronounced rainy or dry
  seasons; thunderstorms occur on 40% of all days (67% of days in
  April)

Terrain: lowland; gently undulating central plateau contains
  water catchment area and nature preserve

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Singapore Strait 0 m
  highest point: Bukit Timah 166 m

Natural resources: fish, deepwater ports

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 6%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: 5%
  other: 87% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: industrial pollution; limited natural
  fresh water resources; limited land availability presents waste
  disposal problems; seasonal smoke/haze resulting from forest fires
  in Indonesia

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: focal point for Southeast Asian sea routes



People



Population: 3,531,600 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 21% (male 387,786; female 364,018)
  15-64 years: 72% (male 1,265,291; female 1,268,458)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 109,418; female 136,629) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.15% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 13.38 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.69 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.83 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.84 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.84 years
  male: 75.79 years
  female: 82.14 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.47 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Singaporean(s)
  adjective: Singapore

Ethnic groups: Chinese 76.4%, Malay 14.9%, Indian 6.4%, other 2.3%

Religions: Buddhist (Chinese), Muslim (Malays), Christian, Hindu,
  Sikh, Taoist, Confucianist

Languages: Chinese (official), Malay (official and national),
  Tamil (official), English (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 91.1%
  male: 95.9%
  female: 86.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Singapore
  conventional short form: Singapore

Data code: SN

Government type: republic within Commonwealth

Capital: Singapore

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: 9 August 1965 (from Malaysia)

National holiday: National Day, 9 August (1965)

Constitution: 3 June 1959, amended 1965 (based on preindependence
  State of Singapore Constitution)

Legal system: based on English common law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President ONG Teng Cheong (since 1 September 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister GOH Chok Tong (since 28 November
  1990) and Deputy Prime Ministers LEE Hsien Loong (since 28 November
  1990) and Tony TAN Keng Yam (since 1 August 1995)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president, responsible to
  Parliament
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 28 August 1993 (next to be held NA August 1999);
  following legislative elections, the leader of the majority party or
  the leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed prime
  minister by the president; deputy prime ministers appointed by the
  president
  election results: ONG Teng Cheong elected president in the country's
  first popular election for president; percent of vote--ONG Teng
  Cheong 59%, CHUA Kim Yeow 41%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (83 seats; members
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 2 January 1997 (next to be held by 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PAP 65% (in contested
  constituencies), other 35%; seats by party--PAP 81, WP 1, SPP 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is appointed by the
  president with the advice of the prime minister, other judges are
  appointed by the president with the advice of the chief justice;
  Court of Appeals

Political parties and leaders:
  general]

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN,
  Australia Group (observer), BIS, C, CCC, CP, ESCAP, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OPCW, PCA, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNIKOM, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador CHAN Heng Chee
  chancery: 3501 International Place NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Steven J. GREEN
  embassy: 27 Napier Street, Singapore 258508
  mailing address: FPO AP 96534-0001

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  white; near the hoist side of the red band, there is a vertical,
  white crescent (closed portion is toward the hoist side) partially
  enclosing five white five-pointed stars arranged in a circle



Economy



Economy--overview: Singapore has an open economy with strong
  service and manufacturing sectors and excellent international
  trading links derived from its entrepot history. Extraordinarily
  strong fundamentals allowed Singapore to weather the effects of the
  Asian financial crisis better than its neighbors, but the crisis did
  pull GDP growth down to 1.3% in 1998 from 6% in 1997. Projections
  for 1999 GDP growth are in the -1% to 1% range. Rising labor costs
  and appreciation of the Singapore dollar against its neighbors'
  currencies continue to be a threat to Singapore's competitiveness.
  The government's strategy to address this problem includes cutting
  costs, increasing productivity, improving infrastructure, and
  encouraging higher value-added industries. In applied technology,
  per capita output, investment, and labor discipline, Singapore has
  key attributes of a developed country.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$91.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$26,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NEGL%
  industry: 28%
  services: 72%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): -0.5% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.856 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: financial, business, and other
  services 33.5%, manufacturing 25.6%, commerce 22.9%, construction
  6.6%, other 11.4% (1994)

Unemployment rate: 5% (1999 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $16.3 billion
  expenditures: $13.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY97/98 est.)

Industries: electronics, financial services, oil drilling
  equipment, petroleum refining, rubber processing and rubber
  products, processed food and beverages, ship repair, entrepot trade,
  biotechnology

Industrial production growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 28 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 28 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1998)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1998)

Agriculture--products: rubber, copra, fruit, vegetables; poultry

Exports: $128 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: computer equipment, rubber and rubber
  products, petroleum products, telecommunications equipment

Exports--partners: Malaysia 19%, US 18%, Hong Kong 9%, Japan 8%,
  Thailand 6% (1995)

Imports: $133.9 billion (1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: aircraft, petroleum, chemicals, foodstuffs

Imports--partners: Japan 21%, Malaysia 15%, US 15%, Thailand 5%,
  Taiwan 4%, South Korea 4% (1995)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Singapore dollar (S$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Singapore dollars (S$) per US$1--1.6781 (January
  1999), 1.6736 (1998), 1.4848 (1997), 1.4100 (1996), 1.4174 (1995),
  1.5274 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 1.4 million (1997 est.)

Telephone system: good domestic facilities; good international
  service
  domestic: NA
  international: submarine cables to Malaysia (Sabah and Peninsular
  Malaysia), Indonesia, and the Philippines; satellite earth
  stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 1 Pacific Ocean), and 1
  Inmarsat (Pacific Ocean region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 13, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1997)

Televisions: 1.05 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 38.6 km
  narrow gauge: 38.6 km 1.000-m gauge
  note: there is a 67 km mass transit system with 42 stations

Highways:
  total: 3,017 km
  paved: 2,936 km (including 148 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 81 km (1997 est.)

Ports and harbors: Singapore

Merchant marine:
  total: 875 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 19,734,146
  GRT/31,442,482 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 142, cargo 132, chemical tanker 51, combination
  bulk 6, combination ore/oil 6, container 154, liquefied gas tanker
  27, livestock carrier 1, multifunction large-load carrier 6, oil
  tanker 291, refrigerated cargo 8, roll-on/roll-off cargo 11,
  short-sea passenger 1, specialized tanker 9, vehicle carrier 30
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 22
  countries among which are Japan 41, Denmark 35, Sweden 28, Thailand
  28, Hong Kong 26, Germany 19, Taiwan 19, and Indonesia 11 (1998 est.)

Airports: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 9
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, People's Defense Force,
  Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,042,587 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 757,940 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $4.244 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 5.1% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: two islands in dispute with Malaysia

Illicit drugs: transit point for Golden Triangle heroin going to
  the US, Western Europe, and the Third World; also a money-laundering
  center



======================================================================




@Slovakia
--------





Introduction



Background: After centuries under foreign rule, mainly by
  Hungary, the Slovaks joined with their neighbors to form the new
  nation of Czechoslovakia in 1918. Following the chaos of World War
  II, Czechoslovakia became a communist nation within Soviet-ruled
  Eastern Europe. Soviet influence collapsed in 1989, and
  Czechoslovakia once more was an independent country turning toward
  the West. The Slovaks and the Czechs agreed to separate peacefully
  on 1 January 1993. Slovakia has experienced more difficulty than the
  Czech Republic in developing a modern market economy.



Geography



Location: Central Europe, south of Poland

Geographic coordinates: 48 40 N, 19 30 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 48,845 sq km
  land: 48,800 sq km
  water: 45 sq km

Area--comparative: about twice the size of New Hampshire

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,355 km
  border countries: Austria 91 km, Czech Republic 215 km, Hungary 515
  km, Poland 444 km, Ukraine 90 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate; cool summers; cold, cloudy, humid winters

Terrain: rugged mountains in the central and northern part and
  lowlands in the south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Bodrok River 94 m
  highest point: Gerlachovka 2,655 m

Natural resources: brown coal and lignite; small amounts of iron
  ore, copper and manganese ore; salt

Land use:
  arable land: 31%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 17%
  forests and woodland: 41%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: air pollution from metallurgical
  plants presents human health risks; acid rain damaging forests

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 5,396,193 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 20% (male 551,847; female 528,236)
  15-64 years: 69% (male 1,837,788; female 1,861,305)
  65 years and over: 11% (male 237,710; female 379,307) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.52 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.29 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.63 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 9.48 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.46 years
  male: 69.71 years
  female: 77.4 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.2 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Slovak(s)
  adjective: Slovak

Ethnic groups: Slovak 85.7%, Hungarian 10.7%, Gypsy 1.5% (the
  1992 census figures underreport the Gypsy/Romany community, which is
  about 500,000), Czech 1%, Ruthenian 0.3%, Ukrainian 0.3%, German
  0.1%, Polish 0.1%, other 0.3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 60.3%, atheist 9.7%, Protestant 8.4%,
  Orthodox 4.1%, other 17.5%

Languages: Slovak (official), Hungarian

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Slovak Republic
  conventional short form: Slovakia
  local long form: Slovenska Republika
  local short form: Slovensko

Data code: LO

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Bratislava

Administrative divisions: 8 departments (kraje, singular--kraj);
  Banskobystricky, Bratislavsky, Kosicky, Nitriansky, Presovsky,
  Trenciansky, Trnavsky, Zilinsky

Independence: 1 January 1993 (from Czechoslovakia)

National holiday: Slovak Constitution Day, 1 September (1992);
  Anniversary of Slovak National Uprising, 29 August (1944)

Constitution: ratified 1 September 1992, fully effective 1
  January 1993

Legal system: civil law system based on Austro-Hungarian codes;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction; legal code modified to
  comply with the obligations of Organization on Security and
  Cooperation in Europe (OSCE) and to expunge Marxist-Leninist legal
  theory

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President (vacant); note--President NOVAC retired at
  the end of his term; the government has announced its intention to
  hold direct presidential election in early 1999; in the meantime the
  prime minister takes over the president's duties
  head of government: Prime Minister Mikulas DZURINDA (since 30
  October 1998)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the recommendation of
  the prime minister
  elections: president elected by National Council secret ballot that
  must yield a three-fifths majority for a five-year term; election
  last held NA March 1998 but no candidate was able to win a
  three-fifths majority required by law (next to be held NA 1999);
  following National Council elections, the leader of the majority
  party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually appointed
  prime minister by the president
  election results: presidency vacant

Legislative branch: unicameral National Council of the Slovak
  Republic or Narodna Rada Slovensky Repubiky (150 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 25-26 September 1998 (next to be held NA
  September 2003)
  election results: percent of vote by party--HZDS 27%, SDK 16.3%, SDL
  14.7%, SMK 9.1%, SNS 9.1%, SOP 8%; seats by party--governing
  coalition 93 (SDK 42, SDL 23, SMK 15, SOP 13), opposition 57 (HZDS
  43, SNS 14)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are elected by the
  National Council; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Movement for a Democratic Slovakia
  Hungarian Coalition or SMK (includes MKDH, MOS, and Coexistence)
  LUPTAK, chairman]; Social Democratic Party of Slovakia or SSDS
  chairman]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Party of Entrepreneurs and
  Businessmen of Slovakia; Christian Social Union; Confederation of
  Trade Unions or KOZ; Metal Workers Unions or KOVO and METALURG;
  Association of Employers of Slovakia; Association of Towns and
  Villages or ZMOS

International organization participation: Australia Group, BIS,
  BSEC (observer), CCC, CE, CEI, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EU
  (applicant), FAO, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS,
  ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MONUA, NSG, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WEU (associate partner), WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador-designate Martin BUTORA
  chancery: (temporary) Suite 250, 2201 Wisconsin Avenue NW,
  Washington, DC 20007

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ralph R. JOHNSON
  embassy: Hviezdoslavovo Namestie 4, 81102 Bratislava
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top),
  blue, and red superimposed with the Slovak cross in a shield
  centered on the hoist side; the cross is white centered on a
  background of red and blue



Economy



Economy--overview: Slovakia, continuing the difficult transition
  from a centrally controlled economy to a modern market-oriented
  economy, begins 1999 with clouds on the horizon: GDP growth is
  slowing sharply; budget and current account deficits are too large;
  external debt is growing uncomfortably fast; unemployment is high
  and rising; corrupt insider deals persist; and demand is weakening
  for Slovakia's key primary goods exports, especially as Russia and
  Ukraine slump and as EU growth slows. International credit rating
  agencies have downgraded Slovak debt to below investment grade. The
  new government intends to address the economy's ills by giving
  priority to joining the OECD and EU, cutting government wage and
  infrastructure spending, boosting some taxes and regulated prices,
  expanding privatization to companies formerly considered strategic,
  restructuring the financial section, encouraging foreign investment,
  and reenergizing the social partnership with labor and employers.
  Government officials believe as long as two years may be needed
  before its structural reforms improve economic performance. In 1999,
  the government expects GDP growth to slow from 5% in 1998 to 2%,
  inflation to rise from 6% to 10%, and unemployment to rise from less
  than 14% to 15% or 16%, but hopes to bring the budget deficit down
  to no more than 2% of GDP and the current account deficit down to 5%
  to 6% of GDP.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$44.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$8,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4.8%
  industry: 33.4%
  services: 61.8% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 5.1%
  highest 10%: 18.2% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.4% (1998)

Labor force: 3.32 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: industry 29.3%, agriculture 8.9%,
  construction 8%, transport and communication 8.2%, services 45.6%
  (1994)

Unemployment rate: 14% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $5.4 billion
  expenditures: $6.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997)

Industries: metal and metal products; food and beverages;
  electricity, gas, coke, oil, and nuclear fuel; chemicals and manmade
  fibers; machinery; paper and printing; earthenware and ceramics;
  transport vehicles; textiles; electrical and optical apparatus;
  rubber products

Industrial production growth rate: 2.7% (1997)

Electricity--production: 25.81 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 35.57%
  hydro: 20.81%
  nuclear: 43.62%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 26.353 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2.607 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 3.15 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grains, potatoes, sugar beets, hops, fruit;
  pigs, cattle, poultry; forest products

Exports: $10.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 37%;
  intermediate manufactured goods 30%, miscellaneous manufactured
  goods 13%; chemicals 9%; raw materials 4% (1998)

Exports--partners: EU 56% (Germany 29%), Czech Republic 20%,
  Austria 7%, Poland 7% (1998)

Imports: $12.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 40%;
  intermediate manufactured goods 18%; fuels 11%; chemicals 11%;
  miscellaneous manufactured goods 10% (1998)

Imports--partners: EU 50% (Germany 26%), Czech Republic 18%,
  Russia 10%, Italy 6% (1998)

Debt--external: $10.7 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $421.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 koruna (Sk) = 100 halierov

Exchange rates: koruny (Sk) per US$1--36.207 (January 1999),
  35.233 (1998). 33.616 (1997), 30.654 (1996), 29.713 (1995), 32.045
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1,362,178 (1992 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note--there
  are 22 private broadcast stations and two public (state) broadcast
  stations

Radios: 915,000 (1995 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 41 (1997)

Televisions: 1.2 million (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,660 km
  broad gauge: 102 km 1.520-m gauge
  standard gauge: 3,507 km 1.435-m gauge (1424 km electrified)
  narrow gauge: 51 km (46 km 1,000-m gauge; 5 km 0.750-m gauge) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 38,000 km
  paved: 37,500 km (including 280 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 500 km (1998 est.)

Waterways: 172 km on the Danube

Pipelines: petroleum products NA km; natural gas 2,700 km

Ports and harbors: Bratislava, Komarno

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 15,041 GRT/19,517
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 15 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Reserve
  Force (Home Guards), Civil Defense Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,478,729 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,130,482 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 45,919 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $436 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: ongoing Gabcikovo Dam dispute with
  Hungary is before the International Court of Justice; unresolved
  property issues with Czech Republic over redistribution of former
  Czechoslovak federal property

Illicit drugs: minor, but increasing, transshipment point for
  Southwest Asian heroin and hashish bound for Western Europe



======================================================================




@Slovenia
--------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Europe, eastern Alps bordering the
  Adriatic Sea, between Austria and Croatia

Geographic coordinates: 46 00 N, 15 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 20,256 sq km
  land: 20,256 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,334 km
  border countries: Austria 330 km, Croatia 670 km, Italy 232 km,
  Hungary 102 km

Coastline: 46.6 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: Mediterranean climate on the coast, continental climate
  with mild to hot summers and cold winters in the plateaus and
  valleys to the east

Terrain: a short coastal strip on the Adriatic, an alpine
  mountain region adjacent to Italy and Austria, mixed mountain and
  valleys with numerous rivers to the east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Adriatic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Triglav 2,864 m

Natural resources: lignite coal, lead, zinc, mercury, uranium,
  silver

Land use:
  arable land: 12%
  permanent crops: 3%
  permanent pastures: 24%
  forests and woodland: 54%
  other: 7% (1996 est.)

Irrigated land: 20 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: flooding and earthquakes

Environment--current issues: Sava River polluted with domestic and
  industrial waste; pollution of coastal waters with heavy metals and
  toxic chemicals; forest damage near Koper from air pollution
  (originating at metallurgical and chemical plants) and resulting
  acid rain

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 1,970,570 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 16% (male 163,816; female 155,509)
  15-64 years: 70% (male 693,382; female 687,060)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 99,121; female 171,682) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 8.97 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.62 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.58 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.94 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.28 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.36 years
  male: 71.71 years
  female: 79.21 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.23 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Slovene(s)
  adjective: Slovenian

Ethnic groups: Slovene 91%, Croat 3%, Serb 2%, Muslim 1%, other 3%

Religions: Roman Catholic 70.8% (including 2% Uniate), Lutheran
  1%, Muslim 1%, atheist 4.3%, other 22.9%

Languages: Slovenian 91%, Serbo-Croatian 6%, other 3%

Literacy:
  definition: NA
  total population: 99%
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Slovenia
  conventional short form: Slovenia
  local long form: Republika Slovenije
  local short form: Slovenija

Data code: SI

Government type: parliamentary democratic republic

Capital: Ljubljana

Administrative divisions: 136 municipalities (obcine,
  singular--obcina) and 11 urban municipalities* (obcine mestne,
  singular--obcina mestna) Ajdovscina, Beltinci, Bled, Bohinj,
  Borovnica, Bovec, Brda, Brezice, Brezovica, Cankova-Tisina, Celje*,
  Cerklje na Gorenjskem, Cerknica, Cerkno, Crensovci, Crna na
  Koroskem, Crnomelj, Destrnik-Trnovska Vas, Divaca, Dobrepolje,
  Dobrova-Horjul-Polhov Gradec, Dol pri Ljubljani, Domzale, Dornava,
  Dravograd, Duplek, Gorenja Vas-Poljane, Gorisnica, Gornja Radgona,
  Gornji Grad, Gornji Petrovci, Grosuplje, Hodos Salovci, Hrastnik,
  Hrpelje-Kozina, Idrija, Ig, Ilirska Bistrica, Ivancna Gorica, Izola,
  Jesenice, Jursinci, Kamnik, Kanal, Kidricevo, Kobarid, Kobilje,
  Kocevje, Komen, Koper*, Kozje, Kranj*, Kranjska Gora, Krsko,
  Kungota, Kuzma, Lasko, Lenart, Lendava, Litija, Ljubljana*, Ljubno,
  Ljutomer, Logatec, Loska Dolina, Loski Potok, Luce, Lukovica,
  Majsperk, Maribor*, Medvode, Menges, Metlika, Mezica,
  Miren-Kostanjevica, Mislinja, Moravce, Moravske Toplice, Mozirje,
  Murska Sobota*, Muta, Naklo, Nazarje, Nova Gorica*, Novo Mesto*,
  Odranci, Ormoz, Osilnica, Pesnica, Piran, Pivka, Podcetrtek,
  Podvelka-Ribnica, Postojna, Preddvor, Ptuj*, Puconci, Race-Fram,
  Radece, Radenci, Radlje ob Dravi, Radovljica, Ravne-Prevalje,
  Ribnica, Rogasevci, Rogaska Slatina, Rogatec, Ruse, Semic, Sencur,
  Sentilj, Sentjernej, Sentjur pri Celju, Sevnica, Sezana, Skocjan,
  Skofja Loka, Skofljica, Slovenj Gradec*, Slovenska Bistrica,
  Slovenske Konjice, Smarje pri Jelsah, Smartno ob Paki, Sostanj,
  Starse, Store, Sveti Jurij, Tolmin, Trbovlje, Trebnje, Trzic,
  Turnisce, Velenje*, Velike Lasce, Videm, Vipava, Vitanje, Vodice,
  Vojnik, Vrhnika, Vuzenica, Zagorje ob Savi, Zalec, Zavrc, Zelezniki,
  Ziri, Zrece

Independence: 25 June 1991 (from Yugoslavia)

National holiday: National Statehood Day, 25 June (1991)

Constitution: adopted 23 December 1991, effective 23 December 1991

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal (16 years of age, if
  employed)

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Milan KUCAN (since 22 April 1990)
  head of government: Prime Minister Janez DRNOVSEK (since 14 May 1992)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers nominated by the prime minister and
  elected by the National Assembly
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 24 November 1997 (next to be held NA 2002);
  following National Assembly elections, the leader of the majority
  party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually nominated to
  become prime minister by the president and elected by the National
  Assembly; election last held 10 November 1996 (next to be held NA
  November 2000)
  election results: Milan KUCAN elected president; percent of
  vote--Milan KUCAN 56.3%, Janez PODOBNIK 18%; Janez DRNOVSEK elected
  prime minister; percent of National Assembly vote--51%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Drzavni Zbor
  (90 seats, 40 are directly elected and 50 are selected on a
  proportional basis; note--the numbers of directly elected and
  proportionally elected seats varies with each election; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: National Assembly--last held 10 November 1996 (next to be
  held Fall 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--LDS 27.01%, SLS 19.38%,
  SDS 16.13%, SKD 9.62%, ZLDS 9.03%, DeSUS 4.32%, SNS 3.22%; seats by
  party--LDS 25, SLS 19, SDS 16, SKD 10, ZLSD 9, DeSUS 5, SNS 4,
  Hungarian minority 1, Italian minority 1; note--seating as of January
  1997 is as follows: LDS 25, SLS 19, SDS 16, SKD 9, ZLSD 9, DeSUS 5,
  SNS 4, Hungarian minority 1, Italian minority 1, independents 1
  note: the National Council or Drzavni Svet is an advisory body with
  limited legislative powers; it may propose laws and ask to review
  any National Assembly decisions; in the election of NA November
  1997, 40 members were elected to represent local, professional, and
  socioeconomic interests (next election to be held in the fall of
  2002)

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are elected by the
  National Assembly on the recommendation of the Judicial Council;
  Constitutional Court, judges elected for nine-year terms by the
  National Assembly and nominated by the president

Political parties and leaders: Liberal Democratic or LDS [Janez
  PETERLE, chairman]; Social Democratic Party of Slovenia or SDS
  PODOBNIK, chairman]; United List (former Communists and allies) or
  JELINCIC, chairman]; Democratic Party of Retired (Persons) of

Political pressure groups and leaders: none

International organization participation: CCC, CE, CEI, EAPC,
  EBRD, ECE, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO, ITU, NAM (guest), OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UN
  Security Council (temporary), UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP, UNIDO, UPU,
  WEU (associate partner), WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dimitrij RUPEL
  chancery: 1525 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant); Charge d'Affaires J. Paul REID
  embassy: address NA, Ljubljana
  mailing address: P.O. Box 254, Prazakova 4, 1000 Ljubljana; American
  Embassy Ljubljana, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7140

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of white (top),
  blue, and red with the Slovenian seal (a shield with the image of
  Triglav, Slovenia's highest peak, in white against a blue background
  at the center, beneath it are two wavy blue lines depicting seas and
  rivers, and above it, there are three six-sided stars arranged in an
  inverted triangle which are taken from the coat of arms of the
  Counts of Celje, the great Slovene dynastic house of the late 14th
  and early 15th centuries); the seal is located in the upper hoist
  side of the flag centered in the white and blue bands



Economy



Economy--overview: Today, Slovenia exhibits one of the highest per
  capita GDPs of the transition economies of the region, fairly
  moderate inflation, and a comfortable level of international
  reserves. Slovenia received an invitation in 1997 to begin accession
  negotiations with the EU--a reflection of its sound economic footing.
  Slovenia must press on with privatization, enterprise restructuring,
  institution reform, and liberalization of financial markets, thereby
  creating conditions conducive to foreign investment and the
  maintenance of a stable tolar. Critical to the future success of the
  economy is the development of export sales in increasingly
  competitive international markets.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$20.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$10,300 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 35%
  services: 60% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4%
  highest 10%: 24.5% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 857,400

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 7.1% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $8.48 billion
  expenditures: $8.53 billion, including capital expenditures of $455
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: ferrous metallurgy and rolling mill products,
  aluminum reduction and rolled products, lead and zinc smelting,
  electronics (including military electronics), trucks, electric power
  equipment, wood products, textiles, chemicals, machine tools

Industrial production growth rate: 0.8% (1996)

Electricity--production: 12.075 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 34.58%
  hydro: 29.31%
  nuclear: 36.11%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 11.295 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2.03 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 1.25 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: potatoes, hops, wheat, sugar beets, corn,
  grapes; cattle, sheep, poultry

Exports: $9.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: manufactured goods 45%, machinery and
  transport equipment 30%, chemicals 10%, food 3% (1997)

Exports--partners: Germany 29%, Italy 15%, Croatia 10%, France,
  Austria, US (1997)

Imports: $9.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 31%,
  manufactured goods 31%, chemicals 11%, fuels and lubricants, food
  (1997)

Imports--partners: Germany 21%, Italy 17%, France 10%, Austria 8%,
  Croatia 5%, Hungary, US (1997)

Debt--external: $4.4 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $5 million (1993)

Currency: 1 tolar (SlT) = 100 stotins

Exchange rates: tolars (SlT) per US$1--162.50 (January 1999),
  166.13 (1998), 159.69 (1997), 135.36 (1996), 118.52 (1995), 128.81
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 691,240 (1997 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: 70% digital; full digitalization scheduled by 2000
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 6, FM 5, shortwave 0
  note: there are more than 20 regional and local radio broadcast
  stations

Radios: 596,100 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 23 (consisting of 20 network
  stations and three private stations; there are also about 400
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 454,400 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,201 km
  standard gauge: 1,201 km 1.435-m gauge (electrified 489 km) (1998)

Highways:
  total: 14,830 km
  paved: 12,309 km (including 251 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 2,521 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: NA

Pipelines: crude oil 290 km; natural gas 305 km

Ports and harbors: Izola, Koper, Piran

Airports: 14 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 6
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 8
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Slovenian Army (includes Air and Naval Forces)

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 530,182 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 421,864 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 15,294 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $272 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: significant progress has been made with
  Croatia toward resolving a maritime border dispute over direct
  access to the sea in the Adriatic; Italy and Slovenia made progress
  in resolving bilateral issues

Illicit drugs: transit point for Southwest Asian heroin bound for
  Western Europe and for precursor chemicals



======================================================================




@Solomon Islands
---------------





Introduction



Background: In 1893, Britain made the southern Solomon Islands a
  protectorate. Other islands were added to the group, including some
  ceded to Britain by Germany. The Solomon Islands were occupied by
  the Japanese during World War II. Following the war, internal
  self-government was established in 1976, and independence from the
  UK came two years later. Current issues include government deficits,
  deforestation, and malaria control.



Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean,
  east of Papua New Guinea

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 S, 159 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 28,450 sq km
  land: 27,540 sq km
  water: 910 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 5,313 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  continental shelf: 200 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; few extremes of temperature and weather

Terrain: mostly rugged mountains with some low coral atolls

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Makarakomburu 2,447 m

Natural resources: fish, forests, gold, bauxite, phosphates,
  lead, zinc, nickel

Land use:
  arable land: 1%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 88%
  other: 9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: typhoons, but they are rarely destructive;
  geologically active region with frequent earth tremors; volcanic
  activity

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; much of
  the surrounding coral reefs are dead or dying

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Environmental Modification,
  Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life Conservation, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol



People



Population: 455,429 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 103,844; female 99,972)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 120,518; female 117,298)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 6,808; female 6,989) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.18% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 35.92 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.11 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.97 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 23 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.09 years
  male: 69.55 years
  female: 74.75 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.96 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Solomon Islander(s)
  adjective: Solomon Islander

Ethnic groups: Melanesian 93%, Polynesian 4%, Micronesian 1.5%,
  European 0.8%, Chinese 0.3%, other 0.4%

Religions: Anglican 34%, Roman Catholic 19%, Baptist 17%, United
  (Methodist/Presbyterian) 11%, Seventh-Day Adventist 10%, other
  Protestant 5%, traditional beliefs 4%

Languages: Melanesian pidgin in much of the country is lingua
  franca, English spoken by 1%-2% of population
  note: 120 indigenous languages

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Solomon Islands
  former: British Solomon Islands

Data code: BP

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Honiara

Administrative divisions: 7 provinces and 1 town*; Central,
  Guadalcanal, Honiara*, Isabel, Makira, Malaita, Temotu, Western
  note: there may be two new provinces of Choiseul (Lauru) and
  Rennell/Bellona and the administrative unit of Honiara may have been
  abolished

Independence: 7 July 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 7 July (1978)

Constitution: 7 July 1978

Legal system: English common law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Moses PITAKAKA (since 10 June 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Bartholomew ULUFA'ALU (since 27
  August 1997); Deputy Prime Minister Sir Baddeley DEVESI (since 27
  August 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the advice of
  the prime minister from among the members of Parliament
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor general
  appointed by the monarch on the advice of Parliament for up to five
  years; following legislative elections, the leader of the majority
  party or the leader of a majority coalition is usually elected prime
  minister by Parliament; deputy prime minister appointed by the
  governor general on the advice of the prime minister from among the
  members of Parliament

Legislative branch: unicameral National Parliament (50 seats;
  members elected from single member constituencies by popular vote to
  serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 6 August 1997 (next to be held by August 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--GNUR
  21, PAP 7, NAPSI 5, SILP 4, UP 4, independents 6, other 3

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: characterized by fluid coalitions;
  TAUSINGA] (leader of opposition); People's Alliance Party or PAP

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Stephen Rex HOROI (represents the
  country as both the Permanent Representative to the UN and the
  ambassador to the US)
  chancery: 800 Second Avenue, Suite 400L, New York, NY 10017

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Solomon Islands (embassy closed July 1993); the
  ambassador to Papua New Guinea is accredited to the Solomon Islands

Flag description: divided diagonally by a thin yellow stripe from
  the lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is blue
  with five white five-pointed stars arranged in an X pattern; the
  lower triangle is green



Economy



Economy--overview: The bulk of the population depend on
  agriculture, fishing, and forestry for at least part of their
  livelihood. Most manufactured goods and petroleum products must be
  imported. The islands are rich in undeveloped mineral resources such
  as lead, zinc, nickel, and gold. Economic troubles in Southeast Asia
  led to a steep downturn in the timber industry, and economic output
  declined by about 10% in 1998. The government instituted public
  service pay cuts and other retrenchments.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.15 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -10% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 11.8% (1996)

Labor force: 26,842

Labor force--by occupation: services 41.5%, agriculture, forestry,
  and fishing 23.7%, commerce, transport, and finance 21.7%,
  construction, manufacturing, and mining 13.1% (1992 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $147 million
  expenditures: $168 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: copra, fish (tuna)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 30 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 30 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cocoa, beans, coconuts, palm kernels, rice,
  potatoes, vegetables, fruit; cattle, pigs; timber; fish

Exports: $184 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: timber, fish, palm oil, cocoa, copra

Exports--partners: Japan 50%, Spain 16%, UK, Thailand 5% (1996)

Imports: $151 million (c.i.f., 1996 est.)

Imports--commodities: plant and equipment, manufactured goods,
  food and live animals, fuel

Imports--partners: Australia 42%, Japan 10%, Singapore 9%, NZ 8%,
  US 5% (1996)

Debt--external: $145 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $46.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Solomon Islands dollar (SI$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Solomon Islands dollars (SI$) per US$1--4.9334
  (January 1999), 4.8156 (1998), 3.5664 (1997), 3.4059 (1995), 3.2914
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 5,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 38,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: 2,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,360 km
  paved: 34 km
  unpaved: 1,326 km (includes about 800 km of private plantation
  roads) (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Aola Bay, Honiara, Lofung, Noro, Viru Harbor,
  Yandina

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 33 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 31
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular military forces; Solomon Islands
  National Reconnaissance and Surveillance Force; Royal Solomon
  Islands Police (RSIP)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Somalia
-------





Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Gulf of Aden and the
  Indian Ocean, east of Ethiopia

Geographic coordinates: 10 00 N, 49 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 637,660 sq km
  land: 627,340 sq km
  water: 10,320 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,366 km
  border countries: Djibouti 58 km, Ethiopia 1,626 km, Kenya 682 km

Coastline: 3,025 km

Maritime claims:
  territorial sea: 200 nm

Climate: principally desert; December to February--northeast
  monsoon, moderate temperatures in north and very hot in south; May
  to October--southwest monsoon, torrid in the north and hot in the
  south, irregular rainfall, hot and humid periods (tangambili)
  between monsoons

Terrain: mostly flat to undulating plateau rising to hills in
  north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Shimbiris 2,416 m

Natural resources: uranium and largely unexploited reserves of
  iron ore, tin, gypsum, bauxite, copper, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 69%
  forests and woodland: 26%
  other: 3% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,800 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts; frequent dust storms over
  eastern plains in summer

Environment--current issues: famine; use of contaminated water
  contributes to human health problems; deforestation; overgrazing;
  soil erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Endangered Species, Law of the Sea
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban

Geography--note: strategic location on Horn of Africa along
  southern approaches to Bab el Mandeb and route through Red Sea and
  Suez Canal



People



Population: 7,140,643 (July 1999 est.)
  note: this estimate was derived from an official census taken in
  1987 by the Somali Government with the cooperation of the UN and the
  US Bureau of the Census; population estimates are updated between
  censuses by factoring in growth rates and by taking account of
  refugee movements and losses due to famine; lower estimates of
  Somalia's population in mid-1996 (on the order of 6.0 million to 6.5
  million) have been made by aid and relief agencies, based on the
  number of persons being fed; population counting in Somalia is
  complicated by the large numbers of nomads and by refugee movements
  in response to famine and clan warfare

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 1,588,025; female 1,584,770)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 1,898,794; female 1,865,487)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 92,419; female 111,148) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 4.13% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 47.98 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 18.62 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 11.9 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.01 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 125.77 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 46.23 years
  male: 44.66 years
  female: 47.85 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.25 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Somali(s)
  adjective: Somali

Ethnic groups: Somali 85%, Bantu, Arabs 30,000

Religions: Sunni Muslim

Languages: Somali (official), Arabic, Italian, English

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 24%
  male: 36%
  female: 14% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Somalia
  former: Somali Republic, Somali Democratic Republic

Data code: SO

Government type: none

Capital: Mogadishu

Administrative divisions: 18 regions (plural--NA,
  singular--gobolka); Awdal, Bakool, Banaadir, Bari, Bay, Galguduud,
  Gedo, Hiiraan, Jubbada Dhexe, Jubbada Hoose, Mudug, Nugaal, Sanaag,
  Shabeellaha Dhexe, Shabeellaha Hoose, Sool, Togdheer, Woqooyi Galbeed

Independence: 1 July 1960 (from a merger of British Somaliland,
  which became independent from the UK on 26 June 1960, and Italian
  Somaliland, which became independent from the Italian-administered
  UN trusteeship on 1 July 1960, to form the Somali Republic)

National holiday: NA

Constitution: 25 August 1979, presidential approval 23 September
  1979

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch: Somalia has no functioning government; the
  United Somali Congress (USC) ousted the regime of Major General
  Mohamed SIAD Barre on 27 January 1991; the present political
  situation is one of anarchy, marked by interclan fighting and random
  banditry

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Assembly or Golaha
  Shacbiga
  note: not functioning

Judicial branch: (not functioning); note--following the breakdown
  of national government, most regions have reverted to Islamic law
  with a provision for appeal of all sentences

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: numerous clan and subclan
  factions are currently vying for power

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, CAEU, ECA, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Somalia does not have an
  embassy in the US (ceased operations on 8 May 1991)

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Somalia; US interests are represented by the US Embassy
  in Nairobi at Moi Avenue and Haile Selassie Avenue; mail address: P.

Flag description: light blue with a large white five-pointed star
  in the center; design based on the flag of the UN (Italian
  Somaliland was a UN trust territory)

Government--note: While chaos and clan fighting continue in most
  of Somalia, some orderly government has been established in the
  northern part. In May 1991, the elders of clans in former British
  Somaliland established the independent Republic of Somaliland,
  which, although not recognized by any government, maintains a stable
  existence, aided by the overwhelming dominance of the ruling clan
  and the economic infrastructure left behind by British, Russian and
  American military assistance programs. The economy has been growing
  and in February 1996 the EU agreed to finance the reconstruction of
  the port of Berbera; since then, other aid projects have been
  assumed by the EU and by a non-governmental Italian organization.



Economy



Economy--overview: One of the world's poorest and least developed
  countries, Somalia has few resources. Moreover, much of the economy
  has been devastated by the civil war. Agriculture is the most
  important sector, with livestock accounting for about 40% of GDP and
  about 65% of export earnings. Nomads and semi-nomads, who are
  dependent upon livestock for their livelihood, make up a large
  portion of the population. After livestock, bananas are the
  principal export; sugar, sorghum, corn, and fish are products for
  the domestic market. The small industrial sector, based on the
  processing of agricultural products, accounts for 10% of GDP; most
  facilities have been shut down because of the civil strife.
  Moreover, as of early 1999, ongoing civil disturbances in Mogadishu
  and outlying areas are interfering with any substantial economic
  advance.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 59%
  industry: 10%
  services: 31% (1995 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 3.7 million (very few are skilled laborers)(1993
  est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture (mostly pastoral nomadism)
  71%, industry and services 29%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: a few small industries, including sugar refining,
  textiles, petroleum refining (mostly shut down)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 258 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 258 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: bananas, sorghum, corn, sugarcane, mangoes,
  sesame seeds, beans; cattle, sheep, goats; fish

Exports: $123 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)

Exports--commodities: livestock, bananas, hides, fish (1997)

Exports--partners: Saudi Arabia 55%, Yemen 19%, Italy 11%, UAE, US
  (1996 est.)

Imports: $60 million (f.o.b., 1995 est.)

Imports--commodities: manufactures, petroleum products,
  foodstuffs, construction materials (1995)

Imports--partners: Kenya 28%, Djibouti 21%, Brazil 6%, Pakistan
  (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $2.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $191.5 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Somali shilling (So. Sh.) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Somali shillings (So. Sh.) per US$1--2,620
  (January 1999), 7,500 (November 1997 est.), 7,000 (January 1996
  est.), 5,000 (1 January 1995), 2,616 (1 July 1993), 4,200 (December
  1992)
  note: the Republic of Somaliland, a self-declared independent
  country not recognized by any government, issues its own currency,
  the Somaliland shilling (So. Sh.)

Fiscal year: NA



Communications



Telephones: 9,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: the public telecommunications system was
  completely destroyed or dismantled by the civil war factions; all
  relief organizations depend on their own private systems
  domestic: recently, local cellular telephone systems have been
  established in Mogadishu and in several other population centers
  international: international connections are available from
  Mogadishu by satellite

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave 5

Radios: 300,000

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 118,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 22,100 km
  paved: 2,608 km
  unpaved: 19,492 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 15 km

Ports and harbors: Bender Cassim (Boosaaso), Berbera, Chisimayu
  (Kismaayo), Merca, Mogadishu

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 61 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 7
  over 3,047 m: 4
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 54
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 13
  914 to 1,523 m: 28
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA; note--no functioning central government
  military forces; clan militias continue to battle for control of key
  economic or political prizes

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,730,450 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 962,545 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: most of the southern half of the boundary
  with Ethiopia is a Provisional Administrative Line; territorial
  dispute with Ethiopia over the Ogaden



======================================================================




@South Africa
------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, at the southern tip of the continent
  of Africa

Geographic coordinates: 29 00 S, 24 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1,219,912 sq km
  land: 1,219,912 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Prince Edward Islands (Marion Island and Prince
  Edward Island)

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,750 km
  border countries: Botswana 1,840 km, Lesotho 909 km, Mozambique 491
  km, Namibia 855 km, Swaziland 430 km, Zimbabwe 225 km

Coastline: 2,798 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly semiarid; subtropical along east coast; sunny
  days, cool nights

Terrain: vast interior plateau rimmed by rugged hills and narrow
  coastal plain

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Njesuthi 3,408 m

Natural resources: gold, chromium, antimony, coal, iron ore,
  manganese, nickel, phosphates, tin, uranium, gem diamonds, platinum,
  copper, vanadium, salt, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 67%
  forests and woodland: 7%
  other: 15% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 12,700 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: prolonged droughts

Environment--current issues: lack of important arterial rivers or
  lakes requires extensive water conservation and control measures;
  growth in water usage threatens to outpace supply; pollution of
  rivers from agricultural runoff and urban discharge; air pollution
  resulting in acid rain; soil erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: South Africa completely surrounds Lesotho and
  almost completely surrounds Swaziland



People



Population: 43,426,386 (July 1999 est.)
  note: South Africa took a census 10 October 1996 which showed a
  population of 37,859,000 (after a 6.8% adjustment for
  underenumeration based on a post-enumeration survey); this figure is
  still about 10% below projections from earlier censuses; since the
  full results of that census have not been released for analysis, the
  numbers shown for South Africa do not take into consideration the
  results of this 1996 census

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 34% (male 7,541,840; female 7,403,235)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 13,180,925; female 13,312,917)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 798,825; female 1,188,644) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.32% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.94 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 12.81 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.08 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 51.99 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 54.76 years
  male: 52.68 years
  female: 56.9 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.09 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: South African(s)
  adjective: South African

Ethnic groups: black 75.2%, white 13.6%, Colored 8.6%, Indian 2.6%

Religions: Christian 68% (includes most whites and Coloreds,
  about 60% of blacks and about 40% of Indians), Muslim 2%, Hindu 1.5%
  (60% of Indians), traditional and animistic 28.5%

Languages: 11 official languages, including Afrikaans, English,
  Ndebele, Pedi, Sotho, Swazi, Tsonga, Tswana, Venda, Xhosa, Zulu

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 81.8%
  male: 81.9%
  female: 81.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of South Africa
  conventional short form: South Africa
  abbreviation: RSA

Data code: SF

Government type: republic

Capital: Pretoria (administrative); Cape Town (legislative);
  Bloemfontein (judicial)

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Eastern Cape, Free State,
  Gauteng, KwaZulu-Natal, Mpumalanga, North-West, Northern Cape,
  Northern Province, Western Cape

Independence: 31 May 1910 (from UK)

National holiday: Freedom Day, 27 April (1994)

Constitution: 10 December 1996; this new constitution was
  certified by the Constitutional Court on 4 December 1996, was signed
  by President MANDELA on 10 December 1996, and entered into effect on
  3 February 1997; it is being implemented in phases

Legal system: based on Roman-Dutch law and English common law;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Nelson MANDELA (since 10 May 1994);
  Executive Deputy President Thabo MBEKI (since 10 May 1994); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Nelson MANDELA (since 10 May 1994);
  Executive Deputy President Thabo MBEKI (since 10 May 1994); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president
  elections: president and executive deputy presidents elected by the
  National Assembly for five-year terms; election last held 9 May 1994
  (next scheduled for sometime between May and July 1999)
  election results: Nelson MANDELA elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--100% (by acclamation); Thabo MBEKI and
  Frederik W. DE KLERK elected executive deputy presidents; percent of
  National Assembly vote--100% (by acclamation)
  note: the initial governing coalition, made up of the ANC, the IFP,
  and the NP, which constituted a Government of National Unity or GNU,
  no longer includes the NP which was withdrawn by DE KLERK on 30 June
  1996 when he voluntarily gave up his position as executive deputy
  president and distanced himself from the programs of the ANC

Legislative branch: bicameral parliament consisting of the
  National Assembly (400 seats; members are elected by popular vote
  under a system of proportional representation to serve five-year
  terms) and the National Council of Provinces (90 seats, 10 members
  elected by each of the nine provincial legislatures for five-year
  terms; has special powers to protect regional interests, including
  the safeguarding of cultural and linguistic traditions among ethnic
  minorities); note--following the implementation of the new
  constitution on 3 February 1997 the former Senate was disbanded and
  replaced by the National Council of Provinces with essentially no
  change in membership and party affiliations, although the new
  institution's responsibilities have been changed somewhat by the new
  constitution
  elections: National Assembly and Senate--last held 26-29 April 1994
  (next to be held 2 June 1999); note--the Senate was disbanded and
  replaced by the National Council of Provinces on 6 February 1997
  election results: National Assembly--percent of vote by party--ANC
  62.6%, NP 20.4%, IFP 10.5%, FF 2.2%, DP 1.7%, PAC 1.2%, ACDP 0.5%,
  other 0.9%; seats by party--ANC 252, NP 82, IFP 43, FF 9, DP 7, PAC
  5, ACDP 2; Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--ANC
  61, NP 17, FF 4, IFP 5, DP 3

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court; Supreme Court of Appeals;
  High Courts; Magistrate Courts

Political parties and leaders: African Christian Democratic Party
  SCHALKWYK, executive director]; Pan-Africanist Congress or PAC
  note: 11 other parties won votes in the April 1994 elections but not
  enough to gain seats in the National Assembly

Political pressure groups and leaders: Congress of South African
  secretary]; South African National Civics Organization or SANCO
  in a formal alliance with the ANC

International organization participation: AfDB, BIS, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, MTCR, NAM, NSG, OAU, OPCW, SACU, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  chancery: 3051 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Beverly Hills (California), Chicago, and New
  York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador James A. JOSEPH
  embassy: 877 Pretorius St., Arcadia 0083
  mailing address: P.O. Box 9536, Pretoria 0001
  consulate(s) general: Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg

Flag description: two equal width horizontal bands of red (top)
  and blue separated by a central green band which splits into a
  horizontal Y, the arms of which end at the corners of the hoist
  side, embracing a black isosceles triangle from which the arms are
  separated by narrow yellow bands; the red and blue bands are
  separated from the green band and its arms by narrow white stripes
  note: prior to 26 April 1994, the flag was actually four flags in
  one--three miniature flags reproduced in the center of the white band
  of the former flag of the Netherlands, which has three equal
  horizontal bands of orange (top), white, and blue; the miniature
  flags are a vertically hanging flag of the old Orange Free State
  with a horizontal flag of the UK adjoining on the hoist side and a
  horizontal flag of the old Transvaal Republic adjoining on the other
  side



Economy



Economy--overview: South Africa is a middle-income, developing
  country with an abundant supply of resources, well-developed
  financial, legal, communications, energy, and transport sectors, a
  stock exchange that ranks among the 10 largest in the world, and a
  modern infrastructure supporting an efficient distribution of goods
  to major urban centers throughout the region. However, growth has
  not been strong enough to cut into the 30% unemployment, and
  daunting economic problems remain from the apartheid era, especially
  the problems of poverty and lack of economic empowerment among the
  disadvantaged groups. Other problems are crime and corruption. The
  new government demonstrated its commitment to open markets,
  privatization, and a favorable investment climate with the release
  of its macroeconomic strategy in June 1996. Called "Growth,
  Employment and Redistribution," this policy framework includes the
  introduction of tax incentives to stimulate new investment in
  labor-intensive projects, expansion of basic infrastructure
  services, the restructuring and partial privatization of state
  assets, continued reduction of tariffs, subsidies to promote
  economic efficiency, improved services to the disadvantaged, and
  integration into the global economy. Serious structural rigidities
  remain, including a complicated and relatively protectionist trade
  regime, and concentration of wealth and economic control.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$290.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 0.3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,800 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 5%
  industry: 39%
  services: 56% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.4%
  highest 10%: 47.3% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 15 million economically active (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services 35%, agriculture 30%,
  industry 20%, mining 9%, other 6%

Unemployment rate: 30% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $30.5 billion
  expenditures: $38 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.6
  billion (FY94/95 est.)

Industries: mining (world's largest producer of platinum, gold,
  chromium), automobile assembly, metalworking, machinery, textile,
  iron and steel, chemical, fertilizer, foodstuffs

Industrial production growth rate: -1% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 186.949 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 93%
  hydro: 0.7%
  nuclear: 6.3%
  other: NA% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 181.404 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 5.575 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 30 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, wheat, sugarcane, fruits, vegetables;
  beef, poultry, mutton, wool, dairy products

Exports: $28.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: gold 20%, other minerals and metals 20%-25%,
  food 5%, chemicals 3% (1997)

Exports--partners: UK, Italy, Japan, US, Germany (1997)

Imports: $27.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transport equipment, chemicals,
  petroleum products, textiles, scientific instruments (1997)

Imports--partners: Germany, US, UK, Japan (1997)

Debt--external: $23.5 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $676.3 million

Currency: 1 rand (R) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: rand (R) per US$1--5.98380 (January 1999), 5.52828
  (1998), 4.60796 (1997), 4.29935 (1996), 3.62709 (1995), 3.55080
  (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 4.2 million (1997)

Telephone system: the system is the best developed, most modern,
  and has the highest capacity in Africa
  domestic: consists of carrier-equipped open-wire lines, coaxial
  cables, microwave radio relay links, fiber-optic cable, and
  radiotelephone communication stations; key centers are Bloemfontein,
  Cape Town, Durban, Johannesburg, Port Elizabeth, and Pretoria
  international: 1 submarine cable; satellite earth stations--3
  Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean and 2 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 15, FM 164, shortwave 1

Radios: 7.5 million (1999 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 556 (includes 156 network stations
  and 400 privately-owned low-power stations; in addition, there are
  144 network repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 7.5 million



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 21,431 km
  narrow gauge: 20,995 km 1.067-m gauge (9,087 km electrified); 436 km
  0.610-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 331,265 km
  paved: 137,475 km (including 1,142 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 193,790 km (1995 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 931 km; petroleum products 1,748 km; natural
  gas 322 km

Ports and harbors: Cape Town, Durban, East London, Mosselbaai,
  Port Elizabeth, Richards Bay, Saldanha

Merchant marine:
  total: 9 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 274,797 GRT/270,837 DWT
  ships by type: container 6, oil tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 749 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 144
  over 3,047 m: 10
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 45
  914 to 1,523 m: 75
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 605
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 35
  914 to 1,523 m: 304
  under 914 m: 266 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: South African National Defense Force or SANDF
  (includes Army, Navy, Air Force, and Medical Services), South
  African Police Service or SAPS

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 11,330,692 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 6,889,631 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 453,610 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2 billion (FY99/00)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (FY95/96)

Military--note: the National Defense Force continues to integrate
  former military, black homelands forces, and ex-opposition forces



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
  negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African
  territories that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long
  ago part of the Swazi Kingdom

Illicit drugs: transshipment center for heroin and cocaine;
  cocaine consumption on the rise; world's largest market for illicit
  methaqualone, usually imported illegally from India through various
  east African countries; illicit cultivation of marijuana



======================================================================




@South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
--------------------------------------------





Geography



Location: Southern South America, islands in the South Atlantic
  Ocean, east of the tip of South America

Geographic coordinates: 54 30 S, 37 00 W

Map references: Antarctic Region

Area:
  total: 4,066 sq km
  land: 4,066 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Shag Rocks, Clerke Rocks, Bird Island

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Rhode Island

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: NA km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: variable, with mostly westerly winds throughout the year
  interspersed with periods of calm; nearly all precipitation falls as
  snow

Terrain: most of the islands, rising steeply from the sea, are
  rugged and mountainous; South Georgia is largely barren and has
  steep, glacier-covered mountains; the South Sandwich Islands are of
  volcanic origin with some active volcanoes

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mount Paget 2,915 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (largely covered by permanent ice and snow with some
  sparse vegetation consisting of grass, moss, and lichen)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: the South Sandwich Islands have prevailing
  weather conditions that generally make them difficult to approach by
  ship; they are also subject to active volcanism

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: the north coast of South Georgia has several
  large bays, which provide good anchorage; reindeer, introduced early
  in this century, live on South Georgia



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there is a small military garrison on South Georgia, and the
  British Antarctic Survey has a biological station on Bird Island;
  the South Sandwich Islands are uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands
  conventional short form: none

Data code: SX

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK, also claimed by
  Argentina; administered from the Falkland Island by a UK civil
  commissioner; Grytviken on South Georgia is the garrison town

Capital: none; Grytviken on South Georgia is the garrison town

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK, also claimed by Argentina)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK, also claimed by Argentina)

Flag description: the flag of the UK is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Some fishing takes place in adjacent waters.
  There is a potential source of income from harvesting fin fish and
  krill. The islands receive income from postage stamps produced in
  the UK.

Budget:
  revenues: $291,777
  expenditures: $451,000, including capital expenditures of $NA (1988
  est.)



Communications



Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: coastal radiotelephone station at Grytviken



Transportation



Ports and harbors: Grytviken

Airports: none



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Argentina



======================================================================




@Spain
-----





Introduction



Background: A powerful world empire in the 16th and 17th
  centuries, Spain ultimately yielded command of the seas to England,
  beginning with the defeat of the Armada in 1588. Spain subsequently
  failed to embrace the mercantile and industrial revolutions and fell
  behind Britain, France, and Germany in economic and political power.
  Spain remained neutral in World Wars I and II. In the second half of
  the 20th century Spain played a catch-up role in the western
  international community. Continuing problems are large-scale
  unemployment and the Basque separatist movement.



Geography



Location: Southwestern Europe, bordering the Bay of Biscay,
  Mediterranean Sea, North Atlantic Ocean, and Pyrenees Mountains,
  southwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 4 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 504,750 sq km
  land: 499,400 sq km
  water: 5,350 sq km
  note: includes Balearic Islands, Canary Islands, and five places of
  sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the coast of
  Morocco--Ceuta, Melilla, Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and
  Penon de Velez de la Gomera

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Oregon

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,919.1 km
  border countries: Andorra 65 km, France 623 km, Gibraltar 1.2 km,
  Portugal 1,214 km, Morocco (Ceuta) 6.3 km, Morocco (Melilla) 9.6 km

Coastline: 4,964 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm (applies only to the Atlantic Ocean)
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; clear, hot summers in interior, more moderate
  and cloudy along coast; cloudy, cold winters in interior, partly
  cloudy and cool along coast

Terrain: large, flat to dissected plateau surrounded by rugged
  hills; Pyrenees in north

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pico de Teide (Tenerife) on Canary Islands 3,718 m

Natural resources: coal, lignite, iron ore, uranium, mercury,
  pyrites, fluorspar, gypsum, zinc, lead, tungsten, copper, kaolin,
  potash, hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 30%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 21%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 8% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 34,530 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: pollution of the Mediterranean Sea
  from raw sewage and effluents from the offshore production of oil
  and gas; water quality and quantity nationwide; air pollution;
  deforestation; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Marine Life
  Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification

Geography--note: strategic location along approaches to Strait of
  Gibraltar



People



Population: 39,167,744 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 15% (male 3,012,907; female 2,835,455)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 13,411,046; female 13,406,214)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 2,702,654; female 3,799,468) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.1% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.99 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.69 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.66 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.07 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.41 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.71 years
  male: 73.97 years
  female: 81.71 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.24 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Spaniard(s)
  adjective: Spanish

Ethnic groups: composite of Mediterranean and Nordic types

Religions: Roman Catholic 99%, other 1%

Languages: Castilian Spanish 74%, Catalan 17%, Galician 7%,
  Basque 2%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 96%
  male: 98%
  female: 94% (1986 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Spain
  conventional short form: Spain
  local short form: Espana

Data code: SP

Government type: parliamentary monarchy

Capital: Madrid

Administrative divisions: 17 autonomous communities (comunidades
  autonomas, singular--comunidad autonoma); Andalucia, Aragon,
  Asturias, Baleares (Balearic Islands), Canarias (Canary Islands),
  Cantabria, Castilla-La Mancha, Castilla y Leon, Cataluna, Communidad
  Valencian, Extremadura, Galicia, La Rioja, Madrid, Murcia, Navarra,
  Pais Vasco (Basque Country)
  note: there are five places of sovereignty on and off the coast of
  Morocco: Ceuta and Melilla are administered as autonomous
  communities; Islas Chafarinas, Penon de Alhucemas, and Penon de
  Velez de la Gomera are under direct Spanish administration

Independence: 1492 (expulsion of the Moors and unification)

National holiday: National Day, 12 October

Constitution: 6 December 1978, effective 29 December 1978

Legal system: civil law system, with regional applications; does
  not accept compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King JUAN CARLOS I (since 22 November 1975); Heir
  Apparent Prince FELIPE, son of the monarch, born 30 January 1968
  head of government: President of the Government Jose Maria AZNAR
  Lopez (since 5 May 1996); First Vice President Francisco ALVAREZ
  CASCOS Fernandez (since 5 May 1996) and Second Vice President (and
  Minister of Economy and Finance) Rodrigo RATO Figaredo (since 5 May
  1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers designated by the president
  note: there is also a Council of State that is the supreme
  consultative organ of the government
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; president proposed by the
  monarch and elected by the National Assembly following legislative
  elections; election last held 3 March 1996 (next to be held by NA
  April 2000); vice presidents appointed by the monarch on proposal of
  the president
  election results: Jose Maria AZNAR elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--NA

Legislative branch: bicameral; the General Courts or National
  Assembly or Las Cortes Generales consists of the Senate or Senado
  (256 seats--208 members directly elected by popular vote and the
  other 48 appointed by the regional legislatures to serve four-year
  terms) and the Congress of Deputies or Congreso de los Diputados
  (350 seats; members are elected by popular vote on block lists by
  proportional representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 3 March 1996 (next to be held by April
  2000); Congress of Deputies--last held 3 March 1996 (next to be held
  by April 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--PP 132, PSOE 96, CiU 11, PNV 6, IU 2, others 9; Congress of
  Deputies--percent of vote by party--PP 38.9%, PSOE 37.5%, IU 10.7%,
  CiU 4.6%; seats by party--PP 156, PSOE 141, IU 21, CiU 16, other 16

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Tribunal Supremo

Political parties and leaders:
  principal national parties, from right to left: Popular Party or PP
  Gonzalez]
  Soley, secretary general] (a coalition of the Democratic Convergence

Political pressure groups and leaders: on the extreme left, the
  Basque Fatherland and Liberty or ETA and the First of October
  Antifascist Resistance Group or GRAPO use terrorism to oppose the
  unions (authorized in April 1977); Workers Confederation or CC.OO;
  the Socialist General Union of Workers or UGT and the smaller
  independent Workers Syndical Union or USO; business and landowning
  interests; the Catholic Church; Opus Dei; university students

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, EIB, EMU, ESA,
  EU, FAO, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MTCR, NAM (guest), NATO,
  NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UNU, UPU, WCL, WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Antonio OYARZABAL MARCHESI
  chancery: 2375 Pennsylvania Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, Miami,
  New Orleans, New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edward L. ROMERO
  embassy: Serrano 75, 28006 Madrid
  mailing address: APO AE 09642
  consulate(s) general: Barcelona

Flag description: three horizontal bands of red (top), yellow
  (double width), and red with the national coat of arms on the hoist
  side of the yellow band; the coat of arms includes the royal seal
  framed by the Pillars of Hercules, which are the two promontories
  (Gibraltar and Ceuta) on either side of the eastern end of the
  Strait of Gibraltar



Economy



Economy--overview: Spain's mixed capitalist economy supports a GDP
  that on a per capita basis is three-fourths that of the four leading
  West European economies. Its center-right government successfully
  worked to gain admission to the first group of countries launching
  the European single currency on 1 January 1999. The deficit-to-GDP
  ratio is 2.1%, the debt-to-GDP ratio is around 68%, and inflation is
  approximately 2%. Moreover, the AZNAR administration has continued
  to advocate liberalization, privatization, and deregulation of the
  economy and has introduced some tax reforms to that end.
  Unemployment, nonetheless, remains the highest in the EU at 20%. The
  government, for political reasons, has made only limited progress in
  changing labor laws or reforming pension schemes, which are key to
  the sustainability of both Spain's internal economic advances and
  its competitiveness in a single currency area. Adjustment to the
  monetary and other economic policies of an integrated Europe will
  pose difficult challenges to Spain in the next few years.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$645.6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$16,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3.4%
  industry: 33.3%
  services: 63.3% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.8%
  highest 10%: 25.2% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 16.2 million

Labor force--by occupation: services 64%, manufacturing, mining,
  and construction 28%, agriculture 8% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 20% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $113 billion
  expenditures: $139 billion, including capital expenditures of $15
  billion (1995)

Industries: textiles and apparel (including footwear), food and
  beverages, metals and metal manufactures, chemicals, shipbuilding,
  automobiles, machine tools, tourism

Industrial production growth rate: 5.8% (1998)

Electricity--production: 163.468 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 43.17%
  hydro: 23.92%
  nuclear: 32.74%
  other: 0.17% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 164.568 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 5.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 6.8 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, vegetables, olives, wine grapes,
  sugar beets, citrus; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; fish

Exports: $111.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: cars and trucks, other machinery and
  manufactured goods, foodstuffs, and other consumer goods

Exports--partners: EU 70% (France 20%, Germany 18%, Italy 10%,
  Portugal 9%, UK 8%), US 4.4% (1997)

Imports: $132.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transport equipment, fuels,
  semifinished goods, foodstuffs, consumer goods, chemicals (1997)

Imports--partners: EU 65% (France 17%, Germany 15%, Italy 9%, UK
  8%, Benelux 7%), US 6%, Japan 3% (1997)

Debt--external: $90 billion (1993 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.3 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 peseta (Pta) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: pesetas (Ptas) per US$1--143.39 (January 1999),
  149.40 (1998), 146.41 (1997), 126.66 (1996), 124.69 (1995), 133.96
  (1994)
  note: on 1 January 1999, the European Union introduced a common
  currency that is now being used by financial institutions in some
  member countries at the rate of 0.8597 euros per US$ and a fixed
  rate of 166.386 pesetas per euro; the euro will replace the local
  currency in consenting countries for all transactions in 2002

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 12.6 million (1990 est.)

Telephone system: generally adequate, modern facilities
  domestic: NA
  international: 22 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth
  stations--2 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean and 1 Indian Ocean), NA
  Eutelsat, NA Inmarsat, and NA Marecs; tropospheric scatter to
  adjacent countries

Radio broadcast stations: AM 190, FM 406 (repeaters 134),
  shortwave 0

Radios: 12 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 542 (382 network stations, 160
  low-power stations, and one US Air Force Europe station) (1997)

Televisions: 15.7 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 15,079 km
  broad gauge: 12,781 km 1.668-m gauge (6,355 km electrified; 2,295 km
  double track)
  standard gauge: 525 km 1.435-m gauge (480 km electrified)
  narrow gauge: 1,773 km 1.000-m gauge (594 km electrified) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 346,858 km
  paved: 343,389 km (including 9,063 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 3,469 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 1,045 km, but of minor economic importance

Pipelines: crude oil 265 km; petroleum products 1,794 km; natural
  gas 1,666 km

Ports and harbors: Aviles, Barcelona, Bilbao, Cadiz, Cartagena,
  Castellon de la Plana, Ceuta, Huelva, La Coruna, Las Palmas (Canary
  Islands), Malaga, Melilla, Pasajes, Gijon, Santa Cruz de Tenerife
  (Canary Islands), Santander, Tarragona, Valencia, Vigo

Merchant marine:
  total: 137 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,094,408
  GRT/1,695,708 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 11, cargo 29, chemical tanker 10, container 10,
  liquefied gas tanker 3, oil tanker 25, passenger 1, refrigerated
  cargo 6, roll-on/roll-off cargo 35, short-sea passenger 6,
  specialized tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 99 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 66
  over 3,047 m: 15
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 11
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 16
  914 to 1,523 m: 15
  under 914 m: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 33
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 11
  under 914 m: 21 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Marines, Civil Guard,
  National Police, Coastal Civil Guard

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 10,374,314 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 8,346,155 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 311,350 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $6.3 billion (1995)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1995)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Gibraltar issue with UK; Spain controls
  five places of sovereignty (plazas de soberania) on and off the
  coast of Morocco--the coastal enclaves of Ceuta and Melilla, which
  Morocco contests, as well as the islands of Penon de Alhucemas,
  Penon de Velez de la Gomera, and Islas Chafarinas

Illicit drugs: key European gateway country for Latin American
  cocaine and North African hashish entering the European market;
  transshipment point for and consumer of Southwest Asian heroin



======================================================================




@Spratly Islands
---------------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, group of reefs and islands in the
  South China Sea, about two-thirds of the way from southern Vietnam
  to the southern Philippines

Geographic coordinates: 8 38 N, 111 55 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: less than 5 sq km
  land: less than 5 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes 100 or so islets, coral reefs, and sea mounts
  scattered over an area of nearly 410,000 sq km of the central South
  China Sea

Area--comparative: NA

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 926 km

Maritime claims: NA

Climate: tropical

Terrain: flat

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Southwest Cay 4 m

Natural resources: fish, guano, undetermined oil and natural gas
  potential

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: typhoons; serious maritime hazard because of
  numerous reefs and shoals

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategically located near several primary
  shipping lanes in the central South China Sea; includes numerous
  small islands, atolls, shoals, and coral reefs



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: there are scattered garrisons occupied by personnel of several
  claimant states



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Spratly Islands

Data code: PG



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity is limited to commercial
  fishing. The proximity to nearby oil- and gas-producing sedimentary
  basins suggests the potential for oil and gas deposits, but the
  region is largely unexplored, and there are no reliable estimates of
  potential reserves; commercial exploitation has yet to be developed.



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: Spratly Islands consist of more than 100 small
  islands or reefs, of which about 45 are claimed and occupied by
  China, Malaysia, the Philippines, Taiwan, and Vietnam



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: all of the Spratly Islands are claimed by
  China, Taiwan, and Vietnam; parts of them are claimed by Malaysia
  and the Philippines; in 1984, Brunei established an exclusive
  fishing zone, which encompasses Louisa Reef in the southern Spratly
  Islands, but has not publicly claimed the island



======================================================================




@Sri Lanka
---------





Geography



Location: Southern Asia, island in the Indian Ocean, south of
  India

Geographic coordinates: 7 00 N, 81 00 E

Map references: Asia

Area:
  total: 65,610 sq km
  land: 64,740 sq km
  water: 870 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than West Virginia

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,340 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical monsoon; northeast monsoon (December to March);
  southwest monsoon (June to October)

Terrain: mostly low, flat to rolling plain; mountains in
  south-central interior

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pidurutalagala 2,524 m

Natural resources: limestone, graphite, mineral sands, gems,
  phosphates, clay

Land use:
  arable land: 14%
  permanent crops: 15%
  permanent pastures: 7%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 5,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional cyclones and tornadoes

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; wildlife
  populations threatened by poaching; coastal degradation from mining
  activities and increased pollution; freshwater resources being
  polluted by industrial wastes and sewage runoff

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: strategic location near major Indian Ocean sea
  lanes



People



Population: 19,144,875 (July 1999 est.)
  note: since the outbreak of hostilities between the government and
  armed Tamil separatists in the mid-1980s, several hundred thousand
  Tamil civilians have fled the island; as of late 1996, 63,068 were
  housed in refugee camps in south India, another 30,000-40,000 lived
  outside the Indian camps, and more than 200,000 Tamils have sought
  political asylum in the West

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 2,650,135; female 2,535,092)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 6,231,987; female 6,500,782)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 592,539; female 634,340) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.1% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 18.16 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.02 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.96 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 16.12 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.67 years
  male: 69.89 years
  female: 75.59 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.1 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Sri Lankan(s)
  adjective: Sri Lankan

Ethnic groups: Sinhalese 74%, Tamil 18%, Moor 7%, Burgher, Malay,
  and Vedda 1%

Religions: Buddhist 69%, Hindu 15%, Christian 8%, Muslim 8%

Languages: Sinhala (official and national language) 74%, Tamil
  (national language) 18%
  note: English is commonly used in government and is spoken by about
  10% of the population

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 90.2%
  male: 93.4%
  female: 87.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Democratic Socialist Republic of Sri Lanka
  conventional short form: Sri Lanka
  former: Ceylon

Data code: CE

Government type: republic

Capital: Colombo

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces; Central, North Central,
  North Eastern, North Western, Sabaragamuwa, Southern, Uva, Western

Independence: 4 February 1948 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence and National Day, 4 February (1948)

Constitution: adopted 16 August 1978

Legal system: a highly complex mixture of English common law,
  Roman-Dutch, Muslim, Sinhalese, and customary law; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA (since
  12 November 1994); note--Sirimavo BANDARANAIKE is the prime minister;
  in Sri Lanka the president is considered to be both the chief of
  state and the head of the government, this is in contrast to the
  more common practice of dividing the roles between the president and
  the prime minister when both offices exist
  head of government: President Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA
  (since 12 November 1994); note--Sirimavo BANDARANAIKE is the prime
  minister; in Sri Lanka the president is considered to be both the
  chief of state and the head of the government, this is in contrast
  to the more common practice of dividing the roles between the
  president and the prime minister when both offices exist
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president in consultation with the
  prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a six-year term;
  election last held 9 November 1994 (next to be held NA November 2000)
  election results: Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA elected
  president; percent of vote--Chandrika Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA
  (People's Alliance) 62%, Srima DISSANAYAKE (United National Party)
  37%, other 1%

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (225 seats; members
  elected by popular vote on the basis of a modified proportional
  representation system to serve six-year terms)
  elections: last held 16 August 1994 (next to be held by August 2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--PA 49.0%, UNP 44.0%, SLMC
  1.8%, TULF 1.7%, SLPF 1.1%, EPDP 0.3%, UPF 0.3%, PLOTE 0.1%, other
  1.7%; seats by party--PA 105, UNP 94, EPDP 9, SLMC 7, TULF 5, PLOTE
  3, SLPF 1, UPF 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  Judicial Service Commission; Court of Appeals

Political parties and leaders: All Ceylon Tamil Congress or ACTC
  Bandaranaike KUMARATUNGA]; People's Liberation Organization of Tamil
  APPUHAMY]; several ethnic Tamil and Muslim parties, represented in
  either parliament or provincial councils

Political pressure groups and leaders: Liberation Tigers of Tamil
  Eelam or LTTE; other radical chauvinist Sinhalese groups; Buddhist
  clergy; Sinhalese Buddhist lay groups; labor unions

International organization participation: AsDB, C, CCC, CP,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, NAM, OAS (observer), OPCW, PCA, SAARC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Warnasena RASAPUTRAM
  chancery: 2148 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s): New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Shaun E. DONNELLY
  embassy: 210 Galle Road, Colombo 3
  mailing address: P. O. Box 106, Colombo

Flag description: yellow with two panels; the smaller hoist-side
  panel has two equal vertical bands of green (hoist side) and orange;
  the other panel is a large dark red rectangle with a yellow lion
  holding a sword, and there is a yellow bo leaf in each corner; the
  yellow field appears as a border that goes around the entire flag
  and extends between the two panels



Economy



Economy--overview: In 1977, Colombo abandoned statist economic
  policies and its import substitution trade policy for
  market-oriented policies and export-oriented trade. Sri Lanka's most
  dynamic industries now are food processing, textiles and apparel,
  food and beverages, telecommunications, and insurance and banking.
  By 1996 plantation crops made up only 20% of exports (compared with
  93% in 1970), while textiles and garments accounted for 63%. GDP
  grew at an annual average rate of 5.5% throughout the 1990s until a
  drought and a deteriorating security situation lowered growth to
  3.8% in 1996. The economy rebounded in 1997-98 with growth of 6.4%
  and 4.7%. For the next round of reforms, the central bank of Sri
  Lanka recommends that Colombo expand market mechanisms in
  nonplantation agriculture, dismantle the government's monopoly on
  wheat imports, and promote more competition in the financial sector.
  A continuing cloud over the economy is the fighting between the
  Sinhalese and the minority Tamils, which has cost 50,000 lives in
  the past 15 years. The global slowdown will temper growth in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$48.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 18%
  industry: 31%
  services: 51% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 35.3% (1990-91 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.8%
  highest 10%: 25.2% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9.3% (1998)

Labor force: 6.2 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services 46%, agriculture 37%,
  industry 17% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 11% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $3 billion
  expenditures: $4.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $1
  billion (1997 est.)

Industries: processing of rubber, tea, coconuts, and other
  agricultural commodities; clothing, cement, petroleum refining,
  textiles, tobacco

Industrial production growth rate: 6.5% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 5.05 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 4.95%
  hydro: 95.05%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5.05 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, sugarcane, grains, pulses, oilseed,
  spices, tea, rubber, coconuts; milk, eggs, hides, beef

Exports: $4.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: textiles and apparel, tea, diamonds and
  other gems, coconut products, rubber products, petroleum products
  (1997)

Exports--partners: US 36%, UK 11%, Japan 6%, Germany 5%,
  Belgium-Luxembourg 4% (1997)

Imports: $5.3 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, textiles,
  petroleum, building materials, sugar (1997)

Imports--partners: India 10%, Japan 9%, South Korea 8%, Hong Kong
  7%, Taiwan 7% (1997)

Debt--external: $8.8 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $559.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Sri Lankan rupee (SLRe) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Sri Lankan rupees (SLRes) per US$1--67.948
  (January 1999), 64.593 (1998), 58.995 (1997), 55.271 (1996), 51.252
  (1995), 49.415 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 352,681 (1997 est.); 114,888 cellular telephone
  subscribers (1997 est.)

Telephone system: very inadequate domestic service, but expanding
  with the entry of two wireless loop operators and privatization of
  national telephone company; good international service
  domestic: NA
  international: submarine cables to Indonesia and Djibouti; satellite
  earth stations--2 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 5, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.6 million (1996 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 21 (19 network stations, two
  low-power stations) (1997)

Televisions: 1.6 million (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,501 km
  broad gauge: 1,442 km 1.676-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 59 km 0.762-m gauge (1995)

Highways:
  total: 99,200 km
  paved: 39,680 km
  unpaved: 59,520 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 430 km; navigable by shallow-draft craft

Pipelines: crude oil and petroleum products 62 km (1987)

Ports and harbors: Colombo, Galle, Jaffna, Trincomalee

Merchant marine:
  total: 22 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 178,867 GRT/276,363 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 14, container 1, oil tanker 1,
  refrigerated cargo 5 (1998 est.)

Airports: 13 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Police Force

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 5,223,590 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,062,758 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 199,196 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $719 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.2% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Sudan
-----





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Red Sea, between Egypt
  and Eritrea

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 2,505,810 sq km
  land: 2.376 million sq km
  water: 129,810 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than one-quarter the size of the
  US

Land boundaries:
  total: 7,687 km
  border countries: Central African Republic 1,165 km, Chad 1,360 km,
  Democratic Republic of the Congo 628 km, Egypt 1,273 km, Eritrea 605
  km, Ethiopia 1,606 km, Kenya 232 km, Libya 383 km, Uganda 435 km

Coastline: 853 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 18 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical in south; arid desert in north; rainy season
  (April to October)

Terrain: generally flat, featureless plain; mountains in east and
  west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Red Sea 0 m
  highest point: Kinyeti 3,187 m

Natural resources: petroleum; small reserves of iron ore, copper,
  chromium ore, zinc, tungsten, mica, silver, gold

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 19%
  other: 30% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 19,460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms

Environment--current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
  wildlife populations threatened by excessive hunting; soil erosion;
  desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: largest country in Africa; dominated by the Nile
  and its tributaries



People



Population: 34,475,690 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 7,941,909; female 7,614,225)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 9,094,712; female 9,061,194)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 423,389; female 340,261) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.71% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 39.34 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.6 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.68 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.24 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 70.94 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 56.4 years
  male: 55.41 years
  female: 57.44 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.58 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Sudanese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Sudanese

Ethnic groups: black 52%, Arab 39%, Beja 6%, foreigners 2%, other
  1%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 70% (in north), indigenous beliefs 25%,
  Christian 5% (mostly in south and Khartoum)

Languages: Arabic (official), Nubian, Ta Bedawie, diverse
  dialects of Nilotic, Nilo-Hamitic, Sudanic languages, English
  note: program of Arabization in process

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 46.1%
  male: 57.7%
  female: 34.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of the Sudan
  conventional short form: Sudan
  local long form: Jumhuriyat as-Sudan
  local short form: As-Sudan
  former: Anglo-Egyptian Sudan

Data code: SU

Government type: transitional--previously ruling military junta;
  presidential and National Assembly elections held in March 1996; new
  constitution drafted by Presidential Committee, went into effect on
  30 June 1998 after being approved in nationwide referendum

Capital: Khartoum

Administrative divisions: 26 states (wilayat, singular--wilayah);
  A'ali an Nil, Al Bahr al Ahmar, Al Buhayrat, Al Jazirah, Al Khartum,
  Al Qadarif, Al Wahdah, An Nil al Abyad, An Nil al Azraq, Ash
  Shamaliyah, Bahr al Jabal, Gharb al Istiwa'iyah, Gharb Bahr al
  Ghazal, Gharb Darfur, Gharb Kurdufan, Janub Darfur, Janub Kurdufan,
  Junqali, Kassala, Nahr an Nil, Shamal Bahr al Ghazal, Shamal Darfur,
  Shamal Kurdufan, Sharq al Istiwa'iyah, Sinnar, Warab

Independence: 1 January 1956 (from Egypt and UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 January (1956)

Constitution: 12 April 1973, suspended following coup of 6 April
  1985; interim constitution of 10 October 1985 suspended following
  coup of 30 June 1989; new constitution implemented on 30 June 1998

Legal system: based on English common law and Islamic law; as of
  20 January 1991, the now defunct Revolutionary Command Council
  imposed Islamic law in the northern states; Islamic law applies to
  all residents of the northern states regardless of their religion;
  some separate religious courts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction,
  with reservations

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal, but noncompulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Lt. General Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR
  (since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Ali Uthman Muhammad
  TAHA (since 17 February 1998), Second Vice President (Police) Maj.
  General George KONGOR AROP (since NA February 1994); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Lt. General Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR
  (since 16 October 1993); First Vice President Ali Uthman Muhammad
  TAHA (since 17 February 1998), Second Vice President (Police) Maj.
  General George KONGOR AROP (since NA February 1994); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president; note--President
  al-BASHIR's government is dominated by members of Sudan's National
  Islamic Front (NIF), a fundamentalist political organization formed
  from the Muslim Brotherhood in 1986; in 1998, the NIF created the
  National Congress as its legal front; the National Congress/NIF
  dominates much of Khartoum's overall domestic and foreign policies;
  President al-BASHIR named a new cabinet on 20 April 1996 which
  includes members of the National Islamic Front, serving and retired
  military officers, and civilian technocrats; on 8 March 1998, he
  reshuffled the cabinet and brought in several former rebel and
  opposition members as ministers
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 6-17 March 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR elected president;
  percent of vote--Umar Hasan Ahmad al-BASHIR 75.7%; note--about forty
  other candidates ran for president
  note: al-BASHIR, as chairman of the Revolutionary Command Council
  for National Salvation (RCC), assumed power on 30 June 1989 and
  served concurrently as chief of state, chairman of the RCC, prime
  minister, and minister of defense until 16 October 1993 when he was
  appointed president by the RCC; upon its dissolution on 16 October
  1993, the RCC's executive and legislative powers were devolved to
  the president and the Transitional National Assembly (TNA), Sudan's
  appointed legislative body, which has since been replaced by the
  National Assembly which was elected in March 1996

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (400 seats; 275
  elected by popular vote, 125 elected by a supraassembly of interest
  groups known as the National Congress)
  elections: last held 6-17 March 1996 (next to be held NA 2001)
  election results: NA; the March 1996 elections were held on a
  nonparty basis; parties are banned in the new National Assembly

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Special Revolutionary Courts

Political parties and leaders: political parties were banned
  following 30 June 1989 coup, however, political "associations" are
  allowed under a new law drafted in 1998 and implemented on 1 January

Political pressure groups and leaders: National Islamic Front or
  its legal front)

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACP, AfDB,
  AFESD, AL, AMF, CAEU, CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM,
  IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol,
  IOC, IOM (observer), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNU, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mahdi Ibrahim MAHAMMAD (recalled to
  Khartoum in August 1998)
  chancery: 2210 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US: US officials at the US
  Embassy in Khartoum were moved for security reasons in February 1996
  and have been relocated to the US Embassies in Nairobi, Kenya and
  Cairo, Egypt; they visit Khartoum monthly, but the Sudanese
  Government has not allowed such visits since August 1998; the US
  Embassy in Khartoum (located on Sharia Abdul Latif Avenue; mailing
  employees; the US Embassy in Nairobi, Kenya is located temporarily
  in the USAID Building at The Crescent, Parkland, Nairobi; mailing
  address--P.O. Box 30137, Box 21A, Unit 64100, APO AE 09831;
  Cairo, Egypt is located at (North Gate) 8, Kamel El-Din Salah
  Street, Garden City, Cairo; mailing address--Unit 64900, APO AE

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and black with a green isosceles triangle based on the hoist
  side



Economy



Economy--overview: Sudan is buffeted by civil war, chronic
  political instability, adverse weather, high inflation, a drop in
  remittances from abroad, and counterproductive economic policies.
  The private sector's main areas of activity are agriculture and
  trading, with most private industrial investment predating 1980.
  Agriculture employs 80% of the work force. Industry mainly processes
  agricultural items. Sluggish economic performance over the past
  decade, attributable largely to declining annual rainfall, has kept
  per capita income at low levels. A large foreign debt and huge
  arrears continue to cause difficulties. In 1990 the International
  Monetary Fund took the unusual step of declaring Sudan
  noncooperative because of its nonpayment of arrears to the Fund.
  After Sudan backtracked on promised reforms in 1992-93, the IMF
  threatened to expel Sudan from the Fund. To avoid expulsion,
  Khartoum agreed to make payments on its arrears to the Fund,
  liberalize exchange rates, and reduce subsidies, measures it has
  partially implemented. The government's continued prosecution of the
  civil war and its growing international isolation continued to
  inhibit growth in the nonagricultural sectors of the economy during
  1998. Hyperinflation has raised consumer prices above the reach of
  most. In 1998, a top priority was to develop potentially lucrative
  oilfields in southcentral Sudan; the government is working with
  foreign partners to exploit the oil sector.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$31.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 6.1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$930 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 33%
  industry: 17%
  services: 50% (1992 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 27% (mid-1997 est.)

Labor force: 11 million (1996 est.)
  note: labor shortages for almost all categories of skilled
  employment (1983 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 80%, industry and commerce
  10%, government 6%

Unemployment rate: 30% (FY92/93 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $482 million
  expenditures: $1.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $30
  million (1996)

Industries: cotton ginning, textiles, cement, edible oils, sugar,
  soap distilling, shoes, petroleum refining

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.315 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 27.76%
  hydro: 72.24%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.315 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, groundnuts (peanuts), sorghum,
  millet, wheat, gum arabic, sesame; sheep

Exports: $594 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: cotton 23%, sesame 22%, livestock/meat 13%,
  gum arabic 5% (1996)

Exports--partners: Saudi Arabia 20%, UK 14%, China 11%, Italy 8%
  (1996)

Imports: $1.42 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, petroleum products, manufactured
  goods, machinery and equipment, medicines and chemicals, textiles
  (1996)

Imports--partners: Saudi Arabia 10%, South Korea 7%, Germany 6%,
  Egypt 6% (1996)

Debt--external: $20.3 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $254.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Sudanese pound (LSd) = 100 piastres

Exchange rates: Sudanese pounds (LSd) per US$1--1,819.70 (April
  1998), 1,873.53 (2d Qtr 1998), 1,575.74 (1997), 1,250.79 (1996),
  580.87 (1995), 289.61 (1994), 159.31 (1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year
  note: prior to July 1995, Sudan had a fiscal year that began on 1
  July and ended on 30 June; as a transition to their new fiscal year,
  a six-month budget was implemented for 1 July-31 December 1995; the
  new calendar year (1 January-31 December) fiscal year became
  effective 1 January 1996



Communications



Telephones: 77,215 (1983 est.)

Telephone system: large, well-equipped system by African
  standards, but barely adequate and poorly maintained by modern
  standards
  domestic: consists of microwave radio relay, cable, radiotelephone
  communications, tropospheric scatter, and a domestic satellite
  system with 14 earth stations
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
  and 1 Arabsat

Radio broadcast stations: AM 11, FM 1, shortwave 1 (1998 est.)

Radios: 5.75 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (1997)

Televisions: 250,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 5,516 km
  narrow gauge: 4,800 km 1.067-m gauge; 716 km 1.6096-m gauge
  plantation line

Highways:
  total: 11,900 km
  paved: 4,320 km
  unpaved: 7,580 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 5,310 km navigable

Pipelines: refined products 815 km

Ports and harbors: Juba, Khartoum, Kusti, Malakal, Nimule, Port
  Sudan, Sawakin

Merchant marine:
  total: 4 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 38,093 GRT/49,727 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 63 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 8
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 51
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 14
  914 to 1,523 m: 26
  under 914 m: 11 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Popular Defense Force
  Militia

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 7,942,139 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,889,557 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 379,174 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $550 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: administrative boundary with Kenya does
  not coincide with international boundary; Egypt asserts its claim to
  the "Hala'ib Triangle," a barren area of 20,580 sq km under partial
  Sudanese administration that is defined by an administrative
  boundary which supersedes the treaty boundary of 1899



======================================================================




@Suriname
--------





Geography



Location: Northern South America, bordering the North Atlantic
  Ocean, between French Guiana and Guyana

Geographic coordinates: 4 00 N, 56 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 163,270 sq km
  land: 161,470 sq km
  water: 1,800 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Georgia

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,707 km
  border countries: Brazil 597 km, French Guiana 510 km, Guyana 600 km

Coastline: 386 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds

Terrain: mostly rolling hills; narrow coastal plain with swamps

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: unnamed location in the coastal plain -2 m
  highest point: Wilhelmina Gebergte 1,286 m

Natural resources: timber, hydropower, fish, kaolin, shrimp,
  bauxite, gold, and small amounts of nickel, copper, platinum, iron
  ore

Land use:
  arable land: NA%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 96%
  other: 4% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: deforestation as timber is cut for
  export; pollution of inland waterways by small-scale mining
  activities

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Law of
  the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: mostly tropical rain forest; great diversity of
  flora and fauna that, for the most part, is increasingly threatened
  by new development; relatively small population, most of which lives
  along the coast



People



Population: 431,156 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 72,673; female 69,212)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 135,573; female 130,700)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 10,585; female 12,413) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.71% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.75 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.75 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -8.92 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.03 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 26.52 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.89 years
  male: 68.32 years
  female: 73.59 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.55 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Surinamer(s)
  adjective: Surinamese

Ethnic groups: Hindustani (also known locally as "East Indians";
  their ancestors emigrated from northern India in the latter part of
  the 19th century) 37%, Creole (mixed white and black) 31%, Javanese
  15.3%, "Maroons" (their African ancestors were brought to the
  country in the 17th and 18th centuries as slaves and escaped to the
  interior) 10.3%, Amerindian 2.6%, Chinese 1.7%, white 1%, other 1.1%

Religions: Hindu 27.4%, Muslim 19.6%, Roman Catholic 22.8%,
  Protestant 25.2% (predominantly Moravian), indigenous beliefs 5%

Languages: Dutch (official), English (widely spoken), Sranang
  Tongo (Surinamese, sometimes called Taki-Taki, is native language of
  Creoles and much of the younger population and is lingua franca
  among others), Hindustani (a dialect of Hindi), Javanese

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 93%
  male: 95%
  female: 91% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Suriname
  conventional short form: Suriname
  local long form: Republiek Suriname
  local short form: Suriname
  former: Netherlands Guiana, Dutch Guiana

Data code: NS

Government type: republic

Capital: Paramaribo

Administrative divisions: 10 districts (distrikten,
  singular--distrikt); Brokopondo, Commewijne, Coronie, Marowijne,
  Nickerie, Para, Paramaribo, Saramacca, Sipaliwini, Wanica

Independence: 25 November 1975 (from Netherlands)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 November (1975)

Constitution: ratified 30 September 1987

Legal system: based on Dutch legal system incorporating French
  penal theory

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jules WIJDENBOSCH (since 14 September
  1996); Vice President Pretaapnarian RADHAKISHUN (since 14 September
  1996); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Jules WIJDENBOSCH (since 14 September
  1996); Vice President Pretaapnarian RADHAKISHUN (since 14 September
  1996); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president from among
  the members of the National Assembly
  note: First Advisor of State maintains significant power
  elections: president and vice president elected by the National
  Assembly or, if no presidential or vice presidential candidate
  receives a constitutional majority vote in the National Assembly
  after two votes, by the larger People's Assembly (869
  representatives from the national, local, and regional councils),
  for five-year terms; election last held 23 May 1996; runoff election
  held 5 September 1996 (next to be held NA May 2001)
  election results: Jules WIJDENBOSCH elected president; percent of
  legislative vote--NA; National Assembly failed to elect president;
  results reflect votes cast by the People's Assembly--Jules
  WIJDENBOSCH (NDP) received 438 votes, Ronald VENETIAAN (NF) received
  407 votes

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or National
  Assemblee (51 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 23 May 1996 (next to be held NA May 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NDP
  16, NF 14, BVD 5, KTPI 5, Pertjaja Luhur 4, The Progressive
  Development Alliance 3, DA '91 2, OPDA 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (justices nominated for life)

Political parties and leaders: The New Front or NF (a coalition
  Democratic Alternative '91 or DA '91 (a coalition of the AF and BEP,
  Development Alliance (a combination of two parties, HPP and PVF)

Political pressure groups and leaders: Union for Liberation and

International organization participation: ACP, Caricom, ECLAC,
  FAO, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent),
  ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OIC, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Arnold Theodoor HALFHIDE
  chancery: Suite 460, 4301 Connecticut Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Miami

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dennis K. HAYS
  embassy: Dr. Sophie Redmondstraat 129, Paramaribo
  mailing address: P. O. Box 1821, American Embassy Paramaribo,
  Department of State, Washington, DC, 20521-3390

Flag description: five horizontal bands of green (top, double
  width), white, red (quadruple width), white, and green (double
  width); there is a large, yellow, five-pointed star centered in the
  red band



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is dominated by the bauxite
  industry, which accounts for more than 15% of GDP and 70% of export
  earnings. After assuming power in the fall of 1996, the WIJDENBOSCH
  government ended the structural adjustment program of the previous
  government, claiming it was unfair to the poorer elements of
  society. Tax revenues fell as old taxes lapsed and the government
  failed to implement new tax alternatives. By the end of 1997, the
  allocation of new Dutch development funds was frozen as Surinamese
  Government relations with the Netherlands deteriorated. Economic
  growth slowed in 1998, with decline in the mining, construction, and
  utility sectors. Suriname's economic prospects for the medium term
  will depend on renewed commitment to responsible monetary and fiscal
  policies and to the introduction of structural reforms to liberalize
  markets and promote competition.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.48 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$3,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 10%
  industry: 32%
  services: 58% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 20% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture NA%, industry NA%,
  services NA%

Unemployment rate: 20% (1997)

Budget:
  revenues: $393 million
  expenditures: $403 million, including capital expenditures of $34
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: bauxite and gold mining, alumina and aluminum
  production, lumbering, food processing, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 6.5% (1994 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.62 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 19.75%
  hydro: 80.25%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.62 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: paddy rice, bananas, palm kernels,
  coconuts, plantains, peanuts; beef, chickens; forest products; shrimp

Exports: $548.84 million (1997)

Exports--commodities: alumina, aluminum, crude oil, lumber, shrimp
  and fish, rice, bananas

Exports--partners: Norway 24%, Netherlands 22%, US 22%, France
  9.5%, Japan 7.6%, UK 6.5% (1997)

Imports: $551.8 million (1997)

Imports--commodities: capital equipment, petroleum, foodstuffs,
  cotton, consumer goods

Imports--partners: US 48%, Netherlands 21.2%, UK 5.1%, Japan 4%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $216 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $76.4 million (1995); note?the
  Netherlands provided a $127 million aid package to Aruba and
  Suriname in 1996

Currency: 1 Surinamese guilder, gulden, or florin (Sf.) = 100
  cents

Exchange rates: Surinamese guilders, gulden, or florins (Sf.) per
  US$1--850 (January 1999); central bank midpoint rate: 401.00 (1998),
  401.00 (1997), 401.26 (1996), 442.23 (1995), 134.12 (1994); parallel
  rate: 800 (December 1998), 412 (December 1995), 510 (December 1994)
  note: beginning July 1994, the central bank midpoint exchange rate
  was unified and became market determined; during 1998, the exchange
  rate splintered into four distinct rates; in January 1999 the
  government floated the guilder

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 43,522 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: international facilities good
  domestic: microwave radio relay network
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 32, shortwave 1

Radios: 290,256 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, there are seven
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 59,598 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 166 km (single track)
  standard gauge: 80 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 86 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 4,530 km
  paved: 1,178 km
  unpaved: 3,352 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,200 km; most important means of transport;
  oceangoing vessels with drafts ranging up to 7 m can navigate many
  of the principal waterways

Ports and harbors: Albina, Moengo, New Nickerie, Paramaribo,
  Paranam, Wageningen

Airports: 46 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5
  over 3,047 m: 1
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 41
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 34 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Army (includes small Navy and Air
  Force elements), Civil Police

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 118,686 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 69,842 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $8.5 million (1997 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.6% (1997 est.)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims area in French Guiana between
  Litani Rivier and Riviere Marouini (both headwaters of the Lawa
  Rivier); claims area in Guyana between New (Upper Courantyne) and

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined mostly for Europe



======================================================================




@Svalbard
--------





Geography



Location: Northern Europe, islands between the Arctic Ocean,
  Barents Sea, Greenland Sea, and Norwegian Sea, north of Norway

Geographic coordinates: 78 00 N, 20 00 E

Map references: Arctic Region

Area:
  total: 62,049 sq km
  land: 62,049 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Spitsbergen and Bjornoya (Bear Island)

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3,587 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm unilaterally claimed by Norway but
  not recognized by Russia
  territorial sea: 4 nm

Climate: arctic, tempered by warm North Atlantic Current; cool
  summers, cold winters; North Atlantic Current flows along west and
  north coasts of Spitsbergen, keeping water open and navigable most
  of the year

Terrain: wild, rugged mountains; much of high land ice covered;
  west coast clear of ice about one-half of the year; fjords along
  west and north coasts

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Arctic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Newtontoppen 1,717 m

Natural resources: coal, copper, iron ore, phosphate, zinc,
  wildlife, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (no trees and the only bushes are crowberry and
  cloudberry)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: ice floes often block up the entrance to
  Bellsund (a transit point for coal export) on the west coast and
  occasionally make parts of the northeastern coast inaccessible to
  maritime traffic

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: northernmost part of the Kingdom of Norway;
  consists of nine main islands; glaciers and snowfields cover 60% of
  the total area



People



Population: 2,503 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -3.55% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA years
  male: NA years
  female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Ethnic groups: Russian and Ukrainian 62%, Norwegian 38%, other
  NEGL% (1994)

Languages: Russian, Norwegian



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Svalbard (sometimes referred to as
  Spitzbergen)

Data code: SV

Dependency status: territory of Norway; administered by the
  Ministry of Industry, Oslo, through a governor (sysselmann) residing
  in Longyearbyen, Spitsbergen; by treaty (9 February 1920)
  sovereignty was given to Norway

Government type: NA

Capital: Longyearbyen

Independence: none (territory of Norway)

National holiday: NA

Legal system: NA

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King HARALD V of Norway (since 17 January 1991)
  head of government: Governor Ann-Kristin OLSEN (since NA) and
  Assistant Governor Jan-Atle HANSEN (since NA September 1993)
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor and assistant
  governor responsible to the Polar Department of the Ministry of
  Justice

International organization participation: none

Flag description: the flag of Norway is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Coal mining is the major economic activity on
  Svalbard. The treaty of 9 February 1920 gives the 41 signatories
  equal rights to exploit mineral deposits, subject to Norwegian
  regulation. Although US, UK, Dutch, and Swedish coal companies have
  mined in the past, the only companies still mining are Norwegian and
  Russian. The settlements on Svalbard are essentially company towns.
  The Norwegian state-owned coal company employs nearly 60% of the
  Norwegian population on the island, runs many of the local services,
  and provides most of the local infrastructure. There is also some
  trapping of seal, polar bear, fox, and walrus.

GDP: $NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: $NA

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Budget:
  revenues: $11.7 million
  expenditures: $11.7 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Exports: $NA

Imports: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $8.7 million from Norway (1997)

Currency: 1 Norwegian krone (NKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Norwegian kroner (NKr) per US$1--7.4524 (January
  1999), 7.5451 (1998), 7.0734 (1997), 6.4498 (1996), 6.3352 (1995),
  7.0576 (1994)



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: local telephone service
  international: satellite earth station--1 of NA type (for
  communication with Norwegian mainland only)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 1 (repeaters 2), shortwave 0
  note: there are five meteorological/radio stations

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Barentsburg, Longyearbyen, Ny-Alesund,
  Pyramiden

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: demilitarized by treaty (9 February 1920)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Svalbard is the focus of a maritime
  boundary dispute in the Barents Sea between Norway and Russia



======================================================================




@Swaziland
---------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, between Mozambique and South Africa

Geographic coordinates: 26 30 S, 31 30 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 17,360 sq km
  land: 17,200 sq km
  water: 160 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than New Jersey

Land boundaries:
  total: 535 km
  border countries: Mozambique 105 km, South Africa 430 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: varies from tropical to near temperate

Terrain: mostly mountains and hills; some moderately sloping
  plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Great Usutu River 21 m
  highest point: Emlembe 1,862 m

Natural resources: asbestos, coal, clay, cassiterite, hydropower,
  forests, small gold and diamond deposits, quarry stone, and talc

Land use:
  arable land: 11%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 62%
  forests and woodland: 7%
  other: 20% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 670 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: limited supplies of potable water;
  wildlife populations being depleted because of excessive hunting;
  overgrazing; soil degradation; soil erosion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Nuclear
  Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked; almost completely surrounded by South
  Africa



People



Population: 985,335 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 46% (male 227,675; female 228,733)
  15-64 years: 51% (male 243,853; female 259,950)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 9,866; female 15,258) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.91% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 40.8 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 21.72 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.65 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 101.87 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 38.11 years
  male: 36.86 years
  female: 39.4 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.92 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Swazi(s)
  adjective: Swazi

Ethnic groups: African 97%, European 3%

Religions: Christian 60%, indigenous beliefs 40%

Languages: English (official, government business conducted in
  English), siSwati (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 76.7%
  male: 78%
  female: 75.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Swaziland
  conventional short form: Swaziland

Data code: WZ

Government type: monarchy; independent member of Commonwealth

Capital: Mbabane; note--Lobamba is the royal and legislative
  capital

Administrative divisions: 4 districts; Hhohho, Lubombo, Manzini,
  Shiselweni

Independence: 6 September 1968 (from UK)

National holiday: Somhlolo (Independence) Day, 6 September (1968)

Constitution: none; constitution of 6 September 1968 was
  suspended 12 April 1973; a new constitution was promulgated 13
  October 1978, but was not formally presented to the people; since
  then a few more outlines for a constitution have been compiled but
  so far none have been accepted

Legal system: based on South African Roman-Dutch law in statutory
  courts and Swazi traditional law and custom in traditional courts;
  has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: NA; note--no suffrage before September 1993; 55 of the
  65 seats in the House of Assembly were filled by popular vote in the
  elections of September and October 1993; of a population of less
  than 1 million, the electorate numbered 283,693

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King MSWATI III (since 25 April 1986)
  head of government: Prime Minister Sibusiso Barnabas DLAMINI (since
  9 August 1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet recommended by the prime minister and confirmed by
  the monarch
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister appointed
  by the monarch

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament or Libandla, an advisory
  body, consists of the Senate (20 seats--10 appointed by the House of
  Assembly and 10 appointed by the monarch; members serve five-year
  terms) and the House of Assembly (65 seats--10 appointed by the
  monarch and 55 elected by popular vote; members serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: House of Assembly--last held NA September and NA October
  1998 (next to be held NA 2003)
  election results: House of Assembly--balloting is done on a nonparty
  basis; candidates for election are nominated by the local council of
  each constituency and for each constituency the three candidates
  with the most votes in the first round of voting are narrowed to a
  single winner by a second round

Judicial branch: High Court, judges are appointed by the monarch;
  Court of Appeal, judges are appointed by the monarch

Political parties and leaders:
  note: political parties are banned by the constitution promulgated
  on 13 October 1978; illegal parties are prohibited from holding
  large public gatherings
  illegal parties: People's United Democratic Movement or PUDEMO

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OAU, OPCW, PCA, SACU, SADC, UN,
  UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mary Madzandza KANYA
  chancery: Suite 3M, 3400 International Drive NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Alan R. McKEE
  embassy: Central Bank Building, Warner Street, Mbabane
  mailing address: P. O. Box 199, Mbabane

Flag description: three horizontal bands of blue (top), red
  (triple width), and blue; the red band is edged in yellow; centered
  in the red band is a large black and white shield covering two
  spears and a staff decorated with feather tassels, all placed
  horizontally



Economy



Economy--overview: In this small landlocked economy, subsistence
  agriculture occupies more than 60% of the population. Manufacturing
  features a number of agroprocessing factories. Mining has declined
  in importance in recent years; high-grade iron ore deposits were
  depleted by 1978, and health concerns have cut world demand for
  asbestos. Exports of soft drink concentrate, sugar and wood pulp are
  the main earners of hard currency. Surrounded by South Africa,
  except for a short border with Mozambique, Swaziland is heavily
  dependent on South Africa from which it receives nearly all of its
  imports and to which it sends more than half of its exports.
  Remittances from Swazi workers in South African mines supplement
  domestically earned income by as much as 20%. The government is
  trying to improve the atmosphere for foreign investment.
  Overgrazing, soil depletion, and drought persist as problems for the
  future.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$4,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 10%
  industry: 42%
  services: 48% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8% (1998)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: private sector about 70%, public
  sector about 30%

Unemployment rate: 22% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $400 million
  expenditures: $450 million, including capital expenditures of $115
  million (FY96/97)

Industries: mining (coal and asbestos), wood pulp, sugar, soft
  drink concentrates

Industrial production growth rate: 3.7% (FY95/96)

Electricity--production: 415 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 49.4%
  hydro: 50.6%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 986 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 571 million kWh (1996)
  note: imports about 60% of its electricity from South Africa

Agriculture--products: sugarcane, cotton, maize, tobacco, rice,
  citrus, pineapples, corn, sorghum, peanuts; cattle, goats, sheep

Exports: $972 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: soft drink concentrates, sugar, wood pulp,
  cotton yarn, citrus and canned fruit (1996)

Exports--partners: South Africa 58%, EU 17%, Mozambique, North
  Korea (1995)

Imports: $1.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: motor vehicles, machinery, transport
  equipment, foodstuffs, petroleum products, chemicals (1996)

Imports--partners: South Africa 96%, Japan, UK, Singapore (FY95/96)

Debt--external: $175 million (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $55 million (1995)

Currency: 1 lilangeni (E) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: emalangeni (E) per US$1--5.9812 (January 1999),
  5.4807 (1998), 4.6032 (1997), 4.2706 (1996), 3.6266 (1995), 3.5490
  (1994); note--the Swazi lilangeni is at par with the South African
  rand

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: NA; 45,000 cellular telephone subscribers (1993 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: system consists of carrier-equipped, open-wire lines and
  low-capacity, microwave radio relay
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 6, shortwave 0

Radios: 200,000 (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (in addition, there are seven
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 20,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 297 km; note--includes 71 km which are not in use
  narrow gauge: 297 km 1.067-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 3,810 km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 18 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 17
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 10 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Umbutfo Swaziland Defense Force (Army), Royal
  Swaziland Police Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 221,199 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 128,806 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $23 million (FY95/96)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.9% (FY95/96)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Swaziland has asked South Africa to open
  negotiations on reincorporating some nearby South African
  territories that are populated by ethnic Swazis or that were long
  ago part of the Swazi Kingdom



======================================================================




@Sweden
------





Introduction



Background: Having long lost its military prowess of the 17th
  century, Sweden has evolved into a prosperous and peaceful
  constitutional monarchy with a capitalist system interlarded with
  substantial welfare elements. As the 20th century comes to an end,
  this long successful formula is being undermined by high
  unemployment; the rising cost of a "cradle to the grave" welfare
  state; the decline of Sweden's competitive position in world
  markets; and indecision over the country's role in the political and
  economic integration of Europe. A member of the European Union,
  Sweden chose not to participate in the introduction of the euro on 1
  January 1999.



Geography



Location: Northern Europe, bordering the Baltic Sea, Gulf of
  Bothnia, Kattegat, and Skagerrak, between Finland and Norway

Geographic coordinates: 62 00 N, 15 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 449,964 sq km
  land: 410,928 sq km
  water: 39,036 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,205 km
  border countries: Finland 586 km, Norway 1,619 km

Coastline: 3,218 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: agreed boundaries or midlines
  territorial sea: 12 nm (adjustments made to return a portion of
  straits to high seas)

Climate: temperate in south with cold, cloudy winters and cool,
  partly cloudy summers; subarctic in north

Terrain: mostly flat or gently rolling lowlands; mountains in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Baltic Sea 0 m
  highest point: Kebnekaise 2,111 m

Natural resources: zinc, iron ore, lead, copper, silver, timber,
  uranium, hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 68%
  other: 24% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,150 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: ice floes in the surrounding waters, especially
  in the Gulf of Bothnia, can interfere with maritime traffic

Environment--current issues: acid rain damaging soils and lakes;
  pollution of the North Sea and the Baltic Sea

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental
  Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate Change,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental Modification,
  Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban,
  Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical
  Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: strategic location along Danish Straits linking
  Baltic and North Seas



People



Population: 8,911,296 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 856,819; female 812,958)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 2,896,383; female 2,802,571)
  65 years and over: 17% (male 651,549; female 891,016) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.29% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 12 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.77 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.68 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.73 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 3.91 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 79.29 years
  male: 76.61 years
  female: 82.11 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.83 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Swede(s)
  adjective: Swedish

Ethnic groups: white, Lapp (Sami), foreign-born or
  first-generation immigrants 12% (Finns, Yugoslavs, Danes,
  Norwegians, Greeks, Turks)

Religions: Evangelical Lutheran 94%, Roman Catholic 1.5%,
  Pentecostal 1%, other 3.5% (1987)

Languages: Swedish
  note: small Lapp- and Finnish-speaking minorities

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1979 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Sweden
  conventional short form: Sweden
  local long form: Konungariket Sverige
  local short form: Sverige

Data code: SW

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Stockholm

Administrative divisions: 21 counties (lan, singular and plural);
  Blekinge, Dalarnas, Gavleborgs, Gotlands, Hallands, Jamtlands,
  Jonkopings, Kalmar, Kronobergs, Norrbottens, Orebro, Ostergotlands,
  Skane, Sodermanlands, Stockholms, Uppsala, Varmlands, Vasterbottens,
  Vasternorrlands, Vastmanlands, Vastra Gotalands

Independence: 6 June 1523 (Gustav VASA elected king); 6 June 1809
  (constitutional monarchy was established)

National holiday: Day of the Swedish Flag, 6 June

Constitution: 1 January 1975

Legal system: civil law system influenced by customary law;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King CARL XVI GUSTAF (since 19 September 1973); Heir
  Apparent Princess VICTORIA Ingrid Alice Desiree, daughter of the
  monarch (born 14 July 1977)
  head of government: Prime Minister Goran PERSSON (since 21 March
  1996)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the prime minister
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; prime minister elected by the
  Parliament; election last held NA September 1998 (next to be held NA
  2002)
  election results: Goran PERSSON reelected prime minister; percent of
  parliamentary vote--131 votes out of 349

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Riksdag (349 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote on a proportional representation
  basis to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 September 1998 (next to be held NA September
  2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--Social Democrats 36.5%,
  Moderates 22.7%, Left Party 12%, Christian Democrats 11.8%, Center
  Party 5.1%, Liberal Party 4.7%, Greens 4.5%; seats by party--Social
  Democrats 131, Moderates 82, Left Party 43, Christian Democrats 42,
  Center Party 18, Liberal Party 17, Greens 16

Judicial branch: Supreme Court or Hogsta Domstolen, judges are
  appointed by the government (prime minister and cabinet)

Political parties and leaders: Social Democratic Party [Goran
  formal leader but party spokesperson is Briger SCHLAUG]

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AsDB,
  Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA,
  FAO, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MTCR, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN (observer), UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG,
  UNPREDEP, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Rolf EKEUS
  chancery: 1501 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20005-1702
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Lyndon Lowell OLSON, Jr.
  embassy: Strandvagen 101, S-115 89 Stockholm
  mailing address: American Embassy Stockholm, Department of State,
  Washington, DC 20521-5750 (pouch)

Flag description: blue with a yellow cross that extends to the
  edges of the flag; the vertical part of the cross is shifted to the
  hoist side in the style of the Dannebrog (Danish flag)



Economy



Economy--overview: Aided by peace and neutrality for the whole
  twentieth century, Sweden has achieved an enviable standard of
  living under a mixed system of high-tech capitalism and extensive
  welfare benefits. It has a modern distribution system, excellent
  internal and external communications, and a skilled labor force.
  Timber, hydropower, and iron ore constitute the resource base of an
  economy heavily oriented toward foreign trade. Privately owned firms
  account for about 90% of industrial output, of which the engineering
  sector accounts for 50% of output and exports. Agriculture accounts
  for only 2% of GDP and 2% of the jobs. In recent years, however,
  this extraordinarily favorable picture has been clouded by budgetary
  difficulties, inflation, high unemployment, and a gradual loss of
  competitiveness in international markets. Sweden has harmonized its
  economic policies with those of the EU, which it joined at the start
  of 1995. Sweden decided not to join the euro system at its outset in
  January 1999 but plans to hold a referendum in 2000 on whether to
  join. Annual GDP growth is forecast for 2.2% and 2.6% in 1999 and
  2000 respectively. Budgetary problems and shaky business confidence
  will constrain government plans to reduce unemployment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$175 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$19,700 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2.2%
  industry: 30.5%
  services: 67.3% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.7%
  highest 10%: 20.1% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 4.552 million (1992)

Labor force--by occupation: community, social and personal
  services 38.3%, mining and manufacturing 21.2%, commerce, hotels,
  and restaurants 14.1%, banking, insurance 9%, communications 7.2%,
  construction 7%, agriculture, fishing, and forestry 3.2% (1991)

Unemployment rate: 6.3% plus about 5% in training programs (1998
  est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $109.4 billion
  expenditures: $146.1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY95/96)

Industries: iron and steel, precision equipment (bearings, radio
  and telephone parts, armaments), wood pulp and paper products,
  processed foods, motor vehicles

Industrial production growth rate: 4.4% (1998)

Electricity--production: 135.192 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 9.75%
  hydro: 37.52%
  nuclear: 52.62%
  other: 0.11% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 141.392 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 9.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 15.9 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grains, sugar beets, potatoes; meat, milk

Exports: $85.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery 35%, motor vehicles, paper
  products, pulp and wood, iron and steel products, chemicals

Exports--partners: EU 55% (Germany 11%, UK 9%, Denmark 6%, Finland
  5%), Norway 8%, US 8% (1994)

Imports: $66.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery, petroleum and petroleum products,
  chemicals, motor vehicles, foodstuffs, iron and steel, clothing

Imports--partners: EU 68% (Germany 19%, UK 10%, Denmark 8%, France
  6%), Norway 8%, US 6% (1997)

Debt--external: $66.5 billion (1994)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.7 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Swedish krona (SKr) = 100 oere

Exchange rates: Swedish kronor (SKr) per US$1--7.8193 (January
  1999), 7.9499 (1998), 7.6349 (1997), 6.7060 (1996), 7.1333 (1995),
  7.7160 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 13 million (1996 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international
  facilities; automatic system
  domestic: coaxial and multiconductor cable carry most voice traffic;
  parallel microwave radio relay network carries some additional
  telephone channels
  international: 5 submarine coaxial cables; satellite earth
  stations--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean), 1 Eutelsat, and 1 Inmarsat
  (Atlantic and Indian Ocean regions); note--Sweden shares the Inmarsat
  earth station with the other Nordic countries (Denmark, Finland,
  Iceland, and Norway)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 5, FM 360 (mostly repeaters),
  shortwave 0

Radios: 7.272 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 163 (1997)

Televisions: 3.5 million



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 13,415 km (includes 3,594 km of privately-owned railways)
  standard gauge: 13,415 km 1.435-m gauge (7,917 km electrified and
  1,152 km double track) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 138,000 km
  paved: 105,018 km (including 1,330 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 32,982 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,052 km navigable for small steamers and barges

Pipelines: natural gas 84 km

Ports and harbors: Gavle, Goteborg, Halmstad, Helsingborg,
  Hudiksvall, Kalmar, Karlshamn, Malmo, Solvesborg, Stockholm,
  Sundsvall

Merchant marine:
  total: 154 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,894,783
  GRT/1,528,077 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 6, cargo 28, chemical tanker 28, combination
  ore/oil 4, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 24, railcar carrier 1,
  refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 39, short-sea passenger
  5, specialized tanker 4, vehicle carrier 13 (1998 est.)

Airports: 255 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 145
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 10
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 82
  914 to 1,523 m: 27
  under 914 m: 24 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 110
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 105 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Swedish Army, Royal Swedish Navy, Swedish Air
  Force

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,076,903 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,817,554 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 52,486 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $4.9 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.2% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: minor transshipment point for and consumer of
  narcotics shipped via the CIS and Baltic states; increasing consumer
  of European amphetamines



======================================================================




@Switzerland
-----------





Introduction



Background: Switzerland's independence and neutrality have long
  been honored by the major European powers and Switzerland did not
  participate in either World War I or II. The political and economic
  integration of Europe since World War II may be rendering obsolete
  Switzerland's concern for neutrality.



Geography



Location: Central Europe, east of France, north of Italy

Geographic coordinates: 47 00 N, 8 00 E

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 41,290 sq km
  land: 39,770 sq km
  water: 1,520 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly less than twice the size of New Jersey

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,852 km
  border countries: Austria 164 km, France 573 km, Italy 740 km,
  Liechtenstein 41 km, Germany 334 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate, but varies with altitude; cold, cloudy,
  rainy/snowy winters; cool to warm, cloudy, humid summers with
  occasional showers

Terrain: mostly mountains (Alps in south, Jura in northwest) with
  a central plateau of rolling hills, plains, and large lakes

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lake Maggiore 195 m
  highest point: Dufourspitze 4,634 m

Natural resources: hydropower potential, timber, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 28%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: avalanches, landslides, flash floods

Environment--current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions
  and open-air burning; acid rain; water pollution from increased use
  of agricultural fertilizers; loss of biodiversity

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air
  Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Marine
  Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: landlocked; crossroads of northern and southern
  Europe; along with southeastern France and northern Italy, contains
  the highest elevations in Europe



People



Population: 7,275,467 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 17% (male 639,970; female 611,876)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 2,509,988; female 2,417,580)
  65 years and over: 15% (male 444,482; female 651,571) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.2% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 10.53 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.06 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.49 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.68 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 4.87 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 78.99 years
  male: 75.83 years
  female: 82.32 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.46 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Swiss (singular and plural)
  adjective: Swiss

Ethnic groups: German 65%, French 18%, Italian 10%, Romansch 1%,
  other 6%

Religions: Roman Catholic 46.1%, Protestant 40%, other 5%, no
  religion 8.9% (1990)

Languages: German 63.7%, French 19.2%, Italian 7.6%, Romansch
  0.6%, other 8.9%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99% (1980 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Swiss Confederation
  conventional short form: Switzerland
  local long form: Schweizerische Eidgenossenschaft (German),
  Confederation Suisse (French), Confederazione Svizzera (Italian)
  local short form: Schweiz (German), Suisse (French), Svizzera
  (Italian)

Data code: SZ

Government type: federal republic

Capital: Bern

Administrative divisions: 26 cantons (cantons, singular--canton in
  French; cantoni, singular--cantone in Italian; kantone,
  singular--kanton in German); Aargau, Ausser-Rhoden, Basel-Landschaft,
  Basel-Stadt, Bern, Fribourg, Geneve, Glarus, Graubunden,
  Inner-Rhoden, Jura, Luzern, Neuchatel, Nidwalden, Obwalden, Sankt
  Gallen, Schaffhausen, Schwyz, Solothurn, Thurgau, Ticino, Uri,
  Valais, Vaud, Zug, Zurich

Independence: 1 August 1291

National holiday: Anniversary of the Founding of the Swiss
  Confederation, 1 August (1291)

Constitution: 29 May 1874

Legal system: civil law system influenced by customary law;
  judicial review of legislative acts, except with respect to federal
  decrees of general obligatory character; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Ruth DREIFUSS (since 1 January 1999); Vice
  President Adolf OGI (since 1 January 1999); note--the president is
  both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Ruth DREIFUSS (since 1 January 1999);
  Vice President Adolf OGI (since 1 January 1999); note--the president
  is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Federal Council or Bundesrat (in German), Conseil Federal
  (in French), Consiglio Federale (in Italian) elected by the Federal
  Assembly from among its own members for a four-year term
  elections: president and vice president elected by the Federal
  Assembly from among the members of the Federal Council for one-year
  terms that run concurrently; election last held NA December 1998
  (next to be held NA December 1999)
  election results: Ruth DREIFUSS elected president; percent of
  Federal Assembly vote--Ruth DREIFUSS 75%; Adolf OGI elected vice
  president; percent of legislative vote --NA

Legislative branch: bicameral Federal Assembly or
  Bundesversammlung (in German), Assemblee Federale (in French),
  Assemblea Federale (in Italian) consists of the Council of States or
  Standerat (in German), Conseil des Etats (in French), Consiglio
  degli Stati (in Italian) (46 seats--members serve four-year terms)
  and the National Council or Nationalrat (in German), Conseil
  National (in French), Consiglio Nazionale (in Italian) (200
  seats--members are elected by popular vote on a basis of proportional
  representation to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Council of States--last held throughout 1997 (each canton
  determines when the next election will be held); National
  Council--last held 20 October 1995 (next to be held probably 24
  October 1999)
  election results: Council of States--percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--FDP 17, CVP 16, SVP 5, SPS 5, LPS 2, LdU 1; National
  Council--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--FDP 45, SPS 54,
  CVP 34, SVP 29, Greens 9, LPS 7, FPS 7, LdU 3, EVP 2, SD 3, PdAdS 3,
  Ticino League 1, EDU 1, FRAP 1, CSP 1

Judicial branch: Federal Supreme Court, judges elected for
  six-year terms by the Federal Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Radical Free Democratic Party
  (Freisinnig-Demokratische Partei der Schweiz or FDP, Parti
  Radical-Democratique Suisse or PRD, Partitio Liberal-Radicale
  Party (Sozialdemokratische Partei der Schweiz or SPS, Parti
  Socialist Suisse or PSS, Partito Socialista Svizzero or PSS, Partida
  Christian Democratic People's Party (Christichdemokratische
  Volkspartei der Schweiz or CVP, Parti Democrate-Chretien Suisse or
  PDC, Partito Democratico-Cristiano Popolare Svizzero or PDC, Partida
  president]; Swiss People's Party (Schweizerische Volkspartei or SVP,
  Union Democratique du Centre or UDC, Unione Democratica de Centro or
  Green Party (Grune Partei der Schweiz or Grune, Parti Ecologiste
  Suisse or Les Verts, Partito Ecologista Svizzero or I Verdi, Partida
  (Landesring der Unabhaengigen or LdU, Alliance des Independants or
  Party (Schweizer Demokraten or SD, Democrates Suisses or DS,
  Democratici Svizzeri or DS), Liberal Party (Liberale Partei der
  Schweiz or LPS, Parti Liberal Suisse or PLS, Partito Liberale
  Svizzero or PLS), Workers' Party (Parti Suisse du Travail or PST,
  Partei der Arbeit der Schweiz or PdAdS, Partito Svizzero del Lavoro
  or PSdL), Evangelical People's Party (Evangelische Volkspartei der
  Schweiz or EVP, Parti Evangelique Suisse or PEV, Partito Evangelico
  Svizzero or PEV), and the Union of Federal Democrats
  (Eidgenossisch-Demokratische Union or EDU, Union Democratique
  Federale or UDF, Unione Democratica Federale or UDF)

International organization participation: ACCT, AfDB, AsDB,
  Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE, CERN, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, EFTA, ESA,
  FAO, G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, LAIA (observer), MTCR, NAM (guest), NEA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OECD, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN (observer), UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNITAR, UNMIBH, UNMOP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNTSO,
  UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Alfred DEFAGO
  chancery: 2900 Cathedral Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, New
  York, and San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Madeleine May KUNIN
  embassy: Jubilaeumstrasse 93, 3005 Bern
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: red square with a bold, equilateral white cross
  in the center that does not extend to the edges of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Switzerland, a fundamentally prosperous and
  stable modern economy with a per capita GDP 15%-20% above that of
  the big West European economies, experienced an export-driven upturn
  in its economy in 1998. The downturn in the global economy, however,
  will have a cooling effect on the 1998 boom in the Swiss export
  sector, including financial services, biotechnology,
  pharmaceuticals, and special-purpose machines. A major downturn in
  the Swiss economy should still be avoided, as consumer and capital
  spending have picked up and will keep the economy moving in 1999.
  GDP growth in 1999 is expected to come in around 1.4%. The growing
  political and economic union of Europe suggests that Switzerland's
  time-honored neutral separation is becoming increasingly obsolete.
  Thus, when the surrounding trade partners launched the euro on 1
  January 1999, their firms began prodding Swiss exporters and
  importers to keep their accounts in euros.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$191.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$26,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2.8%
  industry: 31.1%
  services: 66.1% (1995)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.9%
  highest 10%: 28.6% (1982)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 0% (1998)

Labor force: 3.8 million (850,000 foreign workers, mostly Italian)

Labor force--by occupation: services 67%, manufacturing and
  construction 29%, agriculture and forestry 4% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 3.6% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $32.66 billion
  expenditures: $34.89 billion, including capital expenditures of $2.3
  billion (1998 est.)

Industries: machinery, chemicals, watches, textiles, precision
  instruments

Industrial production growth rate: 6% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 54.815 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 3.99%
  hydro: 52.73%
  nuclear: 43.27%
  other: 0.01% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 53.765 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 24.2 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 23.15 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grains, fruits, vegetables; meat, eggs

Exports: $94.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: machinery 29%, chemicals 28%, metals,
  watches, agricultural products (1997)

Exports--partners: EU 61% (Germany 23%, France 9%, Italy 8%, UK
  6%, Austria 3%), US 10%, Japan 4% (1997)

Imports: $95.5 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery 22%, chemicals 16%, vehicles,
  metals, agricultural products, textiles (1997)

Imports--partners: EU 79% (Germany 32%, France 12%, Italy 10%,
  Netherlands 5%, UK 5%),, US 7%, Japan 3% (1997)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $1.1 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Swiss franc, franken, or franco (SFR) = 100 centimes,
  rappen, or centesimi

Exchange rates: Swiss francs, franken, or franchi (SFR) per
  US$1--1.3837 (January 1999), 1.4498 (1998), 1.4513 (1997), 1.2360
  (1996), 1.1825 (1995), 1.3677 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 5.24 million (1996 est.); 307,000 cellular telephone
  subscribers (1994 est.)

Telephone system: excellent domestic and international services
  domestic: extensive cable and microwave radio relay networks
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean
  and Indian Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 50, shortwave 1 (1997)

Radios: 2.8 million (1996)

Television broadcast stations: 108 (1997)

Televisions: 2.647 million licenses (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,479 km (1,564 km double track)
  standard gauge: 3,304 km 1.435-m gauge (3,288 km electrified)
  narrow gauge: 1,165 km 1.000-m gauge (1,057 km electrified); 10 km
  0.750-m or 0.800-m gauge (1996)

Highways:
  total: 71,048 km (including 1,613 km of expressways)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 65 km; Rhine (Basel to Rheinfelden, Schaffhausen to
  Bodensee); 12 navigable lakes

Pipelines: crude oil 314 km; natural gas 1,506 km

Ports and harbors: Basel

Merchant marine:
  total: 20 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 412,459 GRT/724,995 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 13, cargo 1, chemical tanker 5, oil tanker 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 67 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 42
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 12
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 15 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 25
  under 914 m: 25 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, Frontier Guards,
  Fortification Guards

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,867,290 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,592,696 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 41,204 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $3.1 billion (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.2% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: because of more stringent government regulations,
  used significantly less as a money-laundering center; transit
  country for and consumer of South American cocaine and Southwest
  Asian heroin



======================================================================




@Syria
-----





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Mediterranean Sea, between
  Lebanon and Turkey

Geographic coordinates: 35 00 N, 38 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 185,180 sq km
  land: 184,050 sq km
  water: 1,130 sq km
  note: includes 1,295 sq km of Israeli-occupied territory

Area--comparative: slightly larger than North Dakota

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,253 km
  border countries: Iraq 605 km, Israel 76 km, Jordan 375 km, Lebanon
  375 km, Turkey 822 km

Coastline: 193 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 41 nm
  territorial sea: 35 nm

Climate: mostly desert; hot, dry, sunny summers (June to August)
  and mild, rainy winters (December to February) along coast; cold
  weather with snow or sleet periodically hitting Damascus

Terrain: primarily semiarid and desert plateau; narrow coastal
  plain; mountains in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: unnamed location near Lake Tiberias -200 m
  highest point: Mount Hermon 2,814 m

Natural resources: petroleum, phosphates, chrome and manganese
  ores, asphalt, iron ore, rock salt, marble, gypsum

Land use:
  arable land: 28%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 43%
  forests and woodland: 3%
  other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 9,060 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: dust storms, sandstorms

Environment--current issues: deforestation; overgrazing; soil
  erosion; desertification; water pollution from dumping of raw sewage
  and wastes from petroleum refining; inadequate supplies of potable
  water

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification

Geography--note: there are 42 Israeli settlements and civilian
  land use sites in the Israeli-occupied Golan Heights (August 1998
  est.)



People



Population: 17,213,871 (July 1999 est.)
  note: in addition, there are about 37,200 people living in the
  Israeli-occupied Golan Heights--18,200 Arabs (16,500 Druze and 1,700
  Alawites) and about 19,000 Israeli settlers (August 1998 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 46% (male 4,032,620; female 3,840,431)
  15-64 years: 51% (male 4,515,274; female 4,322,415)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 246,812; female 256,319) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.15% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 36.95 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.4 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.96 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 36.42 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.09 years
  male: 66.75 years
  female: 69.48 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.37 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Syrian(s)
  adjective: Syrian

Ethnic groups: Arab 90.3%, Kurds, Armenians, and other 9.7%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 74%, Alawite, Druze, and other Muslim
  sects 16%, Christian (various sects) 10%, Jewish (tiny communities
  in Damascus, Al Qamishli, and Aleppo)

Languages: Arabic (official); Kurdish, Armenian, Aramaic,
  Circassian widely understood; French, English somewhat understood

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 70.8%
  male: 85.7%
  female: 55.8% (1997 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Syrian Arab Republic
  conventional short form: Syria
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Arabiyah as Suriyah
  local short form: Suriyah
  former: United Arab Republic (with Egypt)

Data code: SY

Government type: republic under military regime since March 1963

Capital: Damascus

Administrative divisions: 14 provinces (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Al Hasakah, Al Ladhiqiyah, Al Qunaytirah, Ar
  Raqqah, As Suwayda', Dar'a, Dayr az Zawr, Dimashq, Halab, Hamah,
  Hims, Idlib, Rif Dimashq, Tartus

Independence: 17 April 1946 (from League of Nations mandate under
  French administration)

National holiday: National Day, 17 April (1946)

Constitution: 13 March 1973

Legal system: based on Islamic law and civil law system; special
  religious courts; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Hafiz al-ASAD (since 22 February 1971);
  note--President ASAD seized power in the November 1970 coup, assumed
  presidential powers 22 February 1971, and was confirmed as president
  in the 12 March 1971 national elections; Vice Presidents 'Abd
  al-Halim ibn Said KHADDAM (since 11 March 1984) and Muhammad Zuhayr
  MASHARIQA (since 11 March 1984)
  head of government: Prime Minister Mahmud ZUBI (since 1 November
  1987), Deputy Prime Ministers Lt. Gen. Mustafa TALAS (since 11 March
  1984), Dr. Salim YASIN (since NA December 1981), and Rashid
  AKHTARINI (since 4 July 1992)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a seven-year term;
  referendum/election last held 8 February 1999 (next to be held NA
  2006); vice presidents appointed by the president; prime minister
  and deputy prime ministers appointed by the president
  election results: Hafiz al-ASAD reelected president; percent of
  vote--Hafiz al-ASAD 99%

Legislative branch: unicameral People's Council or Majlis
  al-shaab (250 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 30 November-1 December 1998 (next to be held NA
  2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NPF 67%, non-NPF 33%;
  seats by party--NPF 167, independents 83; note--the constitution
  guarantees that the Ba'th Party (part of the NPF alliance) receive
  one-half of the seats

Judicial branch: Supreme Constitutional Court, justices are
  appointed for four-year terms by the president; High Judicial
  Council; Court of Cassation; State Security Courts

Political parties and leaders:
  National Progressive Front (NPF) includes: the ruling Arab Socialist
  secretary general of the party, and chairman of the National

Political pressure groups and leaders: non-Ba'th parties have
  little effective political influence; Communist party ineffective;
  conservative religious leaders; Muslim Brotherhood (operates in
  exile in Jordan and Yemen)

International organization participation: ABEDA, AFESD, AL, AMF,
  CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-24, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC,
  ISO, ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNRWA, UPU,
  WFTU, WHO, WMO, WToO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Walid MUALEM
  chancery: 2215 Wyoming Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Ryan CROCKER
  embassy: Abou Roumaneh, Al-Mansur Street, No. 2, Damascus
  mailing address: P. O. Box 29, Damascus

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and black with two small green five-pointed stars in a
  horizontal line centered in the white band; similar to the flag of
  Yemen, which has a plain white band and of Iraq, which has three
  green stars (plus an Arabic inscription) in a horizontal line
  centered in the white band; also similar to the flag of Egypt, which
  has a symbolic eagle centered in the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Syria's predominantly statist economy is on a
  shaky footing because of Damascus's failure to implement extensive
  economic reform. The dominant agricultural sector remains
  underdeveloped, with roughly 80% of agricultural land still
  dependent on rain-fed sources. Although Syria has sufficient water
  supplies in the aggregate at normal levels of precipitation, the
  great distance between major water supplies and population centers
  poses serious distribution problems. The water problem is
  exacerbated by rapid population growth, industrial expansion, and
  increased water pollution. Private investment is critical to the
  modernization of the agricultural, energy, and export sectors. Oil
  production is leveling off, and the efforts of the nonoil sector to
  penetrate international markets have fallen short. Syria's
  inadequate infrastructure, outmoded technological base, and weak
  educational system make it vulnerable to future shocks and hamper
  competition with neighbors such as Jordan and Israel.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$41.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 26%
  industry: 21%
  services: 53% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 15%-25%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 15%-20% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 4.7 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 40%, agriculture 40%,
  industry 20% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 12%-15% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $3.5 billion
  expenditures: $4.2 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: petroleum, textiles, food processing, beverages,
  tobacco, phosphate rock mining

Industrial production growth rate: 0.2% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 19.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 63.73%
  hydro: 36.27%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 19.3 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, barley, cotton, lentils, chickpeas,
  olives, sugar beets; beef, mutton, eggs, poultry, milk

Exports: $4.2 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: petroleum 65%, textiles 16%, food and live
  animals 13%, manufactures 6% (1997 est.)

Exports--partners: Italy 18%, Germany 13%, France 12%, Turkey 10%,
  Lebanon 7%, Spain 6% (1997 est.)

Imports: $5.7 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 40%,
  foodstuffs/animals 15%, metal and metal products 15%, textiles 10%,
  chemicals 10%, consumer goods 5% (1997 est.)

Imports--partners: Ukraine 14%, Italy 7%, Germany 6%, Turkey 5%,
  France 4%, South Korea 4%, Japan 4%, US 3% (1997 est.)

Debt--external: $22 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $327.3 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Syrian pound (LS) = 100 piastres

Exchange rates: Syrian pounds (LS) per US$1--46 (1998), 41.9
  (January 1997); official fixed rate 11.225

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 541,465 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: fair system currently undergoing significant
  improvement and digital upgrades, including fiber-optic technology
  domestic: coaxial cable and microwave radio relay network
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Indian Ocean)
  and 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region); 1 submarine cable;
  coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Iraq, Jordan, Lebanon,
  and Turkey; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 9, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 3.392 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 54 (of which 36 are low-power
  stations and repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 700,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,998 km
  broad gauge: 1,766 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 232 km 1.050-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 41,451 km
  paved: 9,575 km (including 877 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 31,876 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: 870 km; minimal economic importance

Pipelines: crude oil 1,304 km; petroleum products 515 km

Ports and harbors: Baniyas, Jablah, Latakia, Tartus

Merchant marine:
  total: 131 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 401,407 GRT/578,081 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 11, cargo 115, livestock carrier 4,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 104 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 24
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 16
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 80
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 14
  under 914 m: 63 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Syrian Arab Army, Syrian Arab Navy, Syrian
  Arab Air Force, Syrian Arab Air Defense Forces, Police and Security
  Force

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,060,995 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,271,539 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 188,546 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $800 million-$1 billion
  (1997 est.); note--based on official budget data that understate
  actual spending

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 8% (1995 est.)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Golan Heights is Israeli occupied;
  dispute with upstream riparian Turkey over Turkish water development
  plans for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers; Syrian troops in
  northern, central, and eastern Lebanon since October 1976

Illicit drugs: a transit point for opiates and hashish bound for
  regional and Western markets



======================================================================




@Taiwan
------





Introduction



Background: In 1895, military defeat forced China to cede Taiwan
  to Japan, however it reverted to Chinese control after World War II.
  Following the Communist victory on the mainland in 1949, 2 million
  Nationalists fled to Taiwan and established a government that over
  five decades has gradually democratized and incorporated native
  Taiwanese within its structure. Throughout this period, the island
  has prospered as one of East Asia's economic tigers. The dominant
  political issue continues to be the relationship between Taiwan and
  Mainland China and the question of eventual reunification.



Geography



Location: Eastern Asia, islands bordering the East China Sea,
  Philippine Sea, South China Sea, and Taiwan Strait, north of the
  Philippines, off the southeastern coast of China

Geographic coordinates: 23 30 N, 121 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 35,980 sq km
  land: 32,260 sq km
  water: 3,720 sq km
  note: includes the Pescadores, Matsu, and Quemoy

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maryland and Delaware
  combined

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 1,448 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; rainy season during southwest monsoon
  (June to August); cloudiness is persistent and extensive all year

Terrain: eastern two-thirds mostly rugged mountains; flat to
  gently rolling plains in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: Yu Shan 3,997 m

Natural resources: small deposits of coal, natural gas,
  limestone, marble, and asbestos

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 5%
  forests and woodland: 55%
  other: 15%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: earthquakes and typhoons

Environment--current issues: air pollution; water pollution from
  industrial emissions, raw sewage; contamination of drinking water
  supplies; trade in endangered species; low-level radioactive waste
  disposal

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 22,113,250 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 22% (male 2,515,398; female 2,338,506)
  15-64 years: 70% (male 7,825,953; female 7,574,836)
  65 years and over: 8% (male 989,040; female 869,517) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.93% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.63 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.32 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.02 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.08 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.14 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.01 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.49 years
  male: 74.38 years
  female: 80.85 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.77 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Chinese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Chinese

Ethnic groups: Taiwanese (including Hakka) 84%, mainland Chinese
  14%, aborigine 2%

Religions: mixture of Buddhist, Confucian, and Taoist 93%,
  Christian 4.5%, other 2.5%

Languages: Mandarin Chinese (official), Taiwanese (Min), Hakka
  dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 94% (1998 est.)
  male: 93% (1980 est.)
  female: 79% (1980 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Taiwan
  local long form: none
  local short form: T'ai-wan

Data code: TW

Government type: multiparty democratic regime headed by popularly
  elected president

Capital: Taipei

Administrative divisions: since in the past the authorities
  claimed to be the government of all China, the central
  administrative divisions include the provinces of Fu-chien (some 20
  offshore islands of Fujian Province including Quemoy and Matsu) and
  Taiwan (the island of Taiwan and the Pescadores islands); note--the
  more commonly referenced administrative divisions are those of
  Taiwan Province--16 counties (hsien, singular and plural), 5
  municipalities* (shih, singular and plural), and 2 special
  municipalities** (chuan-shih, singular and plural); Chang-hua,
  Chia-i, Chia-i*, Chi-lung*, Hsin-chu, Hsin-chu*, Hua-lien, I-lan,
  Kao-hsiung, Kao-hsiung**, Miao-li, Nan-t'ou, P'eng-hu, P'ing-tung,
  T'ai-chung, T'ai-chung*, T'ai-nan, T'ai-nan*, T'ai-pei, T'ai-pei**,
  T'ai-tung, T'ao-yuan, and Yun-lin; the provincial capital is at
  Chung-hsing-hsin-ts'un
  note: Taiwan uses the Wade-Giles system for romanization

National holiday: National Day, 10 October (1911) (Anniversary of
  the Chinese Revolution)

Constitution: 1 January 1947, amended in 1992, 1994, and 1997

Legal system: based on civil law system; accepts compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President LEE Teng-hui (succeeded to the presidency
  following the death of President CHIANG Ching-kuo 13 January 1988,
  elected by the National Assembly 21 March 1990, elected by popular
  vote in the first-ever direct elections for president 23 March
  1996); Vice President LIEN Chan (since 20 May 1996)
  head of government: Premier (President of the Executive Yuan)
  Vincent SIEW (since 1 September 1997) and Vice Premier (Vice
  President of the Executive Yuan) LIU Chao-shiuan (since 10 December
  1997)
  cabinet: Executive Yuan appointed by the president
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 23 March
  1996 (next to be held NA 2000); premier appointed by the president;
  vice premiers appointed by the president on the recommendation of
  the premier
  election results: LEE Teng-hui elected president; percent of
  vote--LEE Teng-hui 54%, PENG Ming-min 21%, LIN Yang-kang 15%, and
  CHEN Li-an 10%

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Yuan (225 seats--168
  elected by popular vote, 41 elected on the basis of the proportion
  of nationwide votes received by participating political parties,
  eight elected from overseas Chinese constituencies on the basis of
  the proportion of nationwide votes received by participating
  political parties, eight elected by popular vote among the
  aboriginal populations; members serve three-year terms) and
  unicameral National Assembly (334 seats; members elected by popular
  vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: Legislative Yuan--last held 5 December 1998 (next to be
  held NA December 2001); National Assembly--last held 23 March 1996
  (next to be held NA 2000)
  election results: Legislative Yuan--percent of vote by party--KMT 46%,
  DPP 29%, CNP 7%, independents 10%, other parties 8%; seats by
  party--KMT 123, DPP 70, CNP 11, independents 15, other parties 6;
  National Assembly--percent of vote by party--KMT 55%, DPP 30%, CNP
  14%, other 1%; seats by party--KMT 183, DPP 99, CNP 46, other 6

Judicial branch: Judicial Yuan, justices appointed by the
  president with the consent of the National Assembly

Political parties and leaders: Kuomintang or KMT (Nationalist
  parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: Taiwan independence
  movement, various business and environmental groups
  note: debate on Taiwan independence has become acceptable within the
  mainstream of domestic politics on Taiwan; political liberalization
  and the increased representation of opposition parties in Taiwan's
  legislature have opened public debate on the island's national
  identity; advocates of Taiwan independence oppose the ruling party's
  traditional stand that the island will eventually reunify with
  mainland China; goals of the Taiwan independence movement include
  establishing a sovereign nation on Taiwan and entering the UN; other
  organizations supporting Taiwan independence include the World
  United Formosans for Independence and the Organization for Taiwan
  Nation Building

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, BCIE, ICC,
  IOC, WCL, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none; unofficial commercial
  and cultural relations with the people of the US are maintained
  through a private instrumentality, the Taipei Economic and Cultural
  Representative Office (TECRO) with headquarters in Taipei and field
  offices in Washington and 12 other US cities

Diplomatic representation from the US: none; unofficial
  commercial and cultural relations with the people on Taiwan are
  maintained through a private institution, the American Institute in
  Taiwan (AIT), which has its headquarters in Rosslyn, Virginia
  offices in Taipei at #7 Lane 134, Hsin Yi Road, Section 3, telephone
  International Trade Building, Taipei World Trade Center, 333 Keelung

Flag description: red with a dark blue rectangle in the upper
  hoist-side corner bearing a white sun with 12 triangular rays



Economy



Economy--overview: Taiwan has a dynamic capitalist economy with
  gradually decreasing guidance of investment and foreign trade by
  government authorities and partial government ownership of some
  large banks and industrial firms. Real growth in GDP has averaged
  about 8.5% a year during the past three decades. Export growth has
  been even faster and has provided the impetus for industrialization.
  Inflation and unemployment are low, and foreign reserves are the
  world's third largest. Agriculture contributes less than 3% to GDP,
  down from 35% in 1952. Traditional labor-intensive industries are
  steadily being moved off-shore and replaced with more capital- and
  technology-intensive industries. Taiwan has become a major investor
  in China, Thailand, Indonesia, the Philippines, Malaysia, and
  Vietnam. The tightening of labor markets has led to an influx of
  foreign workers, both legal and illegal. Because of its conservative
  financial approach and its entrepreneurial strengths, Taiwan
  suffered little compared with many of its neighbors from "the Asian
  flu" in 1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$362 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$16,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2.7%
  industry: 35.3%
  services: 62% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.1% (1998)

Labor force: 9.4 million (1997)

Labor force--by occupation: services 52%, industry 38%,
  agriculture 10% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 2.7% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $40 billion
  expenditures: $55 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 est.)

Industries: electronics, textiles, chemicals, clothing, food
  processing, plywood, sugar milling, cement, shipbuilding, petroleum
  refining

Industrial production growth rate: 7% (1997)

Electricity--production: 134.906 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 63.2%
  hydro: 7.1%
  nuclear: 29.7%
  other: 0% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 134.906 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, wheat, corn, soybeans, vegetables,
  fruit, tea; pigs, poultry, beef, milk; fish

Exports: $122.1 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: machinery and electrical equipment 21.7%,
  electronic products 14.8%, information/communications 11.8%, textile
  products 11.6% (1997)

Exports--partners: US 24.2%, Hong Kong 23.5%, Europe 15.1%, Japan
  9.6% (1997)

Imports: $114.4 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and electrical equipment 16.5%,
  electronic products 16.3%, chemicals 10.0%, precision instrument
  5.6% (1997)

Imports--partners: Japan 25.4%, US 20.3%, Europe 18.9%, Hong Kong
  1.7% (1997)

Debt--external: $80 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 New Taiwan dollar (NT$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Taiwan dollars per US$1--32.45 (yearend 1997),
  27.5 (1996), 27.4 (1995), 26.2 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 11.526 million (1998 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: extensive microwave radio relay trunk system on east and
  west coasts
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Pacific Ocean
  and 1 Indian Ocean); submarine cables to Japan (Okinawa),
  Philippines, Guam, Singapore, Hong Kong, Indonesia, Australia,
  Middle East, and Western Europe

Radio broadcast stations: AM 158, FM 48, shortwave 21

Radios: 8.62 million

Television broadcast stations: 29 (in addition, there are two
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 10.8 million (1996 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,600 km (519 km electrified); note--1,108 km belongs to the
  Taiwan Railway Administration and the remaining 3,492 km is
  dedicated to industrial use
  narrow gauge: 4,600 km 1.067-m

Highways:
  total: 19,634 km
  paved: 17,171 km (including 548 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 2,463 km (1997)

Pipelines: petroleum products 615 km; natural gas 97 km

Ports and harbors: Chi-lung (Keelung), Hua-lien, Kao-hsiung,
  Su-ao, T'ai-chung

Merchant marine:
  total: 180 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,106,573
  GRT/7,963,834 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 47, cargo 30, combination bulk 3, container 72,
  oil tanker 17, refrigerated cargo 9, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 39 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 8
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 12
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
  914 to 1,523 m: 6
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Marines), Air Force,
  Coastal Patrol and Defense Command, Armed Forces Reserve Command,
  Combined Service Forces

Military manpower--military age: 19 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 6,544,602 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 5,019,737 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 204,711 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $7.446 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.8% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: involved in complex dispute over the
  Spratly Islands with China, Malaysia, Philippines, Vietnam, and
  possibly Brunei; Paracel Islands occupied by China, but claimed by
  Vietnam and Taiwan; claims Japanese-administered Senkaku-shoto
  (Senkaku Islands/Diaoyu Tai), as does China

Illicit drugs: considered an important heroin transit point;
  major problem with domestic consumption of methamphetamines and
  heroin



======================================================================




@Tajikistan
----------





Introduction



Background: Tajikistan has experienced three changes of
  government and a civil war since it gained independence in September
  1991 when the USSR collapsed. A peace agreement was signed in June
  1997, but implementation is progressing slowly. Russian-led
  peacekeeping troops are deployed throughout the country, and
  Russian-commanded border guards are stationed along the
  Tajikistani-Afghan border.



Geography



Location: Central Asia, west of China

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 71 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 143,100 sq km
  land: 142,700 sq km
  water: 400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Wisconsin

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,651 km
  border countries: Afghanistan 1,206 km, China 414 km, Kyrgyzstan 870
  km, Uzbekistan 1,161 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: midlatitude continental, hot summers, mild winters;
  semiarid to polar in Pamir Mountains

Terrain: Pamir and Alay mountains dominate landscape; western
  Fergana Valley in north, Kofarnihon and Vakhsh Valleys in southwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Syrdariya 300 m
  highest point: Qullai Kommunizm 7,495 m

Natural resources: significant hydropower potential, some
  petroleum, uranium, mercury, brown coal, lead, zinc, antimony,
  tungsten

Land use:
  arable land: 6%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 65% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 6,390 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: inadequate sanitation facilities;
  increasing levels of soil salinity; industrial pollution; excessive
  pesticides; part of the basin of the shrinking Aral Sea suffers from
  severe overutilization of available water for irrigation and
  associated pollution

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Ozone Layer
  Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 6,102,854 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 41% (male 1,250,344; female 1,224,355)
  15-64 years: 55% (male 1,661,488; female 1,681,839)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 122,065; female 162,763) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.43% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 27.46 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.85 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.34 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.75 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 114.78 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.28 years
  male: 61.15 years
  female: 67.57 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.48 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Tajikistani(s)
  adjective: Tajikistani

Ethnic groups: Tajik 64.9%, Uzbek 25%, Russian 3.5% (declining
  because of emigration), other 6.6%

Religions: Sunni Muslim 80%, Shi'a Muslim 5%

Languages: Tajik (official), Russian widely used in government
  and business

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 97% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Tajikistan
  conventional short form: Tajikistan
  local long form: Jumhurii Tojikiston
  local short form: none
  former: Tajik Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: TI

Government type: republic

Capital: Dushanbe

Administrative divisions: 2 oblasts (viloyatho, singular--viloyat)
  and one autonomous oblast* (viloyati mukhtori); Viloyati Mukhtori
  Kuhistoni Badakhshoni* (Khorugh--formerly Khorog), Viloyati Khatlon
  (Qurghonteppa--formerly Kurgan-Tyube), Viloyati Leninobod
  (Khujand--formerly Leninabad)
  note: the administrative center name follows in parentheses

Independence: 9 September 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: National Day, 9 September (1991)

Constitution: 6 November 1994

Legal system: based on civil law system; no judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Emomali RAHMONOV (since 6 November 1994;
  head of state and Supreme Assembly chairman since 19 November 1992)
  head of government: Prime Minister Yahyo AZIMOV (since 8 February
  1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president, approved
  by the Supreme Assembly for approval
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 6 November 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: Emomali RAHMONOV elected president; percent of
  vote--Emomali RAHMONOV 58%, Abdumalik ABDULLOJANOV 40%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Assembly or Majlisi Oli
  (181 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: last held 26 February and 12 March 1995 (next to be held
  NA 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; estimated seats by
  party--Communist Party and affiliates 100, People's Party 10, Party
  of People's Unity 6, Party of Economic and Political Renewal 1,
  other 64

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: Tajik Communist Party or CPT
  from the People's Party and Party of People's Unity; United Tajik

International organization participation: CCC, CIS, EAPC, EBRD,
  ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, Intelsat, IOC, IOM, ITU, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tajikistan does not have an
  embassy in the US, but has a mission at the UN: address--136 East
  ALIMOV

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Robert FINN
  embassy: temporarily collocated with the US Embassy in Almaty
  mailing address: use embassy street address
  telephone: NA
  FAX: NA

Flag description: three horizontal stripes of red (top), a wider
  stripe of white, and green; a gold crown surmounted by seven
  five-pointed gold stars is located in the center of the white stripe



Economy



Economy--overview: Tajikistan has the lowest per capita GDP among
  the former Soviet republics. Agriculture dominates the economy, with
  cotton the most important crop. Mineral resources, varied but
  limited in amount, include silver, gold, uranium, and tungsten.
  Industry consists only of a large aluminum plant, hydropower
  facilities, and small obsolete factories mostly in light industry
  and food processing. The Tajikistani economy has been gravely
  weakened by five years of civil conflict and by the loss of
  subsidies from Moscow and of markets for its products. Tajikistan
  thus depends on aid from Russia and Uzbekistan and on international
  humanitarian assistance for much of its basic subsistence needs.
  Even if the peace agreement of June 1997 is honored, the country
  faces major problems in integrating refugees and former combatants
  into the economy. Moreover, constant political turmoil and the
  continued dominance by former communist officials have impeded the
  introduction of meaningful economic reforms. Still in a
  post-conflict status, the future of Tajikistan's economy and the
  potential for attracting foreign investment depend upon stability
  and progress in the peace process.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$6 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$990 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 25%
  industry: 35%
  services: 40% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 46.3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 1.9 million (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and forestry 52%,
  manufacturing, mining, and construction 17%, services 31% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 5.7% includes only officially registered
  unemployed; also large numbers of underemployed workers and
  unregistered unemployed people (December 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: aluminum, zinc, lead, chemicals and fertilizers,
  cement, vegetable oil, metal-cutting machine tools, refrigerators
  and freezers

Industrial production growth rate: 8% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 13.555 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 4.09%
  hydro: 95.91%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 12.555 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 3.8 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 2.8 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, grain, fruits, grapes, vegetables;
  cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $740 million (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: cotton, aluminum, fruits, vegetable oil,
  textiles

Exports--partners: FSU 78%, Netherlands (1994)

Imports: $810 million (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: fuel, chemicals, machinery and transport
  equipment, textiles, foodstuffs

Imports--partners: FSU 55%, Switzerland, UK (1994)

Debt--external: $1 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $64.7 million (1995)

Currency: the Tajikistani ruble (TJR) = 100 tanga

Exchange rates: Tajikistani rubles (TJR) per US$1--998 (January
  1999), 350 (January 1997), 284 (January 1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 303,000 (1991 est.)

Telephone system: poorly developed and not well maintained; many
  towns are not reached by the national network
  domestic: cable and microwave radio relay
  international: linked by cable and microwave radio relay to other
  CIS republics, and by leased connections to the Moscow international
  gateway switch; Dushanbe linked by Intelsat to international gateway
  switch in Ankara (Turkey); satellite earth stations--1 Orbita and 2
  Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: 1 state-owned radio broadcast station
  of NA type

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 0 (there are, however, repeaters
  that relay programs from Russia, Iran, and Turkey) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 480 km in common carrier service; does not include industrial
  lines (1990)

Highways:
  total: 13,700 km
  paved: 11,330 km (note--these roads are said to be hard-surfaced,
  meaning that some are paved and some are all-weather gravel surfaced)
  unpaved: 2,370 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: natural gas 400 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 59 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 45
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 36 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, Air Defense Forces,
  Presidential National Guard, Security Forces (internal and border
  troops)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,478,551 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,211,514 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 65,001 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $19.3 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: most of the boundary with China in
  dispute; territorial dispute with Kyrgyzstan on northern boundary in
  Isfara Valley area

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivation of cannabis, mostly
  for domestic consumption; opium poppy cultivation negligible in 1998
  because of government eradication program; increasingly used as
  transshipment point for illicit drugs from Southwest Asia to Russia
  and Western Europe



======================================================================




@Tanzania
--------





Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, bordering the Indian Ocean, between
  Kenya and Mozambique

Geographic coordinates: 6 00 S, 35 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 945,090 sq km
  land: 886,040 sq km
  water: 59,050 sq km
  note: includes the islands of Mafia, Pemba, and Zanzibar

Area--comparative: slightly larger than twice the size of
  California

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,402 km
  border countries: Burundi 451 km, Kenya 769 km, Malawi 475 km,
  Mozambique 756 km, Rwanda 217 km, Uganda 396 km, Zambia 338 km

Coastline: 1,424 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: varies from tropical along coast to temperate in
  highlands

Terrain: plains along coast; central plateau; highlands in north,
  south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Kilimanjaro 5,895 m

Natural resources: hydropower, tin, phosphates, iron ore, coal,
  diamonds, gemstones, gold, natural gas, nickel

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 40%
  forests and woodland: 38%
  other: 18% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,500 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: the tsetse fly; flooding on the central plateau
  during the rainy season; drought

Environment--current issues: soil degradation; deforestation;
  desertification; destruction of coral reefs threatens marine
  habitats; recent droughts affected marginal agriculture

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: Kilimanjaro is highest point in Africa



People



Population: 31,270,820 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 44% (male 6,926,149; female 6,967,416)
  15-64 years: 53% (male 8,030,141; female 8,437,978)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 415,074; female 494,062) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.14% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 40.37 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.75 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.24 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.95 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 95.27 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 46.17 years
  male: 43.85 years
  female: 48.57 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 5.4 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Tanzanian(s)
  adjective: Tanzanian

Ethnic groups: mainland--native African 99% (of which 95% are
  Bantu consisting of more than 130 tribes), other 1% (consisting of
  Asian, European, and Arab); Zanzibar--Arab, native African, mixed
  Arab and native African

Religions: mainland--Christian 45%, Muslim 35%, indigenous beliefs
  20; Zanzibar--more than 99% Muslim

Languages: Kiswahili or Swahili (official), Kiunguju (name for
  Swahili in Zanzibar), English (official, primary language of
  commerce, administration, and higher education), Arabic (widely
  spoken in Zanzibar), many local languages
  note: Kiswahili (Swahili) is the mother tongue of the Bantu people
  living in Zanzibar and nearby coastal Tanzania; although Kiswahili
  is Bantu in structure and origin, its vocabulary draws on a variety
  of sources, including Arabic and English, and it has become the
  lingua franca of central and eastern Africa; the first language of
  most people is one of the local languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write Kiswahili (Swahili),
  English, or Arabic
  total population: 67.8%
  male: 79.4%
  female: 56.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: United Republic of Tanzania
  conventional short form: Tanzania
  former: United Republic of Tanganyika and Zanzibar

Data code: TZ

Government type: republic

Capital: Dar es Salaam
  note: some government offices have been transferred to Dodoma, which
  is planned as the new national capital; the National Assembly now
  meets there on regular basis

Administrative divisions: 25 regions; Arusha, Dar es Salaam,
  Dodoma, Iringa, Kigoma, Kilimanjaro, Lindi, Mara, Mbeya, Morogoro,
  Mtwara, Mwanza, Pemba North, Pemba South, Pwani, Rukwa, Ruvuma,
  Shinyanga, Singida, Tabora, Tanga, Zanzibar Central/South, Zanzibar
  North, Zanzibar Urban/West, Ziwa Magharibi
  note: Ziwa Magharibi may have been renamed Kagera

Independence: 26 April 1964; Tanganyika became independent 9
  December 1961 (from UK-administered UN trusteeship); Zanzibar became
  independent 19 December 1963 (from UK); Tanganyika united with
  Zanzibar 26 April 1964 to form the United Republic of Tanganyika and
  Zanzibar; renamed United Republic of Tanzania 29 October 1964

National holiday: Union Day, 26 April (1964)

Constitution: 25 April 1977; major revisions October 1984

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
  legislative acts limited to matters of interpretation; has not
  accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Benjamin William MKAPA (since 23 November
  1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 23 November 1995); note
  the president is both chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Benjamin William MKAPA (since 23
  November 1995); Vice President Omar Ali JUMA (since 23 November
  1995); note--the president is both chief of state and head of
  government
  note: Zanzibar elects a president who is head of government for
  matters internal to Zanzibar; Dr. Salmin AMOUR was elected to that
  office on 22 October 1995 in a popular election
  cabinet: Cabinet ministers, including the prime minister, are
  appointed by the president from among the members of the National
  Assembly
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ballot
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 29
  October-19 November 1995 (next to be held NA October 2000); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: percent of vote--Benjamin William MKAPA 62%, MREMA
  28%, LIPUMBA 6%, CHEYO 4%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Bunge (274
  seats--232 elected by popular vote, 37 allocated to women nominated
  by the president, five to members of the Zanzibar House of
  Representatives; members serve five-year terms); note --in addition
  to enacting laws that apply to the entire United Republic of
  Tanzania, the Assembly enacts laws that apply only to the mainland;
  Zanzibar has its own House of Representatives to make laws
  especially for Zanzibar (the Zanzibar House of Representatives has
  50 seats, directly elected by universal suffrage to serve five-year
  terms)
  elections: last held 29 October-19 November 1995 (next to be held NA
  October 2000)
  election results: National Assembly: percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--CCM 186, CUF 24, NCCR-Mageuzi 16, CHADEMA 3, UDP 3;
  Zanzibar House of Representatives: percent of vote by party--NA;
  seats by party--CCM 26, CUF 24

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal; High Court, judges appointed by
  the president

Political parties and leaders: Chama Cha Mapinduzi or CCM

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC,
  EADB, ECA, FAO, G- 6, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO, ITU, MONUA, NAM, OAU, OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mustafa Salim NYANG'ANYI
  chancery: 2139 R Street NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Charles R. STITH
  embassy: 285 Toure Drive, Dar es Salaam (temporary location)
  mailing address: P. O. Box 9123, Dar es Salaam

Flag description: divided diagonally by a yellow-edged black band
  from the lower hoist-side corner; the upper triangle (hoist side) is
  green and the lower triangle is blue



Economy



Economy--overview: Tanzania is one of the poorest countries in the
  world. The economy is heavily dependent on agriculture, which
  accounts for 56% of GDP, provides 85% of exports, and employs 90% of
  the work force. Topography and climatic conditions, however, limit
  cultivated crops to only 4% of the land area. Industry accounts for
  15% of GDP and is mainly limited to processing agricultural products
  and light consumer goods. The economic recovery program announced in
  mid-1986 has generated notable increases in agricultural production
  and financial support for the program by bilateral donors. The World
  Bank, the International Monetary Fund, and bilateral donors have
  provided funds to rehabilitate Tanzania's deteriorated economic
  infrastructure. Growth in 1991-98 has featured a pickup in
  industrial production and a substantial increase in output of
  minerals, led by gold. Natural gas exploration in the Rufiji Delta
  looks promising and production could start by 2002. Recent banking
  reforms have helped increase private sector growth and investment.
  Short-term economic progress also depends on curbing corruption.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$22.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$730 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 56%
  industry: 15%
  services: 29% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 51.1% (1991 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.9%
  highest 10%: 30.2% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 13.5% (1998)

Labor force: 13.495 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 90%, industry and commerce
  10% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $700 million
  expenditures: $1 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (FY98/99 est.)

Industries: primarily agricultural processing (sugar, beer,
  cigarettes, sisal twine), diamond and gold mining, oil refining,
  shoes, cement, textiles, wood products, fertilizer, salt

Industrial production growth rate: 0.4% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 1.82 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 12.09%
  hydro: 87.91%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.82 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, sisal, tea, cotton, pyrethrum
  (insecticide made from chrysanthemums), cashew nuts, tobacco, cloves
  (Zanzibar), corn, wheat, cassava (tapioca), bananas, fruits,
  vegetables; cattle, sheep, goats

Exports: $952 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: coffee, manufactured goods, cotton, cashew
  nuts, minerals, tobacco, sisal (1996)

Exports--partners: India 9.8%, Germany 8.9%, Japan 7.8%, Malaysia
  6.5%, Rwanda 5.2%, Netherlands 4.7% (1997)

Imports: $1.46 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: consumer goods, machinery and transportation
  equipment, industrial raw materials, crude oil

Imports--partners: South Africa 12.9%, Kenya 9.6%, UK 8.7%, Saudi
  Arabia 6.6%, Japan 4.9%, China 4.6% (1997)

Debt--external: $8.3 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $860.9 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Tanzanian shilling (TSh) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Tanzanian shillings (TSh) per US$1--668.3
  (February 1999), 664.67 (1998), 612.12 (1997), 579.98 (1996), 574.76
  (1995), 509.63 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 88,000 (1994)

Telephone system: fair system operating below capacity
  domestic: open wire, microwave radio relay, tropospheric scatter
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 12, FM 4, shortwave 0

Radios: 740,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1998)

Televisions: 60,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,569 km (1995)
  narrow gauge: 2,600 km 1.000-m gauge; 969 km 1.067-m gauge
  note: the Tanzania-Zambia Railway Authority (TAZARA), which operates
  1,860 km of 1.067-m narrow gauge track between Dar es Salaam and
  Kapiri Mposhi in Zambia (of which 969 km are in Tanzania and 891 km
  are in Zambia) is not a part of Tanzania Railways Corporation;
  because of the difference in gauge, this system does not connect to
  Tanzania Railways

Highways:
  total: 88,200 km
  paved: 3,704 km
  unpaved: 84,496 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: Lake Tanganyika, Lake Victoria, Lake Nyasa

Pipelines: crude oil 982 km

Ports and harbors: Bukoba, Dar es Salaam, Kigoma, Kilwa Masoko,
  Lindi, Mtwara, Mwanza, Pangani, Tanga, Wete, Zanzibar

Merchant marine:
  total: 7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 20,618 GRT/26,321 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 2, oil tanker 2, passenger-cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 129 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 10
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 119
  over 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 18
  914 to 1,523 m: 65
  under 914 m: 35 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Tanzanian People's Defense Force or TPDF
  (includes Army, Navy, and Air Force), paramilitary Police Field
  Force Unit, Militia

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 7,119,106 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,120,617 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $21 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.2% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute with Malawi over the boundary in
  Lake Nyasa (Lake Malawi)

Illicit drugs: growing role in transshipment of Southwest and
  Southeast Asian heroin and South American cocaine destined for
  European and US markets and of South Asian methaqualone bound for
  Southern Africa



======================================================================




@Thailand
--------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Andaman Sea and the
  Gulf of Thailand, southeast of Burma

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 100 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 514,000 sq km
  land: 511,770 sq km
  water: 2,230 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of Wyoming

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,863 km
  border countries: Burma 1,800 km, Cambodia 803 km, Laos 1,754 km,
  Malaysia 506 km

Coastline: 3,219 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy, warm, cloudy southwest monsoon (mid-May
  to September); dry, cool northeast monsoon (November to mid-March);
  southern isthmus always hot and humid

Terrain: central plain; Khorat Plateau in the east; mountains
  elsewhere

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Gulf of Thailand 0 m
  highest point: Doi Inthanon 2,576 m

Natural resources: tin, rubber, natural gas, tungsten, tantalum,
  timber, lead, fish, gypsum, lignite, fluorite

Land use:
  arable land: 34%
  permanent crops: 6%
  permanent pastures: 2%
  forests and woodland: 26%
  other: 32% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 44,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: land subsidence in Bangkok area resulting from
  the depletion of the water table; droughts

Environment--current issues: air pollution from vehicle emissions;
  water pollution from organic and factory wastes; deforestation; soil
  erosion; wildlife populations threatened by illegal hunting

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: controls only land route from Asia to Malaysia
  and Singapore



People



Population: 60,609,046 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 7,364,411; female 7,095,428)
  15-64 years: 70% (male 20,878,602; female 21,493,735)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 1,664,113; female 2,112,757) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.93% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.46 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.16 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.79 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 29.54 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.21 years
  male: 65.58 years
  female: 73.01 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.82 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Thai (singular and plural)
  adjective: Thai

Ethnic groups: Thai 75%, Chinese 14%, other 11%

Religions: Buddhism 95%, Muslim 3.8%, Christianity 0.5%, Hinduism
  0.1%, other 0.6% (1991)

Languages: Thai, English (secondary language of the elite),
  ethnic and regional dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 93.8%
  male: 96%
  female: 91.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Thailand
  conventional short form: Thailand

Data code: TH

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: Bangkok

Administrative divisions: 76 provinces (changwat, singular and
  plural); Amnat Charoen, Ang Thong, Buriram, Chachoengsao, Chai Nat,
  Chaiyaphum, Chanthaburi, Chiang Mai, Chiang Rai, Chon Buri,
  Chumphon, Kalasin, Kamphaeng Phet, Kanchanaburi, Khon Kaen, Krabi,
  Krung Thep Mahanakhon (Bangkok), Lampang, Lamphun, Loei, Lop Buri,
  Mae Hong Son, Maha Sarakham, Mukdahan, Nakhon Nayok, Nakhon Pathom,
  Nakhon Phanom, Nakhon Ratchasima, Nakhon Sawan, Nakhon Si Thammarat,
  Nan, Narathiwat, Nong Bua Lamphu, Nong Khai, Nonthaburi, Pathum
  Thani, Pattani, Phangnga, Phatthalung, Phayao, Phetchabun,
  Phetchaburi, Phichit, Phitsanulok, Phra Nakhon Si Ayutthaya, Phrae,
  Phuket, Prachin Buri, Prachuap Khiri Khan, Ranong, Ratchaburi,
  Rayong, Roi Et, Sa Kaeo, Sakon Nakhon, Samut Prakan, Samut Sakhon,
  Samut Songkhram, Sara Buri, Satun, Sing Buri, Sisaket, Songkhla,
  Sukhothai, Suphan Buri, Surat Thani, Surin, Tak, Trang, Trat, Ubon
  Ratchathani, Udon Thani, Uthai Thani, Uttaradit, Yala, Yasothon

Independence: 1238 (traditional founding date; never colonized)

National holiday: Birthday of His Majesty the King, 5 December
  (1927)

Constitution: new constitution signed by King PHUMIPHON on 11
  October 1997

Legal system: based on civil law system, with influences of
  common law; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King PHUMIPHON Adunyadet (since 9 June 1946)
  head of government: Prime Minister CHUAN Likphai (since 15 November
  1997)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers
  note: there is also a Privy Council
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister
  designated from among the members of the House of Representatives;
  following a national election for the House of Representatives, the
  leader of the party that can organize a majority coalition usually
  becomes prime minister

Legislative branch: bicameral National Assembly or Rathasapha
  consists of the Senate or Wuthisapha (a 253-member appointed body
  which will be phased into a 200-member elected body starting in
  March 2000; members serve six-year terms) and the House of
  Representatives or Sapha Phuthaen Ratsadon (currently has 391
  members, but will become a 500-member body after the next election;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 17 November 1996 (next
  scheduled to be held by 17 November 2000, but may be held earlier)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote by
  party--NA; seats by party--NAP 125, DP 123, NDP 52, TNP 39, SAP 20,
  TCP 18, SP 8, LDP 4, MP 2

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (Sandika), judges appointed by the
  monarch

Political parties and leaders: Thai Nation Party or TNP (Chat
  Yoobamrung, SOPHON Petchsavang]

International organization participation: APEC, AsDB, ASEAN, CCC,
  CP, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM,
  ISO, ITU, NAM, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM,
  UNMIBH, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador NIT Phibunsongkhram
  chancery: 1024 Wisconsin Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Richard HECKLINGER
  embassy: 120 Wireless Road, Bangkok
  mailing address: APO AP 96546
  consulate(s) general: Chiang Mai

Flag description: five horizontal bands of red (top), white, blue
  (double width), white, and red



Economy



Economy--overview: After months of speculative pressure on the
  Thai baht, the government decided to float the currency in July
  1997, the symbolic beginning of the country's current economic
  crisis. The crisis--which began in the country's financial sector--has
  spread throughout the economy. After years of rapid economic growth
  averaging 9% earlier this decade, the Thai economy contracted 0.4%
  in 1997 and shrunk another 8.5% in 1998. In the years before the
  crisis, Thailand ran persistent current account deficits. With the
  depreciation of the Thai baht and the collapse of domestic demand,
  however, imports have fallen off sharply--by more than 33%--and
  Thailand posted a trade surplus of approximately $12 billion in
  1998. Foreign investment for new projects, the long-time catalyst of
  Thailand's economic growth, has also slowed. The CHUAN government
  has closely adhered to the economic recovery program prescribed by
  the IMF. The cooperation afforded Thailand stability in the value of
  its currency in the second half of 1998 and helped replenish foreign
  reserves. Tough measures--including passage of adequate bankruptcy
  and foreclosure legislation as well as privatization of state-owned
  companies and recapitalization of the financial sector--remain
  undone. Bangkok is also trying to establish a social safety net for
  those displaced by the current economic crisis and is working to
  increase the quality of Thailand's labor force.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$369 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -8.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,100 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 12%
  industry: 39%
  services: 49% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 13.1% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.5%
  highest 10%: 37.1% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4.3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 32.6 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 54%, industry 15%,
  services (including government) 31% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: 4.5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $24 billion
  expenditures: $25 billion, including capital expenditures of $8
  billion (FY96/97)

Industries: tourism; textiles and garments, agricultural
  processing, beverages, tobacco, cement, light manufacturing, such as
  jewelry; electric appliances and components, computers and parts,
  integrated circuits, furniture, plastics; world's second-largest
  tungsten producer and third-largest tin producer

Industrial production growth rate: -10% (1998)

Electricity--production: 82 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 91.46%
  hydro: 8.54%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 82.561 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 79 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 640 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: rice, cassava (tapioca), rubber, corn,
  sugarcane, coconuts, soybeans

Exports: $51.6 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: manufactures 82% (computers and parts 16%),
  agricultural products and fisheries 14% (1997)

Exports--partners: US 19.6%, Japan 14.9%, Singapore 11%, Hong Kong
  5.7%, Malaysia 4.3%, UK 3.7% (1997)

Imports: $73.5 billion (c.i.f., 1996)

Imports--commodities: capital goods 50%, intermediate goods and
  raw materials 22%, consumer goods 10.2%, fuels 8.7% (1997)

Imports--partners: Japan 25.6%, US 13.9%, Singapore 5%, Taiwan
  4.6%, Germany 4.5%, Malaysia 4.1% (1997)

Debt--external: $90 billion (1997)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.732 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 baht (B) = 100 satang

Exchange rates: baht (B) per US$1--36.624 (January 1999), 41.359
  (1998), 31.364 (1997), 25.343 (1996), 24.915 (1995), 25.150 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 1,553,200 (1994 est.)

Telephone system: service to general public adequate, but
  investments in technological upgrades reduced by recession; bulk of
  service to government activities provided by multichannel cable and
  microwave radio relay network
  domestic: microwave radio relay and multichannel cable; domestic
  satellite system being developed
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 200 (in government-controlled
  network), FM 100 (in government-controlled network), shortwave 0

Radios: 10.75 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 5 (all in Bangkok; in addition,
  there are 131 repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 3.3 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 4,623 km
  narrow gauge: 4,623 km 1.000-m gauge (99 km double track)

Highways:
  total: 64,600 km
  paved: 62,985 km
  unpaved: 1,615 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 3,999 km principal waterways; 3,701 km with navigable
  depths of 0.9 m or more throughout the year; numerous minor
  waterways navigable by shallow-draft native craft

Pipelines: petroleum products 67 km; natural gas 350 km

Ports and harbors: Bangkok, Laem Chabang, Pattani, Phuket,
  Sattahip, Si Racha, Songkhla

Merchant marine:
  total: 293 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,848,626
  GRT/2,989,382 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 41, cargo 135, chemical tanker 5, combination
  bulk 1, container 13, liquefied gas tanker 17, multifunction
  large-load carrier 3, oil tanker 61, passenger 1, refrigerated cargo
  11, roll-on/roll-off cargo 2, short-sea passenger 1, specialized
  tanker 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 107 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 56
  over 3,047 m: 6
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 17
  914 to 1,523 m: 20
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 51
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 15
  under 914 m: 35 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Royal Thai Army, Royal Thai Navy (includes
  Royal Thai Marine Corps), Royal Thai Air Force, Paramilitary Forces

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 17,486,014 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 10,536,417 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 585,562 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.95 billion (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.5% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: parts of the border with Laos are
  indefinite; maritime boundary with Vietnam resolved, August 1997;
  parts of border with Cambodia are indefinite; maritime boundary with
  Cambodia not clearly defined; sporadic conflict with Burma over
  alignment of border

Illicit drugs: a minor producer of opium, heroin, and marijuana;
  major illicit transit point for heroin en route to the international
  drug market from Burma and Laos; eradication efforts have reduced
  the area of cannabis cultivation and shifted some production to
  neighboring countries; opium poppy cultivation has been reduced by
  eradication efforts; also a drug money-laundering center; minor role
  in amphetamine production for regional consumption; increasing
  indigenous abuse of methamphetamines and heroin



======================================================================




@Togo
----





Geography



Location: Western Africa, bordering the Bight of Benin, between
  Benin and Ghana

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 1 10 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 56,790 sq km
  land: 54,390 sq km
  water: 2,400 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than West Virginia

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,647 km
  border countries: Benin 644 km, Burkina Faso 126 km, Ghana 877 km

Coastline: 56 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 30 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid in south; semiarid in north

Terrain: gently rolling savanna in north; central hills; southern
  plateau; low coastal plain with extensive lagoons and marshes

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Pic Agou 986 m

Natural resources: phosphates, limestone, marble

Land use:
  arable land: 38%
  permanent crops: 7%
  permanent pastures: 4%
  forests and woodland: 17%
  other: 34% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 70 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: hot, dry harmattan wind can reduce visibility in
  north during winter; periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: deforestation attributable to
  slash-and-burn agriculture and the use of wood for fuel; recent
  droughts affecting agriculture

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 5,081,413 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 1,229,026; female 1,218,956)
  15-64 years: 50% (male 1,223,371; female 1,299,519)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 49,890; female 60,651) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.51% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 44.78 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.69 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 77.55 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 59.25 years
  male: 56.93 years
  female: 61.64 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.53 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Togolese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Togolese

Ethnic groups: native African (37 tribes; largest and most
  important are Ewe, Mina, and Kabre) 99%, European and
  Syrian-Lebanese less than 1%

Religions: indigenous beliefs 70%, Christian 20%, Muslim 10%

Languages: French (official and the language of commerce), Ewe
  and Mina (the two major African languages in the south), Kabye
  (sometimes spelled Kabiye) and Dagomba (the two major African
  languages in the north)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 51.7%
  male: 67%
  female: 37% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Togolese Republic
  conventional short form: Togo
  local long form: Republique Togolaise
  local short form: none
  former: French Togo

Data code: TO

Government type: republic under transition to multiparty
  democratic rule

Capital: Lome

Administrative divisions: 5 regions (regions, singular--region);
  De La Kara, Des Plateaux, Des Savanes, Du Centre, Maritime

Independence: 27 April 1960 (from French-administered UN
  trusteeship)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 April (1960)

Constitution: multiparty draft constitution approved by High
  Council of the Republic 1 July 1992; adopted by public referendum 27
  September 1992

Legal system: French-based court system

Suffrage: NA years of age; universal adult

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Gen. Gnassingbe EYADEMA (since 14 April
  1967)
  head of government: Prime Minister Kwassi KLUTSE (since August 1996)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president and the
  prime minister
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 21 June 1998 (next to be held NA 2003); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: Gnassingbe EYADEMA reelected president; percent of
  vote--Gnassingbe EYADEMA 52.13%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (81 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 6 and 20 February 1994 (next to be held NA
  February 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--CAR
  36, RPT 35, UTD 7, UJD 2, CFN 1
  note: as a result of defections from the CAR to the RPT and the
  merging of the UJD with the RPT, representation in the National
  Assembly in August 1997 was RPT 42, CAR 32, UTD 5, CFN 1,
  independent 1

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal or Cour d'Appel; Supreme Court
  or Cour Supreme

Political parties and leaders: Rally of the Togolese People or
  FOLLY]; Pan-African Sociodemocrats Group or GSP, an alliance of
  note: Rally of the Togolese People or RPT, led by President EYADEMA,
  was the only party until the formation of multiple parties was
  legalized 12 April 1991

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AfDB, CCC,
  ECA, ECOWAS, Entente, FAO, FZ, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM,
  IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU,
  MINURCA, MINURSO, MIPONUH, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNIDO, UPU, WADB, WAEMU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Akosita FINEANGANOFO
  chancery: 2208 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Brenda Brown SCHOONOVER
  embassy: Rue Pelletier Caventou and Rue Vauban, Lome
  mailing address: B. P. 852, Lome

Flag description: five equal horizontal bands of green (top and
  bottom) alternating with yellow; there is a white five-pointed star
  on a red square in the upper hoist-side corner; uses the popular
  pan-African colors of Ethiopia



Economy



Economy--overview: This small sub-Saharan economy is heavily
  dependent on both commercial and subsistence agriculture, which
  provides employment for 65% of the labor force. Cocoa, coffee, and
  cotton together generate about 30% of export earnings. Togo is
  self-sufficient in basic foodstuffs when harvests are normal, with
  occasional regional supply difficulties. In the industrial sector,
  phosphate mining is by far the most important activity, although it
  has suffered from the collapse of world phosphate prices and
  increased foreign competition. Togo serves as a regional commercial
  and trade center. The government's decade-long effort, supported by
  the World Bank and the IMF, to implement economic reform measures,
  encourage foreign investment, and bring revenues in line with
  expenditures has stalled. Political unrest, including private and
  public sector strikes throughout 1992 and 1993, jeopardized the
  reform program, shrunk the tax base, and disrupted vital economic
  activity. The 12 January 1994 devaluation of the currency by 50%
  provided an important impetus to renewed structural adjustment;
  these efforts were facilitated by the end of strife in 1994 and a
  return to overt political calm. Progress depends on following
  through on privatization, increased transparency in government
  accounting to accommodate increased social service outlays, and
  possible downsizing of the military, on which the regime has
  depended to stay in place. However, in late 1998 the EU suspended
  aid and trade preferences for Togo because of grave doubts over the
  conduct of the presidential elections. The World Bank also suspended
  its disbursements at yearend 1998 because Togo was unable to pay its
  arrears.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,670 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 32%
  industry: 23%
  services: 45% (1995)

Population below poverty line: 32.3% (1987-89 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.2% (1997)

Labor force: 1.538 million (1993 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry 5%, services
  30% (1998 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $232 million
  expenditures: $252 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: phosphate mining, agricultural processing, cement;
  handicrafts, textiles, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 13.6% (1995)

Electricity--production: 88 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 93.18%
  hydro: 6.82%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 408 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 320 million kWh (1996)
  note: imports electricity from Ghana

Agriculture--products: coffee, cocoa, cotton, yams, cassava
  (tapioca), corn, beans, rice, millet, sorghum; livestock; fish

Exports: $345 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: cotton, phosphates, coffee, cocoa

Exports--partners: Canada 7.6%, Taiwan 7.1%, Nigeria 6.8%, South
  Africa 5.2% (1996 est.)

Imports: $400 million (f.o.b., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, consumer goods,
  petroleum products

Imports--partners: Ghana 19.1%, France 10.8%, China 8.2%, Cameroon
  6.8% (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $1.5 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $201.1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Communaute Financiere Africaine franc (CFAF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Communaute Financiere Africaine francs (CFAF) per
  US$1--560.01 (December 1998), 589.95 (1998), 583.67 (1997), 511.55
  (1996), 499.15 (1995), 555.20 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 47,000 (10,000 cellular telephone subscribers) (1998
  est.)

Telephone system: fair system based on network of microwave radio
  relay routes supplemented by open-wire lines and cellular system
  domestic: microwave radio relay and open-wire lines for conventional
  system; cellular system has capacity of 10,000 telephones
  international: satellite earth stations--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)
  and 1 Symphonie

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 795,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 3 (in addition, there are two
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 24,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 525 km (1995)
  narrow gauge: 525 km 1.000-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 7,520 km
  paved: 2,376 km
  unpaved: 5,144 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 50 km Mono river

Ports and harbors: Kpeme, Lome

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 7
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Gendarmerie

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,102,453 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 578,109 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $27 million (1996)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2% (1996)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transit hub for Nigerian heroin and cocaine
  traffickers



======================================================================




@Tokelau
-------





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of three islands in the South Pacific
  Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 9 00 S, 172 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 10 sq km
  land: 10 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 17 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 101 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by trade winds (April to November)

Terrain: low-lying coral atolls enclosing large lagoons

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 0% (soil is thin and infertile)
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: lies in Pacific typhoon belt

Environment--current issues: very limited natural resources and
  overcrowding are contributing to emigration to New Zealand

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA



People



Population: 1,471 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: -0.92% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: NA births/1,000 population

Death rate: NA deaths/1,000 population

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA
  male: NA
  female: NA

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Tokelauan(s)
  adjective: Tokelauan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian

Religions: Congregational Christian Church 70%, Roman Catholic
  28%, other 2%
  note: on Atafu, all Congregational Christian Church of Samoa; on
  Nukunonu, all Roman Catholic; on Fakaofo, both denominations, with
  the Congregational Christian Church predominant

Languages: Tokelauan (a Polynesian language), English



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Tokelau

Data code: TL

Dependency status: territory of New Zealand; note--Tokelauans are
  drafting a constitution, developing institutions and patterns of
  self-government as Tokelau moves toward free association with
  Wellington

Government type: NA

Capital: none; each atoll has its own administrative center

Administrative divisions: none (territory of New Zealand)

Independence: none (territory of New Zealand)

National holiday: Waitangi Day, 6 February (1840) (Treaty of
  Waitangi established British sovereignty over New Zealand)

Constitution: administered under the Tokelau Islands Act of 1948,
  as amended in 1970

Legal system: British and local statutes

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); the UK
  and New Zealand are represented by Administrator Lindsay WATT (since
  NA March 1993)
  head of government: Aliki Faipule FALIMATEAO (since NA 1997)
  cabinet: the Council of Faipule, consisting of three elected
  leaders, one from each atoll; functions as a cabinet
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; administrator appointed
  by the Minister of Foreign Affairs and Trade in New Zealand; the
  head of government is chosen from the Council of Faipule and serves
  a one-year term

Legislative branch: unicameral General Fono (45 seats--15 from
  each of the three atolls; members chosen by each atoll's Council of
  Elders or Taupulega to serve three-year terms); note--the Tokelau
  Amendment Act of 1996 confers legislative power on the General Fono

Judicial branch: Supreme Court in New Zealand exercises civil and
  criminal jurisdiction

Political parties and leaders: none

International organization participation: SPC, WHO (associate)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of New
  Zealand)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of New
  Zealand)

Flag description: the flag of New Zealand is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Tokelau's small size (three villages),
  isolation, and lack of resources greatly restrain economic
  development and confine agriculture to the subsistence level. The
  people must rely on aid from New Zealand to maintain public
  services, annual aid being substantially greater than GDP. The
  principal sources of revenue come from sales of copra, postage
  stamps, souvenir coins, and handicrafts. Money is also remitted to
  families from relatives in New Zealand.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.5 million (1993 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,000 (1993 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $430,830
  expenditures: $2.8 million, including capital expenditures of
  $37,300 (1987 est.)

Industries: small-scale enterprises for copra production, wood
  work, plaited craft goods; stamps, coins; fishing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: coconuts, copra, breadfruit, papayas,
  bananas; pigs, poultry, goats

Exports: $98,000 (f.o.b., 1983)

Exports--commodities: stamps, copra, handicrafts

Exports--partners: NZ

Imports: $323,400 (c.i.f., 1983)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, building materials, fuel

Imports--partners: NZ

Debt--external: $0

Economic aid--recipient: $3.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 New Zealand dollar (NZ$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: New Zealand dollars (NZ$) per US$1--1.8560
  (January 1999), 1.8629 (1998), 1.5083 (1997), 1.4543 (1996), 1.5235
  (1995), 1.6844 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: radiotelephone service between islands
  international: radiotelephone service to Western Samoa;
  government-regulated telephone service (TeleTok), with three
  satellite earth stations, established in 1997

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA
  note: each atoll has a radio broadcast station of NA type that
  broadcasts shipping and weather reports

Radios: 1,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Merchant marine: none

Airports: none; lagoon landings by amphibious aircraft from
  Western Samoa



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of New Zealand



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Tonga
-----





Geography



Location: Oceania, archipelago in the South Pacific Ocean, about
  two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 175 00 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 748 sq km
  land: 718 sq km
  water: 30 sq km

Area--comparative: four times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 419 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; modified by trade winds; warm season (December
  to May), cool season (May to December)

Terrain: most islands have limestone base formed from uplifted
  coral formation; others have limestone overlying volcanic base

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location on Kao Island 1,033 m

Natural resources: fish, fertile soil

Land use:
  arable land: 24%
  permanent crops: 43%
  permanent pastures: 6%
  forests and woodland: 11%
  other: 16% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: cyclones (October to April); earthquakes and
  volcanic activity on Fonuafo'ou

Environment--current issues: deforestation results as more and
  more land is being cleared for agriculture and settlement; some
  damage to coral reefs from starfish and indiscriminate coral and
  shell collectors; overhunting threatens native sea turtle populations

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: archipelago of 170 islands (36 inhabited)



People



Population: 109,082 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 0.8% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.92 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.19 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 37.93 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 69.78 years
  male: 67.73 years
  female: 72.22 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.56 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Tongan(s)
  adjective: Tongan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian, Europeans about 300

Religions: Christian (Free Wesleyan Church claims over 30,000
  adherents)

Languages: Tongan, English

Literacy:
  definition: can read and write Tongan and/or English
  total population: 98.5%
  male: 98.4%
  female: 98.7% (1996 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Kingdom of Tonga
  conventional short form: Tonga
  former: Friendly Islands

Data code: TN

Government type: hereditary constitutional monarchy

Capital: Nuku'alofa

Administrative divisions: three island groups; Ha'apai,
  Tongatapu, Vava'u

Independence: 4 June 1970 (emancipation from UK protectorate)

National holiday: Emancipation Day, 4 June (1970)

Constitution: 4 November 1875, revised 1 January 1967

Legal system: based on English law

Suffrage: 21 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: King Taufa'ahau TUPOU IV (since 16 December 1965)
  head of government: Prime Minister Baron VAEA (since 22 August 1991)
  and Deputy Prime Minister S. Langi KAVALIKU (since 22 August 1991)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the monarch
  note: there is also a Privy Council that consists of the monarch and
  the Cabinet
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; prime minister and
  deputy prime minister appointed for life by the monarch

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Assembly or Fale Alea
  (30 seats--12 reserved for cabinet ministers sitting ex officio, nine
  for nobles selected by the country's 33 nobles, and nine elected by
  popular vote; members serve three-year terms)
  elections: last held 24-25 January 1996 (next to be held NA March
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--7 proreform, 2
  traditionalist

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  monarch; Privy Council with the addition of the chief justice of the
  Supreme Court sits as the Court of Appeal

Political parties and leaders: Tonga People's Party [Viliami
  FUKOFUKA]

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C, ESCAP,
  FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, IMF,
  Intelsat (nonsignatory user), Interpol, IOC, ITU, Sparteca, SPC,
  SPF, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tonga does not have an
  embassy in the US; Ambassador Akosita FINEANGANOFO, resides in
  London; address: Embassy of the Kingdom of Tonga, c/o Tonga High
  consulate(s) general: San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Tonga; the ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Tonga

Flag description: red with a bold red cross on a white rectangle
  in the upper hoist-side corner



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy's base is agriculture, which
  contributes 32% to GDP. Squash, coconuts, bananas, and vanilla beans
  are the main crops, and agricultural exports make up two-thirds of
  total exports. The country must import a high proportion of its
  food, mainly from New Zealand. The industrial sector accounts for
  only 10% of GDP. Tourism is the primary source of hard currency
  earnings. The country remains dependent on sizable external aid and
  remittances to offset its trade deficit. The government is
  emphasizing the development of the private sector, especially the
  encouragement of investment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$232 million (FY97/98 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1.5% (FY97/98 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,100 (FY97/98 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 32%
  industry: 10%
  services: 58% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 36,665 (1994)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 11.8% (FY93/94)

Budget:
  revenues: $49 million
  expenditures: $120 million, including capital expenditures of $75
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: tourism, fishing

Industrial production growth rate: 1.9% (FY95/96)

Electricity--production: 30 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 30 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: squash, coconuts, copra, bananas, vanilla
  beans, cocoa, coffee, ginger, black pepper; fish

Exports: $11.9 million (f.o.b., FY97/98)

Exports--commodities: squash, fish, vanilla, root crops, coconut
  oil

Exports--partners: Japan 43%, US 19%, Canada 14%, NZ 5%, Australia
  5% (1996 est.)

Imports: $78.9 million (f.o.b., FY97/98)

Imports--commodities: food products, live animals, machinery and
  transport equipment, manufactures, fuels, chemicals

Imports--partners: NZ 34%, Australia 16%, US 10%, UK 8%, Japan 6%
  (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $62 million (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $38.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 pa'anga (T$) = 100 seniti

Exchange rates: pa'anga (T$) per US$1--1.6171 (December 1998),
  1.4921 (1998), 1.2635 (1997), 1.2323 (1996), 1.2709 (1995), 1.3202
  (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 6,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 66,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 2,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 680 km
  paved: 184 km
  unpaved: 496 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Neiafu, Nuku'alofa, Pangai

Merchant marine:
  total: 7 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 17,754 GRT/25,969 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 1, cargo 2, chemical tanker 1, liquefied gas
  tanker 2, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Tonga Defense Services (includes, Royal Tongan
  Marines, Tongan Royal Guards, Maritime Force, Police); note--a new
  Air Wing which will be subordinate to the Defense Ministry is being
  developed

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Trinidad and Tobago
-------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, northeast of Venezuela

Geographic coordinates: 11 00 N, 61 00 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 5,130 sq km
  land: 5,130 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 362 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the outer edge of the continental
  margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; rainy season (June to December)

Terrain: mostly plains with some hills and low mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: El Cerro del Aripo 940 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, asphalt

Land use:
  arable land: 15%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 2%
  forests and woodland: 46%
  other: 28% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 220 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: outside usual path of hurricanes and other
  tropical storms

Environment--current issues: water pollution from agricultural
  chemicals, industrial wastes, and raw sewage; oil pollution of
  beaches; deforestation; soil erosion

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto
  Protocol, Endangered Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 1,102,096 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 27% (male 150,862; female 144,589)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 377,894; female 346,375)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 37,001; female 45,375) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -1.35% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.46 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.14 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -19.8 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.09 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.82 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 18.56 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 70.66 years
  male: 68.19 years
  female: 73.19 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.06 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Trinidadian(s), Tobagonian(s)
  adjective: Trinidadian, Tobagonian

Ethnic groups: black 40%, East Indian (a local term--primarily
  immigrants from northern India) 40.3%, mixed 14%, white 1%, Chinese
  1%, other 3.7%

Religions: Roman Catholic 32.2%, Hindu 24.3%, Anglican 14.4%,
  other Protestant 14%, Muslim 6%, none or unknown 9.1%

Languages: English (official), Hindi, French, Spanish

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97.9%
  male: 98.8%
  female: 97% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Trinidad and Tobago
  conventional short form: Trinidad and Tobago

Data code: TD

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Port-of-Spain

Administrative divisions: 8 counties, 3 municipalities*, and 1
  ward**; Arima*, Caroni, Mayaro, Nariva, Port-of-Spain*, Saint
  Andrew, Saint David, Saint George, Saint Patrick, San Fernando*,
  Tobago**, Victoria

Independence: 31 August 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 31 August (1962)

Constitution: 1 August 1976

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
  legislative acts in the Supreme Court; has not accepted compulsory
  ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Arthur Napoleon Raymond ROBINSON (since 19
  March 1997)
  head of government: Prime Minister Basdeo PANDAY (since 9 November
  1995)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed from among the members of Parliament
  elections: president elected by an electoral college, which consists
  of the members of the Senate and House of Representatives, for a
  five-year term; election last held NA February 1997 (next to be held
  NA 2002); prime minister appointed from among the members of
  Parliament; following legislative elections, the leader of the
  majority party in the House of Representatives is usually appointed
  prime minister
  election results: Arthur Napoleon Raymond ROBINSON elected
  president; percent of electoral college vote--69%

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of the Senate
  (31 seats; members appointed by the president for a maximum term of
  five years) and the House of Representatives (36 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: House of Representatives--last held 6 November 1995 (next
  to be held by December 2000)
  election results: House of Representatives--percent of vote--PNM 52%,
  UNC 42.2%, NAR 5.2%; seats by party--PNM 15, UNC 19, NAR 1,
  independent 1; note--the UNC formed a coalition with the NAR
  note: Tobago has a unicameral House of Assembly, with 15 members
  serving four-year terms

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal (judges are appointed by the
  president on the advice of the prime minister); Supreme Court
  (judges are appointed by the president on the advice of the prime
  minister)

Political parties and leaders: People's National Movement or PNM

International organization participation: ACP, C, Caricom, CCC,
  CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G-24, G-77, IADB, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA,
  IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO,
  ITU, LAES, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNU,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Michael A. ARNEAUD
  chancery: 1708 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Miami and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edward E. SHUMAKER, III
  embassy: 15 Queen's Park West, Port-of-Spain
  mailing address: P. O. Box 752, Port-of-Spain

Flag description: red with a white-edged black diagonal band from
  the upper hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: Trinidad and Tobago has earned a reputation as
  an excellent investment site for international businesses.
  Successful economic reforms were implemented in 1995, and foreign
  investment and trade are flourishing. Unemployment--a main cause of
  the country's socioeconomic problems--is high, but has decreased to
  its lowest point in six years. An investment boom in the energy
  sector led to a surge in imports in 1997. The resulting trade
  deficit is expected to return to a surplus once construction is
  completed and the plants come on line. The petrochemical sector has
  spurred growth in other related sectors, reinforcing the
  government's commitment to economic diversification. Tourism is a
  major foreign exchange earner, with 260,000 arrivals in 1995, 80%
  from Europe.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.85 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4.3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$8,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2.2%
  industry: 44%
  services: 53.8% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 21% (1992 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.7% (1997)

Labor force: 541,000 (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: construction and utilities 12.4%,
  manufacturing, mining, and quarrying 14%, agriculture 9.5%, services
  64.1% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 14% (June 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.59 billion
  expenditures: $1.54 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $165.8 million (1997)

Industries: petroleum, chemicals, tourism, food processing,
  cement, beverage, cotton textiles

Industrial production growth rate: 7.5% (1995)

Electricity--production: 4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 4 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cocoa, sugarcane, rice, citrus, coffee,
  vegetables; poultry

Exports: $2.4 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: petroleum and petroleum products, chemicals,
  steel products, fertilizer, sugar, cocoa, coffee, citrus, flowers

Exports--partners: US 39.7%, Caricom countries 24.5%, Latin
  America 10.3%, EU 8.2% (1997)

Imports: $3.3 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transportation equipment,
  manufactured goods, food, live animals

Imports--partners: US 52.2%, Latin America 16.5%, EU 13.8%, Japan
  3.6% (1997)

Debt--external: $2.8 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $121.4 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Trinidad and Tobago dollar (TT$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Trinidad and Tobago dollars (TT$) per US$1--6.2761
  (January 1999), 6.2840 (1998), 6.2517 (1997), 6.0051 (1996), 5.9478
  (1995), 5.9249 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 October-30 September



Communications



Telephones: 170,000 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: excellent international service; good local
  service
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean);
  tropospheric scatter to Barbados and Guyana

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 10, shortwave 0

Radios: 700,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 4 (1997)

Televisions: 400,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: minimal agricultural railroad system near San Fernando;
  railway service was discontinued in 1968

Highways:
  total: 8,320 km
  paved: 4,252 km
  unpaved: 4,068 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 1,032 km; petroleum products 19 km; natural
  gas 904 km

Ports and harbors: Pointe-a-Pierre, Point Fortin, Point Lisas,
  Port-of-Spain, Scarborough, Tembladora

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 cargo ship (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,336 GRT/2,567 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 6 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Trinidad and Tobago Defense Force (includes
  Ground Forces, Coast Guard, and Air Wing), Trinidad and Tobago
  Police Service

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 312,870 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 223,200 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $83 million (1994)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American drugs
  destined for the US and Europe; producer of cannabis



======================================================================




@Tromelin Island
---------------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, island in the Indian Ocean, east of
  Madagascar

Geographic coordinates: 15 52 S, 54 25 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 1 sq km
  land: 1 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 1.7 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 3.7 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 12 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: sandy

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Indian Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 7 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (scattered bushes)

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1993)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: climatologically important location for
  forecasting cyclones; wildlife sanctuary



People



Population: uninhabited



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Tromelin Island
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ile Tromelin

Data code: TE

Dependency status: possession of France; administered by a high
  commissioner of the Republic, resident in Reunion

Legal system: NA

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (possession of France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (possession of France)

Flag description: the flag of France is used



Economy



Economy--overview: no economic activity



Communications



Communications--note: important meteorological station



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; offshore anchorage only

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Madagascar and Mauritius



======================================================================




@Tunisia
-------





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the Mediterranean Sea,
  between Algeria and Libya

Geographic coordinates: 34 00 N, 9 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 163,610 sq km
  land: 155,360 sq km
  water: 8,250 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Georgia

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,424 km
  border countries: Algeria 965 km, Libya 459 km

Coastline: 1,148 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate in north with mild, rainy winters and hot, dry
  summers; desert in south

Terrain: mountains in north; hot, dry central plain; semiarid
  south merges into the Sahara

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Shatt al Gharsah -17 m
  highest point: Jabal ash Shanabi 1,544 m

Natural resources: petroleum, phosphates, iron ore, lead, zinc,
  salt

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 13%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 44% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,850 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: toxic and hazardous waste disposal is
  ineffective and presents human health risks; water pollution from
  raw sewage; limited natural fresh water resources; deforestation;
  overgrazing; soil erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship
  Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Life Conservation

Geography--note: strategic location in central Mediterranean



People



Population: 9,513,603 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 31% (male 1,513,296; female 1,417,166)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 3,006,029; female 3,018,411)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 283,026; female 275,675) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.39% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 19.72 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.05 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.74 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.03 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 31.38 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.35 years
  male: 71.95 years
  female: 74.86 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.38 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Tunisian(s)
  adjective: Tunisian

Ethnic groups: Arab 98%, European 1%, Jewish and other 1%

Religions: Muslim 98%, Christian 1%, Jewish and other 1%

Languages: Arabic (official and one of the languages of
  commerce), French (commerce)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 66.7%
  male: 78.6%
  female: 54.6% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Tunisia
  conventional short form: Tunisia
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah at Tunisiyah
  local short form: Tunis

Data code: TS

Government type: republic

Capital: Tunis

Administrative divisions: 23 governorates; Al Kaf, Al Mahdiyah,
  Al Munastir, Al Qasrayn, Al Qayrawan, Aryanah, Bajah, Banzart, Bin
  'Arus, Jundubah, Madanin, Nabul, Qabis, Qafsah, Qibili, Safaqis,
  Sidi Bu Zayd, Silyanah, Susah, Tatawin, Tawzar, Tunis, Zaghwan

Independence: 20 March 1956 (from France)

National holiday: National Day, 20 March (1956)

Constitution: 1 June 1959; amended 12 July 1988

Legal system: based on French civil law system and Islamic law;
  some judicial review of legislative acts in the Supreme Court in
  joint session

Suffrage: 20 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI (since 7 November
  1987)
  head of government: Prime Minister Hamed KAROUI (since 26 September
  1989)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); prime
  minister appointed by the president
  election results: President Zine El Abidine BEN ALI reelected
  without opposition; percent of vote--Zine El Abidine BEN ALI 99%

Legislative branch: unicameral Chamber of Deputies or Majlis
  al-Nuwaab (163 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 March 1994 (next to be held NA 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--RCD 97.7%, MDS 1.0%,
  others 1.3%; seats by party--RCD 144, MDS 10, others 9; note--the
  government changed the electoral code to guarantee that the
  opposition won seats

Judicial branch: Court of Cassation (Cour de Cassation)

Political parties and leaders: Constitutional Democratic Rally
  parties are legal, including the Communist Party

Political pressure groups and leaders: the Islamic fundamentalist
  party, Al Nahda (Renaissance), is outlawed

International organization participation: ABEDA, ACCT, AfDB,
  AFESD, AL, AMF, AMU, BSEC (observer), CCC, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO,
  ITU, MINURCA, MINURSO, MIPONUH, NAM, OAS (observer), OAU, OIC, OPCW,
  OSCE (partner), UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNMIBH, UPU, WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Noureddine MEJDOUB
  chancery: 1515 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20005

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Robin L. RAPHEL
  embassy: 144 Avenue de la Liberte, 1002 Tunis-Belvedere
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: red with a white disk in the center bearing a
  red crescent nearly encircling a red five-pointed star; the crescent
  and star are traditional symbols of Islam



Economy



Economy--overview: Tunisia has a diverse economy, with important
  agricultural, mining, energy, tourism, and manufacturing sectors.
  Governmental control of economic affairs while still heavy has
  gradually lessened over the past decade with increasing
  privatization, simplification of the tax structure, and a prudent
  approach to debt. Real growth averaged 4.0% in 1993-97 and reached
  5.0% in 1998. Inflation has been moderate. Growth in tourism and
  increased trade have been key elements in this steady growth.
  Tunisia's association agreement with the European Union entered into
  force on 1 March 1998, the first such accord between the EU and
  Mediterranean countries to be activated. Under the agreement Tunisia
  will gradually remove barriers to trade with the EU over the next
  decade. Broader privatization, further liberalization of the
  investment code to increase foreign investment, and improvements in
  government efficiency are among the challenges for the future.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$49 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$5,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14%
  industry: 28%
  services: 58% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 14.1% (1990 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.3%
  highest 10%: 30.7% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.3% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 3.3 million (1995 est.)
  note: shortage of skilled labor

Labor force--by occupation: services 55%, industry 23%,
  agriculture 22% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: 15.6% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $5.8 billion
  expenditures: $6.5 billion, including capital expenditures to $1.4
  billion (1998 est.)

Industries: petroleum, mining (particularly phosphate and iron
  ore), tourism, textiles, footwear, food, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 4.2% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 7.535 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 99.54%
  hydro: 0.46%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 7.616 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 81 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: olives, dates, oranges, almonds, grain,
  sugar beets, grapes; poultry, beef, dairy products

Exports: $5.4 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: hydrocarbons, textiles, agricultural
  products, phosphates and chemicals

Exports--partners: EU 80%, North African countries 6%, Asia 4%, US
  1% (1996)

Imports: $7.9 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: industrial goods and equipment 57%,
  hydrocarbons 13%, food 12%, consumer goods

Imports--partners: EU countries 80%, North African countries 5.5%,
  Asia 5.5%, US 5% (1996)

Debt--external: $12.1 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $933.2 million (1995); note?ODA, $90
  million (1998 est.)

Currency: 1 Tunisian dinar (TD) = 1,000 millimes

Exchange rates: Tunisian dinars (TD) per US$1--1.1027 (December
  1998), 1.1393 (1998), 1.1059 (1997), 0.9734 (1996), 0.9458 (1995),
  1.0116 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 560,000 (1996 est.); 3,185 cellular telephone
  subscribers (1998 est.)

Telephone system: the system is above the African average and is
  continuing to be upgraded; key centers are Sfax, Sousse, Bizerte,
  and Tunis; Internet access is available through two private service
  providers licensed by the government
  domestic: trunk facilities consist of open-wire lines, coaxial
  cable, and microwave radio relay
  international: 5 submarine cables; satellite earth stations--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) and 1 Arabsat with back-up control
  station; coaxial cable and microwave radio relay to Algeria and
  Libya; participant in Medarabtel

Radio broadcast stations: AM 7, FM 8, shortwave 1 (1998 est.)

Radios: 1.7 million (1998 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 19 (these are network stations;
  there are some additional stations of low power) (1997)

Televisions: 650,000 (1998 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,260 km
  standard gauge: 492 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 1,758 km 1.000-m gauge
  dual gauge: 10 km 1.000-m and 1.435-m gauges (three rails) (1993
  est.)

Highways:
  total: 23,100 km
  paved: 18,226 km
  unpaved: 4,874 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 797 km; petroleum products 86 km; natural
  gas 742 km

Ports and harbors: Bizerte, Gabes, La Goulette, Sfax, Sousse,
  Tunis, Zarzis

Merchant marine:
  total: 20 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 188,345 GRT/215,749 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 5, chemical tanker 3, liquefied gas
  tanker 1, oil tanker 3, short-sea passenger 3, specialized tanker 1
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 32 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 14
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 5
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 18
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, paramilitary forces,
  National Guard

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,601,928 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,486,964 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 99,597 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $356 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.5% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary dispute with Libya;
  Malta and Tunisia are discussing the commercial exploitation of the
  continental shelf between their countries, particularly for oil
  exploration



======================================================================




@Turkey
------





Geography



Location: southwestern Asia (that part west of the Bosporus is
  sometimes included with Europe), bordering the Black Sea, between
  Bulgaria and Georgia, and bordering the Aegean Sea and the
  Mediterranean Sea, between Greece and Syria

Geographic coordinates: 39 00 N, 35 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 780,580 sq km
  land: 770,760 sq km
  water: 9,820 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,627 km
  border countries: Armenia 268 km, Azerbaijan 9 km, Bulgaria 240 km,
  Georgia 252 km, Greece 206 km, Iran 499 km, Iraq 331 km, Syria 822 km

Coastline: 7,200 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: in Black Sea only: to the maritime boundary
  agreed upon with the former USSR
  territorial sea: 6 nm in the Aegean Sea; 12 nm in Black Sea and in
  Mediterranean Sea

Climate: temperate; hot, dry summers with mild, wet winters;
  harsher in interior

Terrain: mostly mountains; narrow coastal plain; high central
  plateau (Anatolia)

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Mediterranean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Mount Ararat 5,166 m

Natural resources: antimony, coal, chromium, mercury, copper,
  borate, sulfur, iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 32%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 16%
  forests and woodland: 26%
  other: 22% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 36,740 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: very severe earthquakes, especially in northern
  Turkey, along an arc extending from the Sea of Marmara to Lake Van

Environment--current issues: water pollution from dumping of
  chemicals and detergents; air pollution, particularly in urban
  areas; deforestation; concern for oil spills from increasing
  Bosporus ship traffic

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Desertification, Hazardous Wastes, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol,
  Environmental Modification

Geography--note: strategic location controlling the Turkish
  Straits (Bosporus, Sea of Marmara, Dardanelles) that link Black and
  Aegean Seas



People



Population: 65,599,206 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 10,148,457; female 9,781,452)
  15-64 years: 64% (male 21,255,506; female 20,560,070)
  65 years and over: 6% (male 1,775,164; female 2,078,557) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.57% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.92 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.27 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.85 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 35.81 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 73.29 years
  male: 70.81 years
  female: 75.88 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.41 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Turk(s)
  adjective: Turkish

Ethnic groups: Turkish 80%, Kurdish 20%

Religions: Muslim 99.8% (mostly Sunni), other 0.2% (Christian and
  Jews)

Languages: Turkish (official), Kurdish, Arabic

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 82.3%
  male: 91.7%
  female: 72.4% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Turkey
  conventional short form: Turkey
  local long form: Turkiye Cumhuriyeti
  local short form: Turkiye

Data code: TU

Government type: republican parliamentary democracy

Capital: Ankara

Administrative divisions: 80 provinces (iller, singular--il);
  Adana, Adiyaman, Afyon, Agri, Aksaray, Amasya, Ankara, Antalya,
  Ardahan, Artvin, Aydin, Balikesir, Bartin, Batman, Bayburt, Bilecik,
  Bingol, Bitlis, Bolu, Burdur, Bursa, Canakkale, Cankiri, Corum,
  Denizli, Diyarbakir, Edirne, Elazig, Erzincan, Erzurum, Eskisehir,
  Gazi Antep, Giresun, Gumushane, Hakkari, Hatay, Icel, Igdir,
  Isparta, Istanbul, Izmir, Kahraman Maras, Karabuk, Karaman, Kars,
  Kastamonu, Kayseri, Kilis, Kirikkale, Kirklareli, Kirsehir, Kocaeli,
  Konya, Kutahya, Malatya, Manisa, Mardin, Mugla, Mus, Nevsehir,
  Nigde, Ordu, Osmaniye, Rize, Sakarya, Samsun, Sanli Urfa, Siirt,
  Sinop, Sirnak, Sivas, Tekirdag, Tokat, Trabzon, Tunceli, Usak, Van,
  Yalova, Yozgat, Zonguldak
  note: Karabuk, Kilis, Osmaniye and Yalova are the four newest
  provinces; the US Board on Geographic Names is awaiting an official
  Turkish administrative map for verification of the boundaries

Independence: 29 October 1923 (successor state to the Ottoman
  Empire)

National holiday: Anniversary of the Declaration of the Republic,
  29 October (1923)

Constitution: 7 November 1982

Legal system: derived from various European continental legal
  systems; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Suleyman DEMIREL (since 16 May 1993)
  head of government: Prime Minister Bulent ECEVIT (since 11 January
  1999)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  nomination of the prime minister
  note: there is also a National Security Council that serves as an
  advisory body to the president and the cabinet
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly for a
  seven-year term; election last held 16 May 1993 (next scheduled to
  be held NA May 2000); prime minister and deputy prime minister
  appointed by the president
  election results: Suleyman DEMIREL elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--54%

Legislative branch: unicameral Grand National Assembly of Turkey
  or Turkiye Buyuk Millet Meclisi (550 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 24 December 1995 (next to be held 18 April 1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--RP 21.38%, DYP 19.18%,
  ANAP 19.65%, DSP 14.64%, CHP 10.71%, independent 0.48%; seats by
  party--RP 158, DYP 135, ANAP 133, DSP 75, CHP 49; note--seats held by
  various parties are subject to change due to defections, creation of
  new parties, and ouster or death of sitting deputies; seating by
  party as of 1 January 1999: FP 144, ANAP 137, DYP 97, DSP 61, CHP
  55, DTP 12, BBP 8, MHP 3, DP 1, DEPAR 1, independents 20, vacant 11

Judicial branch: Constitutional Court, judges appointed by the
  president; Court of Appeals, judges are elected by the Supreme
  Council of Judges and Prosecutors

Political parties and leaders: Motherland Party or ANAP [Mesut
  outlawed on 22 February 1998

Political pressure groups and leaders: Turkish Confederation of
  Independent Industrialists and Businessmen's Association or MUSIAD

International organization participation: AsDB, BIS, BSEC, CCC,
  CE, CERN (observer), EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IAEA, IBRD,
  ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, NATO,
  NEA, OECD, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO,
  UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UPU, WEU (associate), WFTU,
  WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Baki ILKIN
  chancery: 1714 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: Chicago, Houston, Los Angeles, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Mark R. PARRIS
  embassy: 110 Ataturk Boulevard, Ankara
  mailing address: PSC 93, Box 5000, APO AE 09823
  consulate(s) general: Istanbul
  consulate(s): Adana

Flag description: red with a vertical white crescent (the closed
  portion is toward the hoist side) and white five-pointed star
  centered just outside the crescent opening



Economy



Economy--overview: Turkey has a dynamic economy that is a complex
  mix of modern industry and commerce along with traditional village
  agriculture and crafts. It has a strong and rapidly growing private
  sector, yet the state still plays a major role in basic industry,
  banking, transport, and communication. Its most important
  industry--and largest exporter--is textiles and clothing, which is
  almost entirely in private hands. The economic situation in recent
  years has been marked by rapid growth coupled with partial success
  in implementing structural reform measures. Inflation declined to
  70% in 1998, down from 99% in 1997, but the public sector fiscal
  deficit probably remained near 10% of GDP--due in large part to
  interest payments which accounted for 42% of central government
  spending in 1998. The government enacted a new tax law and speeded
  up privatization in 1998 but made no progress on badly needed social
  security reform. Ankara is trying to increase trade with other
  countries in the region yet most of Turkey's trade is still with
  OECD countries. Despite the implementation in January 1996 of a
  customs union with the EU, foreign direct investment in the country
  remains low--about $1 billion annually--perhaps because potential
  investors are concerned about still-high inflation and the unsettled
  political situation. Economic growth will remain about the same in
  1999; inflation should decline further.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$425.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14.4%
  industry: 28.7%
  services: 56.9% (1998)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 70% (1998)

Labor force: 22.7 million (April 1998)
  note: about 1.5 million Turks work abroad (1994)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 42.5%, services 34.5%,
  industry 23% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $44.4 billion
  expenditures: $58.5 billion, including capital expenditures of $3.7
  billion (1998)

Industries: textiles, food processing, autos, mining (coal,
  chromite, copper, boron), steel, petroleum, construction, lumber,
  paper

Industrial production growth rate: 4.1% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 103 billion kWh (1997)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 62.4%
  hydro: 37.1%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0.5% (1997)

Electricity--consumption: 91.16 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 300 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 265 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: tobacco, cotton, grain, olives, sugar
  beets, pulse, citrus; livestock

Exports: $31 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: textiles and apparel 30%, foodstuffs 15%,
  iron and steel products 13% (1997)

Exports--partners: Germany 20%, US 9%, Russia 5%, UK 6%, Italy 6%
  (1998)

Imports: $47 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment 50%, fuels,
  minerals, foodstuffs (1997)

Imports--partners: Germany 16%, Italy 9%, US 9%, Russia 6%, UK 6%,
  France 2% (1997)

Debt--external: $93.4 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: ODA, $195 million (1993)

Currency: Turkish lira (TL)

Exchange rates: Turkish liras (TL) per US$1--331,400 (January
  1999), 260,724 (1998), 151,865 (1997), 81,405 (1996), 45,845.1
  (1995), 29,608.7 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 17 million (in addition, there are 1.5 million
  cellular telephone subscribers) (1997 est.)

Telephone system: fair domestic and international systems;
  undergoing modernization and refurbishment programs
  domestic: cable; AMPS standard cellular system in Ashkhabad with
  plans for expansion
  international: 12 satellite earth stations--Intelsat (Atlantic
  Ocean), Eutelsat, and Inmarsat (Indian and Atlantic Ocean regions);
  3 submarine fiber-optic cables (1996); connected internationally by
  the Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber-Optic Line that became operational in
  1998

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA
  note: there are 36 national broadcast stations, 108 regional
  broadcast stations, and 1,058 local broadcast stations (1996)

Radios: 9.4 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 69 (in addition, there are 476
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 10.53 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 10,386 km
  standard gauge: 10,386 km 1.435-m gauge (1,088 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 382,397 km
  paved: 95,599 km (including 1,560 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 286,798 km (1997 est.)

Waterways: about 1,200 km

Pipelines: crude oil 1,738 km; petroleum products 2,321 km;
  natural gas 708 km

Ports and harbors: Gemlik, Hopa, Iskenderun, Istanbul, Izmir,
  Kocaeli (Izmit), Icel (Mersin), Samsun, Trabzon

Merchant marine:
  total: 531 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 5,913,171
  GRT/9,832,994 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 159, cargo 239, chemical tanker 32, combination
  bulk 5, combination ore/oil 6, container 12, liquefied gas tanker 5,
  oil tanker 36, passenger-cargo 1, refrigerated cargo 3,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 21, short-sea passenger 9, specialized tanker
  3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 117 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 81
  over 3,047 m: 16
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 25
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 19
  914 to 1,523 m: 16
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 36
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 26 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Land Forces, Navy (includes Naval Air and
  Naval Infantry), Air Force, Coast Guard, Gendarmerie

Military manpower--military age: 20 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 18,168,658 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 11,024,173 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 659,338 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $6.737 billion (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.3% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: complex maritime, air, and territorial
  disputes with Greece in Aegean Sea; Cyprus question with Greece;
  dispute with downstream riparian states (Syria and Iraq) over water
  development plans for the Tigris and Euphrates Rivers; traditional
  demands on former Armenian lands in Turkey have subsided

Illicit drugs: major transit route for Southwest Asian heroin and
  hashish to Western Europe and--to a far lesser extent the US--via air,
  land, and sea routes; major Turkish, Iranian, and other
  international trafficking organizations operate out of Istanbul;
  laboratories to convert imported morphine base into heroin are in
  remote regions of Turkey as well as near Istanbul; government
  maintains strict controls over areas of legal opium poppy
  cultivation and output of poppy straw concentrate



======================================================================




@Turkmenistan
------------





Geography



Location: Central Asia, bordering the Caspian Sea, between Iran
  and Kazakhstan

Geographic coordinates: 40 00 N, 60 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 488,100 sq km
  land: 488,100 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,736 km
  border countries: Afghanistan 744 km, Iran 992 km, Kazakhstan 379
  km, Uzbekistan 1,621 km

Coastline: 0 km
  note: Turkmenistan borders the Caspian Sea (1,768 km)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: subtropical desert

Terrain: flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes rising to
  mountains in the south; low mountains along border with Iran;
  borders Caspian Sea in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Vpadina Akchanaya -81 m (note--Sarygamysh Koli is a
  lake in north eastern Turkmenistan whose water levels fluctuate
  widely; at its shallowest, its level is -110 m; it is presently at
  -60 m, 20 m above Vpadina Akchanaya)
  highest point: Ayrybaba 3,139 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, coal, sulfur, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 63%
  forests and woodland: 8%
  other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 13,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: contamination of soil and groundwater
  with agricultural chemicals, pesticides; salination, water-logging
  of soil due to poor irrigation methods; Caspian Sea pollution;
  diversion of a large share of the flow of the Amu Darya into
  irrigation contributes to that river's inability to replenish the
  Aral Sea; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Hazardous
  Wastes, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 4,366,383 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 38% (male 845,584; female 813,223)
  15-64 years: 58% (male 1,243,031; female 1,283,985)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 68,496; female 112,064) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.58% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 25.91 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.77 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.35 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.61 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 73.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 61.11 years
  male: 57.48 years
  female: 64.91 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.21 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Turkmen(s)
  adjective: Turkmen

Ethnic groups: Turkmen 77%, Uzbek 9.2%, Russian 6.7%, Kazakh 2%,
  other 5.1% (1995)

Religions: Muslim 89%, Eastern Orthodox 9%, unknown 2%

Languages: Turkmen 72%, Russian 12%, Uzbek 9%, other 7%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 97% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Turkmenistan
  local long form: none
  local short form: Turkmenistan
  former: Turkmen Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: TX

Government type: republic

Capital: Ashgabat

Administrative divisions: 5 welayatlar (singular--welayat): Ahal
  Welayaty (Ashgabat), Balkan Welayaty (Nebitdag), Dashhowuz Welayaty
  (formerly Tashauz), Lebap Welayaty (Charjew), Mary Welayaty
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 27 October 1991 (from the Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 27 October (1991)

Constitution: adopted 18 May 1992

Legal system: based on civil law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President and Chairman of the Cabinet of Ministers
  Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when the first direct
  presidential election occurred); note--the president is both the
  chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President and Chairman of the Cabinet of
  Ministers Saparmurat NIYAZOV (since 27 October 1990, when the first
  direct presidential election occurred); note--the president is both
  the chief of state and head of government; Deputy Chairmen of the
  Cabinet of Ministers Mukhamed ABALAKOV (since NA), Orazgeldy
  AYDOGDIYEV (since NA 1992), Hudaayguly HALYKOV (since NA 1996),
  Rejep SAPAROV (since NA 1992), Boris SHIKHMURADOV (since NA 1993),
  Batyr SARJAYEV (since NA 1993), Ilaman SHIKHIYEV (since NA 1995),
  Yolly GURBANMURADOV (since NA 1997), Saparmurat NURIYEV (since NA
  1997)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  note: NIYAZOV has been asked by various local groups, most recently
  on 21 December 1998 at the Second Congress of the Democratic Party,
  to be "president for life," but he has declined, saying the status
  would require an amendment to the constitution
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 21 June 1992 (next to be held NA 2002;
  note--extension of President NIYAZOV's term for an additional five
  years overwhelmingly approved by national referendum held 15 January
  1994); deputy chairmen of the cabinet of ministers are appointed by
  the president
  election results: Saparmurat NIYAZOV elected president without
  opposition; percent of vote--Saparmurat NIYAZOV 99.5%

Legislative branch: under the 1992 constitution, there are two
  parliamentary bodies, a unicameral People's Council or Halk
  Maslahaty (more than 100 seats, some of which are elected by popular
  vote and some of which are appointed; meets infrequently) and a
  unicameral Assembly or Majlis (50 seats; members are elected by
  popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: People's Council--NA; Assembly--last held 11 December 1994
  (next to be held NA December 1999)
  election results: Assembly--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Democratic Party 45, other 5; note--all 50 preapproved by
  President NIYAZOV

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party of Turkmenistan
  note: formal opposition parties are outlawed; unofficial, small
  opposition movements exist underground or in foreign countries

International organization participation: CCC, CIS, EAPC, EBRD,
  ECE, ECO, ESCAP, FAO, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDB, IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, IOM (observer), ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (observer)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Halil UGUR
  chancery: 2207 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Steven R. MANN
  embassy: 9 Pushkin Street, Ashgabat
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: green field with a vertical red stripe near the
  hoist side, containing five carpet guls (designs used in producing
  rugs) stacked above two crossed olive branches similar to the olive
  branches on the UN flag; a white crescent moon and five white stars
  appear in the upper corner of the field just to the fly side of the
  red stripe



Economy



Economy--overview: Turkmenistan is largely desert country with
  nomadic cattle raising, intensive agriculture in irrigated oases,
  and huge gas and oil resources. One-half of its irrigated land is
  planted in cotton, making it the world's tenth largest producer. It
  also possesses the world's fifth largest reserves of natural gas and
  substantial oil resources. Until the end of 1993, Turkmenistan had
  experienced less economic disruption than other former Soviet states
  because its economy received a boost from higher prices for oil and
  gas and a sharp increase in hard currency earnings. In 1994,
  Russia's refusal to export Turkmen gas to hard currency markets and
  mounting debts of its major customers in the former USSR for gas
  deliveries contributed to a sharp fall in industrial production and
  caused the budget to shift from a surplus to a slight deficit. The
  economy bottomed out in 1996, but high inflation continued.
  Furthermore, with an authoritarian ex-communist regime in power and
  a tribally based social structure, Turkmenistan has taken a cautious
  approach to economic reform, hoping to use gas and cotton sales to
  sustain its inefficient economy. In 1996, the government set in
  place a stabilization program aimed at a unified and market-based
  exchange rate, allocation of government credits by auction, and
  strict limits on budget deficits. Privatization goals remain
  limited. Turkmenistan is working hard to open new gas export
  channels through Iran and Turkey to Europe, but these will take many
  years to realize. In 1998 Turkmenistan faced revenue shortfalls due
  to the continued lack of adequate export routes for natural gas and
  obligations on extensive short-term external debt.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5% (1998)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,630 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 18%
  industry: 50%
  services: 32% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.7%
  highest 10%: 26.9% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 19.8% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 2.34 million (1996)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and forestry 44%, industry
  and construction 19%, other 37% (1996)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $521 million
  expenditures: $548 million, including capital expenditures of $83
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: natural gas, oil, petroleum products, textiles, food
  processing

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 9.484 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 99.96%
  hydro: 0.04%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 7.134 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 2.7 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 350 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, grain; livestock

Exports: $689 million (1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: natural gas, cotton, petroleum products,
  textiles, electricity, carpets

Exports--partners: FSU, Hong Kong, Switzerland, US, Germany,
  Turkey (1996)

Imports: $1.1 billion (1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and parts, grain and food,
  plastics and rubber, consumer durables, textiles

Imports--partners: FSU, US, Turkey, Germany, Cyprus (1996)

Debt--external: $1.7 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $27.2 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Turkmen manat (TMM) = 100 tenesi

Exchange rates: manats per US$1--5,350 (January 1999), 4,070
  (January 1997), 2,400 (January 1996)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system: poorly developed
  domestic: NA
  international: linked by cable and microwave radio relay to other
  CIS republics and to other countries by leased connections to the
  Moscow international gateway switch; a new telephone link from
  Ashgabat to Iran has been established; a new exchange in Ashgabat
  switches international traffic through Turkey via Intelsat;
  satellite earth stations--1 Orbita and 1 Intelsat

Radio broadcast stations: 1 state-owned radio broadcast station
  of NA type

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 3 (much programming relayed from
  Russia and Turkey) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,187 km
  broad gauge: 2,187 km 1.520-m gauge (1996 est.)

Highways:
  total: 24,000 km
  paved: 19,488 km (note--these roads are said to be hard-surfaced,
  meaning that some are paved and some are all-weather gravel surfaced)
  unpaved: 4,512 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: the Amu Darya is an important inland waterway

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; natural gas 4,400 km

Ports and harbors: Turkmenbashy

Merchant marine:
  total: 1 oil tanker (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,896 GRT/3,389 DWT
  (1998 est.)

Airports: 64 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 22
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 13
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 8
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 42
  914 to 1,523 m: 7
  under 914 m: 35 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Ministry of Defense (Army, Air and Air
  Defense, Navy, Border Troops, and Internal Troops), National Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 1,110,606 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 901,735 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 45,050 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $88 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Caspian Sea boundaries are not yet
  determined among Azerbaijan, Iran, Kazakhstan, Russia, and
  Turkmenistan

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivator of opium poppy, mostly
  for domestic consumption; limited government eradication program;
  increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs from
  Southwest Asia to Russia and Western Europe; also a transshipment
  point for acetic anhydride destined for Afghanistan



======================================================================




@Turks and Caicos Islands
------------------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, two island groups in the North Atlantic
  Ocean, southeast of The Bahamas

Geographic coordinates: 21 45 N, 71 35 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 430 sq km
  land: 430 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 2.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 389 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; marine; moderated by trade winds; sunny and
  relatively dry

Terrain: low, flat limestone; extensive marshes and mangrove
  swamps

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Blue Hills 49 m

Natural resources: spiny lobster, conch

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: NA%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: frequent hurricanes

Environment--current issues: limited natural fresh water
  resources, private cisterns collect rainwater

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: 30 islands (eight inhabited)



People



Population: 16,863 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 32% (male 2,777; female 2,697)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 5,619; female 5,085)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 305; female 380) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.65% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 26.39 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.86 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 15 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.11 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.8 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.07 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.11 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.35 years
  male: 70.4 years
  female: 74.4 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.28 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: none
  adjective: none

Ethnic groups: black

Religions: Baptist 41.2%, Methodist 18.9%, Anglican 18.3%,
  Seventh-Day Adventist 1.7%, other 19.9% (1980)

Languages: English (official)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has ever attended school
  total population: 98%
  male: 99%
  female: 98% (1970 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Turks and Caicos Islands

Data code: TK

Dependency status: overseas territory of the UK

Government type: NA

Capital: Grand Turk (Cockburn Town)

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of the UK)

Independence: none (overseas territory of the UK)

National holiday: Constitution Day, 30 August (1976)

Constitution: introduced 30 August 1976; suspended in 1986;
  restored and revised 5 March 1988

Legal system: based on laws of England and Wales, with a small
  number adopted from Jamaica and The Bahamas

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1953),
  represented by Governor John KELLY (since NA September 1996)
  head of government: Chief Minister Derek H. TAYLOR (since 31 January
  1995)
  cabinet: Executive Council consists of three ex officio members and
  five appointed by the governor from among the members of the
  Legislative Council
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; governor appointed by
  the monarch; chief minister appointed by the governor

Legislative branch: unicameral Legislative Council (19 seats, of
  which 13 are popularly elected; members serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 31 January 1995 (next to be held by NA December
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--PDM 8,
  PNP 4, independent (Norman SAUNDERS) 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Progressive National Party or PNP

International organization participation: Caricom (associate),
  CDB, Interpol (subbureau)

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  the UK)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of the UK)

Flag description: blue, with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant and the colonial shield centered on the outer
  half of the flag; the shield is yellow and contains a conch shell,
  lobster, and cactus



Economy



Economy--overview: The Turks and Caicos economy is based on
  tourism, fishing, and offshore financial services. Most capital
  goods and food for domestic consumption are imported. The US was the
  leading source of tourists in 1996, accounting for more than half of
  the 87,000 visitors. Major sources of government revenue include
  fees from offshore financial activities and customs receipts.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$117 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1997 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$7,700 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 4% (1995)

Labor force: 4,848 (1990 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: about 33% in government and 20% in
  agriculture and fishing; significant numbers in tourism and
  financial and other services (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 10% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $47 million
  expenditures: $33.6 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997/98 est.)

Industries: tourism, offshore financial services

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 5 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 5 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, beans, cassava (tapioca), citrus
  fruits; fish

Exports: $4.7 million (1993)

Exports--commodities: lobster, dried and fresh conch, conch shells

Exports--partners: US, UK

Imports: $46.6 million (1993)

Imports--commodities: food and beverages, tobacco, clothing,
  manufactures, construction materials

Imports--partners: US, UK

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $5.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1,359 (1988 est.)

Telephone system: fair cable and radiotelephone services
  domestic: NA
  international: 2 submarine cables; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 3, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 7,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (broadcasts from The Bahamas are
  received; cable television is established) (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 121 km
  paved: 24 km
  unpaved: 97 km

Ports and harbors: Grand Turk, Providenciales

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 7 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the UK



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for South American narcotics
  destined for the US



======================================================================




@Tuvalu
------





Geography



Location: Oceania, island group consisting of nine coral atolls
  in the South Pacific Ocean, about one-half of the way from Hawaii to
  Australia

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 S, 178 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 26 sq km
  land: 26 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: 0.1 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 24 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by easterly trade winds (March to
  November); westerly gales and heavy rain (November to March)

Terrain: very low-lying and narrow coral atolls

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 5 m

Natural resources: fish

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: severe tropical storms are usually rare, but, in
  1997, there were three cyclones

Environment--current issues: since there are no streams or rivers
  and groundwater is not potable, all water needs must be met by
  catchment systems with storage facilities; beachhead erosion because
  of the use of sand for building materials; excessive clearance of
  forest undergrowth for use as fuel; damage to coral reefs from the
  spread of the Crown of Thorns starfish; Tuvalu is very concerned
  about global increases in greenhouse gas emissions and their effect
  on rising sea levels, which threaten the country's underground water
  table

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol,
  Desertification, Endangered Species, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer
  Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Law of the Sea



People



Population: 10,588 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 35% (male 1,870; female 1,799)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 3,062; female 3,360)
  65 years and over: 4% (male 225; female 272) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.34% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 21.91 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.5 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.91 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 25.53 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 64.15 years
  male: 63.01 years
  female: 65.34 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.11 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Tuvaluan(s)
  adjective: Tuvaluan

Ethnic groups: Polynesian 96%

Religions: Church of Tuvalu (Congregationalist) 97%, Seventh-Day
  Adventist 1.4%, Baha'i 1%, other 0.6%

Languages: Tuvaluan, English

Literacy: NA; note--education is free and compulsory from ages 6
  through 13



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Tuvalu
  former: Ellice Islands

Data code: TV

Government type: constitutional monarchy with a parliamentary
  democracy; began debating republic status in 1992

Capital: Funafuti

Administrative divisions: none

Independence: 1 October 1978 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 October (1978)

Constitution: 1 October 1978

Legal system: NA

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952),
  represented by Governor General Sir Tomasi PUAPUA, M.D. (since NA
  June 1998)
  head of government: Prime Minister Bikenibeu PAENIU (since 23
  December 1996) and Deputy Prime Minister Kokeiya MALUA (since 8
  April 1998);
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the governor general on the
  recommendation of the prime minister
  elections: the monarch is hereditary; governor general appointed by
  the monarch on the recommendation of the prime minister; prime
  minister and deputy prime minister elected by and from the members
  of Parliament; election last held 8 April 1998 (next to be held NA
  2002)
  election results: Bikenibeu PAENIU reelected prime minister by a
  vote in Parliament of 10 to 2; Kokeiya MALUA elected deputy prime
  minister; percent of Parliament vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament or Fale I Fono, also
  called House of Assembly (12 seats--two from each island with more
  than 1,000 inhabitants, one from all the other inhabited islands;
  members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 26-27 March 1998 (next to be held by NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote--NA; seats--independents 12

Judicial branch: eight Island Courts; High Court; note--a chief
  justice visits twice a year to preside over sessions of the High
  Court

Political parties and leaders: there are no political parties but
  members of Parliament usually align themselves in informal groupings

International organization participation: ACP, AsDB, C (special),
  ESCAP, IFRCS (associate), Intelsat (nonsignatory user), ITU,
  Sparteca, SPC, SPF, UNESCO, UPU, WHO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Tuvalu does not have an
  embassy in the US

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Tuvalu; the US ambassador to Fiji is accredited to Tuvalu

Flag description: light blue with the flag of the UK in the upper
  hoist-side quadrant; the outer half of the flag represents a map of
  the country with nine yellow five-pointed stars symbolizing the nine
  islands



Economy



Economy--overview: Tuvalu consists of a densely populated,
  scattered group of nine coral atolls with poor soil. The country has
  no known mineral resources and few exports. Subsistence farming and
  fishing are the primary economic activities. Government revenues
  largely come from the sale of stamps and coins and worker
  remittances. About 1,000 Tuvaluans work in Nauru in the phosphate
  mining industry. Nauru has begun repatriating Tuvaluans, however, as
  phosphate resources decline. Substantial income is received annually
  from an international trust fund established in 1987 by Australia,
  NZ, and the UK and supported also by Japan and South Korea. In an
  effort to reduce its dependence on foreign aid, the government is
  pursuing public sector reforms, including privatization of some
  government functions and personnel cuts of up to 7%. In 1998, Tuvalu
  began selling internet addresses in its TV domain and reportedly has
  derived revenue from use of its area code for "900" lines. Low-lying
  Tuvalu is particularly vulnerable to any future global warming.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$7.8 million (1995 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 8.7% (1995)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$800 (1995 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 3.9% (average 1985-93)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: people make a living mainly through
  exploitation of the sea, reefs, and atolls and from wages sent home
  by those working abroad (mostly workers in the phosphate industry
  and sailors)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $4.3 million
  expenditures: $4.3 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1989 est.)

Industries: fishing, tourism, copra

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 3 million kWh (1995)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 3 million kWh (1995)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1995)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1995)

Agriculture--products: coconuts; fish

Exports: $165,000 (f.o.b., 1989)

Exports--commodities: copra

Exports--partners: Fiji, Australia, NZ

Imports: $4.4 million (c.i.f., 1989)

Imports--commodities: food, animals, mineral fuels, machinery,
  manufactured goods

Imports--partners: Fiji, Australia, NZ

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $7.9 million (1995); note?substantial
  annual support from an international trust fund

Currency: 1 Tuvaluan dollar ($T) or 1 Australian dollar ($A) =
  100 cents

Exchange rates: Tuvaluan dollars ($T) or Australian dollars ($A)
  per US$1--1.5853 (January 1999), 1.5888 (1998), 1.3439 (1997), 1.2773
  (1996), 1.3486 (1995), 1.3667 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 130 (1983 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: radiotelephone communications between islands
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 4,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 8 km (1996 est.)
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Funafuti, Nukufetau

Merchant marine:
  total: 10 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 44,371 GRT/70,137 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 6, chemical tanker 2, oil tanker 1,
  passenger-cargo 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular military forces; Police Force
  (consists of 56 full- and part-time personnel), Police Force
  (includes Maritime Surveillance Unit for search and rescue missions
  and surveillance operations)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Uganda
------





Geography



Location: Eastern Africa, west of Kenya

Geographic coordinates: 1 00 N, 32 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 236,040 sq km
  land: 199,710 sq km
  water: 36,330 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,698 km
  border countries: Democratic Republic of the Congo 765 km, Kenya 933
  km, Rwanda 169 km, Sudan 435 km, Tanzania 396 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; generally rainy with two dry seasons (December
  to February, June to August); semiarid in northeast

Terrain: mostly plateau with rim of mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Lake Albert 621 m
  highest point: Margherita Peak on Mount Stanley 5,110 m

Natural resources: copper, cobalt, limestone, salt

Land use:
  arable land: 25%
  permanent crops: 9%
  permanent pastures: 9%
  forests and woodland: 28%
  other: 29% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 90 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: draining of wetlands for agricultural
  use; deforestation; overgrazing; soil erosion; poaching is widespread

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Life Conservation,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Environmental Modification

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 22,804,973 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 51% (male 5,857,254; female 5,820,526)
  15-64 years: 47% (male 5,301,208; female 5,330,005)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 239,434; female 256,546) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.83% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 48.54 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 18.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -1.84 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)
  note: according to the UNHCR, by the end of 1997, Uganda was host to
  refugees from a number of neighboring countries, including: Sudan
  160,000, Democratic Republic of the Congo 14,000, and Rwanda 12,000

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.93 male(s)/female
  total population: 1 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 90.68 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 43.06 years
  male: 42.2 years
  female: 43.94 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.03 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ugandan(s)
  adjective: Ugandan

Ethnic groups: Baganda 17%, Karamojong 12%, Basogo 8%, Iteso 8%,
  Langi 6%, Rwanda 6%, Bagisu 5%, Acholi 4%, Lugbara 4%, Bunyoro 3%,
  Batobo 3%, non-African (European, Asian, Arab) 1%, other 23%

Religions: Roman Catholic 33%, Protestant 33%, Muslim 16%,
  indigenous beliefs 18%

Languages: English (official national language, taught in grade
  schools, used in courts of law and by most newspapers and some radio
  broadcasts), Ganda or Luganda (most widely used of the Niger-Congo
  languages, preferred for native language publications and may be
  taught in school), other Niger-Congo languages, Nilo-Saharan
  languages, Swahili, Arabic

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 61.8%
  male: 73.7%
  female: 50.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Uganda
  conventional short form: Uganda

Data code: UG

Government type: republic

Capital: Kampala

Administrative divisions: 39 districts; Apac, Arua, Bundibugyo,
  Bushenyi, Gulu, Hoima, Iganga, Jinja, Kabale, Kabarole, Kalangala,
  Kampala, Kamuli, Kapchorwa, Kasese, Kibale, Kiboga, Kisoro, Kitgum,
  Kotido, Kumi, Lira, Luwero, Masaka, Masindi, Mbale, Mbarara, Moroto,
  Moyo, Mpigi, Mubende, Mukono, Nebbi, Ntungamo, Pallisa, Rakai,
  Rukungiri, Soroti, Tororo

Independence: 9 October 1962 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 9 October (1962)

Constitution: 8 October 1995; adopted by the interim, 284-member
  Constituent Assembly, charged with debating the draft constitution
  that had been proposed in May 1993; the Constituent Assembly was
  dissolved upon the promulgation of the constitution in October 1995

Legal system: in 1995, the government restored the legal system
  to one based on English common law and customary law; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI (since
  seizing power 29 January 1986); note--the president is both chief of
  state and head of government
  head of government: President Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI (since
  seizing power 29 January 1986); Prime Minister Kintu MUSOKE (since
  18 November 1994); note--the president is both chief of state and
  head of government; the prime minister assists the president in the
  supervision of the cabinet
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among elected
  legislators
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a NA-year term;
  election last held 9 May 1996 (next to be held by 31 May 2001);
  note--first popular election for president since independence in 1962
  was held in 1996; prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI elected president;
  percent of vote--Lt. Gen. Yoweri Kaguta MUSEVENI 74%, Paul Kawanga
  SSEMOGERERE 24%, Muhammad MAYANJA 2%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (276 members--214
  directly elected by popular vote, 62 nominated by legally
  established special interest groups and approved by the
  president--women 39, army 10, disabled 5, youth 5, labor 3; members
  serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 27 June 1996 (next to be held NA 2001);
  election results: NA; note--election campaigning by party was not
  permitted

Judicial branch: Court of Appeal, judges are appointed by the
  president; High Court, judges are appointed by the president

Political parties and leaders: only one political organization,
  chairman] is recognized; note--this is the party of President
  MUSEVENI; the president maintains that the NRM is not a political
  party, but a movement which claims the loyalty of all Ugandans
  note: of the political parties that exist but are prohibited from
  sponsoring candidates, the most important are the Ugandan People's
  MAYANJA-NKANGI]; the new constitution requires the suspension of
  political party activity until a referendum is held on the matter in
  2000

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC,
  EADB, ECA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, IGAD, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO
  (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAU, OIC, OPCW, PCA, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Edith Grace SSEMPALA
  chancery: 5911 16th Street NW, Washington, DC 20011

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Nancy J. POWELL
  embassy: Parliament Avenue, Kampala
  mailing address: P. O. Box 7007, Kampala

Flag description: six equal horizontal bands of black (top),
  yellow, red, black, yellow, and red; a white disk is superimposed at
  the center and depicts a red-crested crane (the national symbol)
  facing the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: Uganda has substantial natural resources,
  including fertile soils, regular rainfall, and sizable mineral
  deposits of copper and cobalt. Agriculture is the most important
  sector of the economy, employing over 80% of the work force. Coffee
  is the major export crop and accounts for the bulk of export
  revenues. Since 1986, the government--with the support of foreign
  countries and international agencies--has acted to rehabilitate and
  stabilize the economy by undertaking currency reform, raising
  producer prices on export crops, increasing prices of petroleum
  products, and improving civil service wages. The policy changes are
  especially aimed at dampening inflation and boosting production and
  export earnings. In 1990-98, the economy turned in a solid
  performance based on continued investment in the rehabilitation of
  infrastructure, improved incentives for production and exports,
  reduced inflation, gradually improved domestic security, and the
  return of exiled Indian-Ugandan entrepreneurs. Continuation of this
  performance, while possible, appears difficult because of Ugandan
  involvement in the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo,
  growing corruption within the government, and slippage in the
  government's determination to press reforms.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$22.7 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 5.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,020 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 44%
  industry: 17%
  services: 39% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 55% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3%
  highest 10%: 33.4% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.6% (1998)

Labor force: 8.361 million (1993 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 86%, industry 4%, services
  10% (1980 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $869 million
  expenditures: $985 million, including capital expenditures of $69
  million (FY95/96)

Industries: sugar, brewing, tobacco, cotton textiles, cement

Industrial production growth rate: 19.7% (FY95/96)

Electricity--production: 787 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.89%
  hydro: 99.11%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 677 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 110 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: coffee, tea, cotton, tobacco, cassava
  (tapioca), potatoes, corn, millet, pulses; beef, goat meat, milk,
  poultry

Exports: $476 million (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: coffee 54%, gold, fish and fish products,
  cotton, tea, corn (1997)

Exports--partners: Spain 14%, Germany 14%, Netherlands 10%, France
  8%, Italy (1997)

Imports: $1.4 billion (c.i.f., 1998)

Imports--commodities: transportation equipment, petroleum, medical
  supplies, iron and steel (1996)

Imports--partners: Kenya 31%, UK 12%, Japan 6%, India 6%, South
  Africa 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $2.9 billion (1998 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $827.3 million (1993)

Currency: 1 Ugandan shilling (USh) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Ugandan shillings (USh) per US$1--1,368.4
  (December 1998), 1,240.2 (1998), 1,083.0 (1997), 1,046.1 (1996),
  968.9 (1995), 979.4 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 61,600 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: fair system but in serious need of expansion
  and better maintenance; a cellular system has been introduced as a
  stopgap but the communications problems will not be solved without
  substantial investment in the conventional telephone infrastructure;
  e-mail and Internet services are available
  domestic: intercity traffic by wire, microwave radio relay, and
  radiotelephone communications stations, cellular system for short
  range traffic
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 10, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 2.13 million (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 8 (in addition, there is one
  low-power repeater) (1997)

Televisions: 220,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,241 km
  narrow gauge: 1,241 km 1.000-m gauge
  note: a program to rehabilitate the railroad is underway (1995)

Highways:
  total: 27,000 km
  paved: 1,800 km
  unpaved: 25,200 km (of which about 4,800 km are all-weather roads)
  (1990 est.)

Waterways: Lake Victoria, Lake Albert, Lake Kyoga, Lake George,
  Lake Edward, Victoria Nile, Albert Nile

Ports and harbors: Entebbe, Jinja, Port Bell

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 roll-on/roll-off cargo ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling
  5,091 GRT/8,229 DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 27 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 4
  over 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 23
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 6
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 7 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Wing

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 4,812,363 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,611,096 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $95 million (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.9% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Ugandan military forces are supporting
  the rebel forces in the civil war in the Democratic Republic of the
  Congo



======================================================================




@Ukraine
-------





Geography



Location: Eastern Europe, bordering the Black Sea, between Poland
  and Russia

Geographic coordinates: 49 00 N, 32 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 603,700 sq km
  land: 603,700 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,558 km
  border countries: Belarus 891 km, Hungary 103 km, Moldova 939 km,
  Poland 428 km, Romania (south) 169 km, Romania (west) 362 km, Russia
  1,576 km, Slovakia 90 km

Coastline: 2,782 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate continental; Mediterranean only on the
  southern Crimean coast; precipitation disproportionately
  distributed, highest in west and north, lesser in east and
  southeast; winters vary from cool along the Black Sea to cold
  farther inland; summers are warm across the greater part of the
  country, hot in the south

Terrain: most of Ukraine consists of fertile plains (steppes) and
  plateaus, mountains being found only in the west (the Carpathians),
  and in the Crimean Peninsula in the extreme south

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Black Sea 0 m
  highest point: Hora Hoverla 2,061 m

Natural resources: iron ore, coal, manganese, natural gas, oil,
  salt, sulfur, graphite, titanium, magnesium, kaolin, nickel,
  mercury, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 58%
  permanent crops: 2%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 18%
  other: 9% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 26,050 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: inadequate supplies of potable water;
  air and water pollution; deforestation; radiation contamination in
  the northeast from 1986 accident at Chornobyl' Nuclear Power Plant

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 85, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity, Climate
  Change, Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic
  Compounds, Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: strategic position at the crossroads between
  Europe and Asia; second-largest country in Europe



People



Population: 49,811,174 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 18% (male 4,690,318; female 4,498,239)
  15-64 years: 68% (male 16,136,296; female 17,572,011)
  65 years and over: 14% (male 2,251,664; female 4,662,646) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: -0.62% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 9.54 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.38 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.63 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.92 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.48 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.86 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 21.73 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 65.91 years
  male: 60.23 years
  female: 71.87 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.34 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ukrainian(s)
  adjective: Ukrainian

Ethnic groups: Ukrainian 73%, Russian 22%, Jewish 1%, other 4%

Religions: Ukrainian Orthodox--Moscow Patriarchate, Ukrainian
  Orthodox--Kiev Patriarchate, Ukrainian Autocephalous Orthodox,
  Ukrainian Catholic (Uniate), Protestant, Jewish

Languages: Ukrainian, Russian, Romanian, Polish, Hungarian

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 98%
  male: 100%
  female: 97% (1989 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Ukraine
  local long form: none
  local short form: Ukrayina
  former: Ukrainian Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: UP

Government type: republic

Capital: Kiev (Kyyiv)

Administrative divisions: 24 oblasti (singular--oblast'), 1
  autonomous republic* (avtomnaya respublika), and 2 municipalities
  (mista, singular--misto) with oblast status**; Cherkas'ka (Cherkasy),
  Chernihivs'ka (Chernihiv), Chernivets'ka (Chernivtsi),
  Dnipropetrovs'ka (Dnipropetrovs'k), Donets'ka (Donets'k),
  Ivano-Frankivs'ka (Ivano-Frankivs'k), Kharkivs'ka (Kharkiv),
  Khersons'ka (Kherson), Khmel'nyts'ka (Khmel'nyts'kyy),
  Kirovohrads'ka (Kirovohrad), Kyyiv**, Kyyivs'ka (Kiev), Luhans'ka
  (Luhans'k), L'vivs'ka (L'viv), Mykolayivs'ka (Mykolayiv), Odes'ka
  (Odesa), Poltavs'ka (Poltava), Avtonomna Respublika Krym*
  (Simferopol'), Rivnens'ka (Rivne), Sevastopol'**, Sums'ka (Sumy),
  Ternopil's'ka (Ternopil'), Vinnyts'ka (Vinnytsya), Volyns'ka
  (Luts'k), Zakarpats'ka (Uzhhorod), Zaporiz'ka (Zaporizhzhya),
  Zhytomyrs'ka (Zhytomyr)
  note: oblasts have the administrative center name following in
  parentheses

Independence: 1 December 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 August (1991)

Constitution: adopted 28 June 1996

Legal system: based on civil law system; judicial review of
  legislative acts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Leonid D. KUCHMA (since 19 July 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Valeriy PUSTOVOYTENKO (since 16
  July 1997), First Deputy Prime Minister Volodymyr KURATCHENKO (since
  14 January 1999), and three deputy prime ministers
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president and
  approved by the Supreme Council
  note: there is also a National Security and Defense Council or NSDC
  originally created in 1992 as the National Security Council, but
  significantly revamped and strengthened under President KUCHMA; the
  NSDC staff is tasked with developing national security policy on
  domestic and international matters and advising the president; a
  Presidential Administration that helps draft presidential edicts and
  provides policy support to the president; and a Council of Regions
  that serves as an advisory body created by President KUCHMA in
  September 1994 that includes chairmen of the Kyyiv (Kiev) and
  Sevastopol' municipalities and chairmen of the Oblasti
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 26 June and 10 July 1994 (next to be held NA
  October 1999); prime minister and deputy prime ministers appointed
  by the president and approved by the People's Council
  election results: Leonid D. KUCHMA elected president; percent of
  vote--Leonid KUCHMA 52.15%, Leonid KRAVCHUK 45.06%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Council or Verkhovna Rada
  (450 seats; under Ukraine's new election law, half of the Rada's
  seats are allocated on a proportional basis to those parties that
  gain 4% of the national electoral vote; the other 225 members are
  elected by popular vote in single-mandate constituencies; all serve
  four-year terms)
  elections: last held 29 March 1998 (next to be held NA 2002);
  note--repeat elections continuing to fill vacant seats
  election results: percent of vote by party (for parties clearing 4%
  hurdle on 29 March 1998)--Communist 24.7%, Rukh 9.4%,
  Socialist/Peasant 8.6%, Green 5.3%, People's Democratic Party 5.0%,
  Hromada 4.7%, Progressive Socialist 4.0%, United Social Democratic
  Party 4.0%; seats by party (as of 8 July 1998)--Communist 120,
  People's Democratic Party 88, Rukh 47, Hromada 45, Socialist/Peasant
  33, United Social Democratic 25, Green 24, Progressive Socialist 14,
  independents 26, vacant 28

Judicial branch: Supreme Court; Constitutional Court

Political parties and leaders: Communist Party of Ukraine [Petro
  VITRENKO]
  note: and numerous smaller parties

Political pressure groups and leaders: New Ukraine (Nova
  Ukrayina); Congress of National Democratic Forces

International organization participation: BSEC, CCC, CE, CEI,
  CIS, EAPC, EBRD, ECE, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IFC, IFRCS, IHO
  (pending member), ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat (nonsignatory
  user), Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU, MONUA, NSG, OAS
  (observer), OPCW, OSCE, PCA, PFP, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNMIBH,
  UNMOP, UNMOT, UNPREDEP, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Anton Denysovych BUTEYKO
  chancery: 3350 M Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Chicago and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Steven Karl PIFER
  embassy: 10 Yuria Kotsubynskoho, 254053 Kiev 53
  mailing address: use embassy street address

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of azure (top) and
  golden yellow represent grainfields under a blue sky



Economy



Economy--overview: After Russia, the Ukrainian republic was far
  and away the most important economic component of the former Soviet
  Union, producing about four times the output of the next-ranking
  republic. Its fertile black soil generated more than one-fourth of
  Soviet agricultural output, and its farms provided substantial
  quantities of meat, milk, grain, and vegetables to other republics.
  Likewise, its diversified heavy industry supplied equipment and raw
  materials to industrial and mining sites in other regions of the
  former USSR. Ukraine depends on imports of energy, especially
  natural gas. Shortly after the implosion of the USSR in December
  1991, the Ukrainian Government liberalized most prices and erected a
  legal framework for privatization, but widespread resistance to
  reform within the government and the legislature soon stalled reform
  efforts and led to some backtracking. Output in 1992-98 fell to less
  than half the 1991 level. Loose monetary policies pushed inflation
  to hyperinflationary levels in late 1993. Since his election in July
  1994, President KUCHMA has pushed economic reforms, maintained
  financial discipline, and tried to remove almost all remaining
  controls over prices and foreign trade. The onset of the financial
  crisis in Russia dashed Ukraine's hopes for its first year of
  economic growth in 1998 due to a sharp fall in export revenue and
  reduced domestic demand. Although administrative currency controls
  will be lifted in early 1999, they are likely to be reimposed when
  the hryvnia next comes under pressure. The currency is only likely
  to collapse further if Ukraine abandons tight monetary policies or
  threatens default. Despite increasing pressure from the IMF to
  accelerate reform, significant economic restructuring remains
  unlikely in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$108.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -1.7% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 14%
  industry: 30%
  services: 56% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 50% (1997 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 4.1%
  highest 10%: 20.8% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 20% (yearend 1998 est.)

Labor force: 22.8 million (yearend 1997)

Labor force--by occupation: industry and construction 32%,
  agriculture and forestry 24%, health, education, and culture 17%,
  trade and distribution 8%, transport and communication 7%, other 12%
  (1996)

Unemployment rate: 3.7% officially registered; large number of
  unregistered or underemployed workers (December 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $18 billion
  expenditures: $21 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: coal, electric power, ferrous and nonferrous metals,
  machinery and transport equipment, chemicals, food-processing
  (especially sugar)

Industrial production growth rate: -1.5% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 171.8 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 47%
  hydro: 9.2%
  nuclear: 43.8%
  other: 0% (1998)

Electricity--consumption: 174 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--exports: 5 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--imports: 7 billion kWh (1998)

Agriculture--products: grain, sugar beets, sunflower seeds,
  vegetables; beef, milk

Exports: $11.3 billion (1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: ferrous and nonferrous metals, chemicals,
  machinery and transport equipment, food products

Exports--partners: Russia, China,, Turkey, Germany, Belarus (1998)

Imports: $13.1 billion (1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: energy, machinery and parts, transportation
  equipment, chemicals, plastics and rubber

Imports--partners: Russia, Germany, US, Poland, Italy (1998)

Debt--external: $10.9 billion (October 1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $637.7 million (1995); IMF Extended Funds
  Facility $2.2 billion (1998)

Currency: 1 hryvna=100 kopiykas

Exchange rates: hryvnia per US$1--3.4270 (February 1999), 2.4495
  (1998), 1.8617 (1997), 1.8295 (1996), 1.4731 (1995), 0.3275 (1994)
  note: in August 1998, Ukraine introduced currency controls in an
  attempt to fend off the impact of the Russian financial crisis; it
  created an exchange rate corridor for the hryvnia of 2.5-3.5 hryvnia
  per US$1

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 12,531,277 (1998)

Telephone system: Ukraine's phone systems are administered
  through the State Committee for Communications; Ukraine has a
  telecommunication development plan through 2005; Internet service is
  available in large cities
  domestic: local--Kiev has a digital loop connected to the national
  digital backbone; Kiev has several cellular phone companies
  providing service in the different standards; some companies offer
  intercity roaming and even limited international roaming; cellular
  phone service is offered in at least 100 cities nationwide
  international: foreign investment in the form of joint business
  ventures greatly improved the Ukrainian telephone system; Ukraine's
  two main fiber-optic lines are part of the Trans-Asia-Europe
  Fiber-Optic Line (TAE); these lines connect Ukraine to worldwide
  service through Belarus, Hungary, and Poland; Odesa is a landing
  point for the Italy-Turkey-Ukraine-Russia Undersea Fiber-Optic Cable
  (ITUR) giving Ukraine an additional fiber-optic link to worldwide
  service; Ukraine has Intelsat, Inmarsat, and Intersputnik earth
  stations

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note--at
  least 25 local broadcast stations of NA type (1998)

Radios: 15 million (1990)

Television broadcast stations: at least 33 (in addition 21
  repeater stations that relay ORT broadcasts from Russia) (1997)

Televisions: 17.3 million (1992)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 23,350 km
  broad gauge: 23,350 km 1.524-m gauge (8,600 km electrified)

Highways:
  total: 172,565 km
  paved: 163,937 km (including 1,875 km of expressways); note--these
  roads are said to be hard-surfaced, meaning that some are paved and
  some are all-weather gravel surfaced
  unpaved: 8,628 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 4,400 km navigable waterways, of which 1,672 km were
  on the Pryp''yat' and Dnistr (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 4,000 km (1995); petroleum products 4,500 km
  (1995); natural gas 34,400 km (1998)

Ports and harbors: Berdyans'k, Illichivs'k, Izmayil, Kerch,
  Kherson, Kiev (Kyyiv), Mariupol', Mykolayiv, Odesa, Reni

Merchant marine:
  total: 181 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,022,047
  GRT/1,101,278 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 9, cargo 117, liquefied gas tanker 1, container
  4, multifunction large-load carrier 2, oil tanker 16, passenger 12,
  passenger-cargo 3, railcar carrier 2, refrigerated cargo 2,
  roll-on/roll-off cargo 10, short-sea passenger 3 (1998 est.)

Airports: 706 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 163
  over 3,047 m: 14
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 55
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 34
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 57 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 543
  over 3,047 m: 7
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 16
  914 to 1,523 m: 37
  under 914 m: 476 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Force,
  Internal Troops, National Guard, Border Troops

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 12,434,486 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 9,740,684 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 365,762 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $414 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: dispute with Romania over continental
  shelf of the Black Sea under which significant gas and oil deposits
  may exist; agreed in 1997 to two-year negotiating period, after
  which either party can refer dispute to the International Court of
  Justice (ICJ); has made no territorial claim in Antarctica (but has
  reserved the right to do so) and does not recognize the claims of
  any other nation

Illicit drugs: limited cultivation of cannabis and opium poppy,
  mostly for CIS consumption; some synthetic drug production for
  export to West; limited government eradication program; used as
  transshipment point for opiates and other illicit drugs from Africa,
  Latin America, and Turkey, and to Europe and Russia; drug-related
  money laundering a minor, but growing, problem



======================================================================




@United Arab Emirates
--------------------





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Gulf of Oman and the Persian
  Gulf, between Oman and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 24 00 N, 54 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 82,880 sq km
  land: 82,880 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Maine

Land boundaries:
  total: 867 km
  border countries: Oman 410 km, Saudi Arabia 457 km

Coastline: 1,318 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: desert; cooler in eastern mountains

Terrain: flat, barren coastal plain merging into rolling sand
  dunes of vast desert wasteland; mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Persian Gulf 0 m
  highest point: Jabal Yibir 1,527 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 2%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 98% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 50 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: frequent sand and dust storms

Environment--current issues: lack of natural freshwater resources
  being overcome by desalination plants; desertification; beach
  pollution from oil spills

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Hazardous Wastes, Marine Dumping, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Biodiversity, Law of the Sea

Geography--note: strategic location along southern approaches to
  Strait of Hormuz, a vital transit point for world crude oil



People



Population: 2,344,402 (July 1999 est.)
  note: includes 1,576,589 non-nationals (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 31% (male 368,844; female 353,183)
  15-64 years: 67% (male 1,015,690; female 558,902)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 32,935; female 14,848) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.78% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 18.86 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 3.13 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 2.03 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.82 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 2.22 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.53 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 14.1 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.24 years
  male: 73.83 years
  female: 76.72 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.5 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Emirian(s)
  adjective: Emirian

Ethnic groups: Emiri 19%, other Arab and Iranian 23%, South Asian
  50%, other expatriates (includes Westerners and East Asians) 8%
  (1982)
  note: less than 20% are UAE citizens (1982)

Religions: Muslim 96% (Shi'a 16%), Christian, Hindu, and other 4%

Languages: Arabic (official), Persian, English, Hindi, Urdu

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 79.2%
  male: 78.9%
  female: 79.8% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: United Arab Emirates
  conventional short form: none
  local long form: Al Imarat al Arabiyah al Muttahidah
  local short form: none
  former: Trucial States
  abbreviation: UAE

Data code: TC

Government type: federation with specified powers delegated to
  the UAE federal government and other powers reserved to member
  emirates

Capital: Abu Dhabi

Administrative divisions: 7 emirates (imarat, singular--imarah);
  Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi), 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Ash Shariqah (Sharjah),
  Dubayy (Dubai), Ra's al Khaymah, Umm al Qaywayn

Independence: 2 December 1971 (from UK)

National holiday: National Day, 2 December (1971)

Constitution: 2 December 1971 (made permanent in 1996)

Legal system: federal court system introduced in 1971; all
  emirates except Dubayy (Dubai) and Ra's al Khaymah have joined the
  federal system; all emirates have secular and Islamic law for civil,
  criminal, and high courts

Suffrage: none

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan (since 2
  December 1971), ruler of Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi) (since 6 August 1966)
  and Vice President MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum (since 8 October
  1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai)
  head of government: Prime Minister MAKTUM bin Rashid al-Maktum
  (since 8 October 1990), ruler of Dubayy (Dubai); Deputy Prime
  Minister SULTAN bin Zayid Al Nuhayyan (since 20 November 1990)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  note: there is also a Federal Supreme Council (FSC) which is
  composed of the seven emirate rulers; the council is the highest
  constitutional authority in the UAE; establishes general policies
  and sanctions federal legislation, Abu Zaby (Abu Dhabi) and Dubayy
  (Dubai) rulers have effective veto power; meets four times a year
  elections: president and vice president elected by the FSC (a group
  of seven electors) for five-year terms; election last held NA
  October 1996 (next to be held NA 2001); prime minister and deputy
  prime minister appointed by the president
  election results: ZAYID bin Sultan Al Nuhayyan reelected president;
  percent of FSC vote--NA, but believed to be unanimous; MAKTUM bin
  Rashid al-Maktum elected vice president; percent of FSC vote--NA, but
  believed to be unanimous

Legislative branch: unicameral Federal National Council or Majlis
  al-Ittihad al-Watani (40 seats; members appointed by the rulers of
  the constituent states to serve two-year terms)
  elections: none
  note: reviews legislation, but cannot change or veto

Judicial branch: Union Supreme Court, judges appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: none

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ABEDA, AfDB, AFESD, AL,
  AMF, CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, GCC, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA,
  IDB, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat,
  Interpol, IOC, ISO (correspondent), ITU, NAM, OAPEC, OIC, OPCW,
  OPEC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Muhammad bin Husayn al-SHAALI
  chancery: Suite 700, 1255 22nd Street NW, Washington, DC 20037

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Theodore H. KATTOUF
  embassy: Al-Sudan Street, Abu Dhabi
  mailing address: P. O. Box 4009, Abu Dhabi; American Embassy Abu
  Dhabi, Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-6010 (pouch);
  note--work week is Saturday through Wednesday
  consulate(s) general: Dubai

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of green (top),
  white, and black with a thicker vertical red band on the hoist side



Economy



Economy--overview: The UAE has an open economy with one of the
  world's highest per capita incomes and with a sizable annual trade
  surplus. Its wealth is based on oil and gas output (about 33% of
  GDP), and the fortunes of the economy fluctuate with the prices of
  those commodities. Since 1973, the UAE has undergone a profound
  transformation from an impoverished region of small desert
  principalities to a modern state with a high standard of living. At
  present levels of production, oil and gas reserves should last for
  over 100 years. The UAE Government is encouraging increased
  privatization within the economy. Industrial development has picked
  up in 1997-98, but lower world oil prices caused GDP to drop 5% in
  1998.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$40 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$17,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 3%
  industry: 52%
  services: 45% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 5% (1997 est.)

Labor force: 1.3 million (1997 est.)
  note: 75% of the population in the 15-64 age group is non-national
  (July 1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: services 60%, industry 32%,
  agriculture 8% (1996 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $5.4 billion
  expenditures: $5.8 billion, including capital expenditures of $350
  million (1998 budget est.)

Industries: petroleum, fishing, petrochemicals, construction
  materials, some boat building, handicrafts, pearling

Industrial production growth rate: 0% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 18 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 18 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: dates, vegetables, watermelons; poultry,
  eggs, dairy products; fish

Exports: $38 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil 45%, natural gas, reexports, dried
  fish, dates

Exports--partners: Japan 36%, South Korea 9%, Singapore 5%, India
  5%, Oman 3% (1997)

Imports: $29.7 billion (f.o.b., 1997 est.)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, machinery and transport
  equipment, chemicals, food

Imports--partners: US 9%, Japan 9%, UK 9%, Germany 6%, India 6%
  (1997)

Debt--external: $14 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Emirian dirham (Dh) = 100 fils

Exchange rates: Emirian dirhams (Dh) per US$1--central bank
  mid-point rate: 3.6725 (January 1999), 3.6725 (1998); fixed rate:
  3.6710 (1994-1997)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 677,793 (1993 est.)

Telephone system: modern system consisting of microwave radio
  relay and coaxial cable; key centers are Abu Dhabi and Dubai
  domestic: microwave radio relay and coaxial cable
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (1 Atlantic Ocean
  and 2 Indian Ocean) and 1 Arabsat; submarine cables to Qatar,
  Bahrain, India, and Pakistan; tropospheric scatter to Bahrain;
  microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 3, shortwave 0

Radios: 545,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 15 (1997)

Televisions: 170,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 4,835 km
  paved: 4,835 km
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 830 km; natural gas, including natural gas
  liquids, 870 km

Ports and harbors: 'Ajman, Al Fujayrah, Das Island, Khawr Fakkan,
  Mina' Jabal 'Ali, Mina' Khalid, Mina' Rashid, Mina' Saqr, Mina'
  Zayid, Umm al Qaywayn

Merchant marine:
  total: 74 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,093,795 GRT/1,757,189
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 4, cargo 20, chemical tanker 4, container 8,
  liquefied gas tanker 1, livestock carrier 1, oil tanker 28,
  refrigerated cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 7 (1998 est.)

Airports: 41 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 21
  over 3,047 m: 8
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 3
  914 to 1,523 m: 3
  under 914 m: 4 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 20
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 9
  under 914 m: 5 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense,
  paramilitary (includes Federal Police Force)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 791,097 (1999 est.)
  note: includes non-nationals

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 425,248 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 23,358 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $2.118 billion (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 5% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: location and status of boundary with
  Saudi Arabia is not final, de facto boundary reflects 1974
  agreement; no defined boundary with most of Oman, but Administrative
  Line in far north; claims two islands in the Persian Gulf occupied
  by Iran: Lesser Tunb (called Tunb as Sughra in Arabic by UAE and
  Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Kuchek in Persian by Iran) and Greater Tunb
  (called Tunb al Kubra in Arabic by UAE and Jazireh-ye Tonb-e Bozorg
  in Persian by Iran); claims island in the Persian Gulf jointly
  administered with Iran (called Abu Musa in Arabic by UAE and
  Jazireh-ye Abu Musa in Persian by Iran)--over which Iran has taken
  steps to exert unilateral control since 1992, including access
  restrictions and a military build-up on the island; the UAE has
  garnered significant diplomatic support in the region in protesting
  these Iranian actions

Illicit drugs: growing role as heroin transshipment and
  money-laundering center due to its proximity to southwest Asian
  producing countries and the bustling free trade zone in Dubai



======================================================================




@United Kingdom
--------------





Introduction



Background: Britain, the dominant industrial and maritime power
  of the nineteenth century, played a leading role in developing
  parliamentary democracy and in advancing literature and science. The
  British Empire covered approximately one-fourth of the earth's
  surface at its zenith. In the first half of the twentieth century
  its strength was seriously depleted by two world wars. Since the end
  of World War II, the British Empire has been dismantled, and Britain
  has rebuilt itself into a prosperous, modern European nation with
  significant international political, cultural, and economic
  influence. As the twentieth century draws to a close, Britain is
  debating the degree of its integration with continental Europe.
  While a member of the EU, for the time being it is staying out of
  the euro system introduced in January 1999. Constitutional reform,
  including the House of Lords and the devolution of power to
  Scotland, Wales, and Northern Ireland, is an ongoing issue in Great
  Britain.



Geography



Location: Western Europe, islands including the northern
  one-sixth of the island of Ireland between the North Atlantic Ocean
  and the North Sea, northwest of France

Geographic coordinates: 54 00 N, 2 00 W

Map references: Europe

Area:
  total: 244,820 sq km
  land: 241,590 sq km
  water: 3,230 sq km
  note: includes Rockall and Shetland Islands

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Oregon

Land boundaries:
  total: 360 km
  border countries: Ireland 360 km

Coastline: 12,429 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: as defined in continental shelf orders or in
  accordance with agreed upon boundaries
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: temperate; moderated by prevailing southwest winds over
  the North Atlantic Current; more than one-half of the days are
  overcast

Terrain: mostly rugged hills and low mountains; level to rolling
  plains in east and southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Fenland -4 m
  highest point: Ben Nevis 1,343 m

Natural resources: coal, petroleum, natural gas, tin, limestone,
  iron ore, salt, clay, chalk, gypsum, lead, silica

Land use:
  arable land: 25%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 10%
  other: 19% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,080 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: sulfur dioxide emissions from power
  plants contribute to air pollution; some rivers polluted by
  agricultural wastes; and coastal waters polluted because of
  large-scale disposal of sewage at sea

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides, Air
  Pollution-Sulphur 94, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species, Environmental
  Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: lies near vital North Atlantic sea lanes; only 35
  km from France and now linked by tunnel under the English Channel;
  because of heavily indented coastline, no location is more than 125
  km from tidal waters



People



Population: 59,113,439 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 19% (male 5,822,901; female 5,522,122)
  15-64 years: 65% (male 19,393,706; female 19,103,882)
  65 years and over: 16% (male 3,821,181; female 5,449,647) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.24% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 11.9 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 10.64 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 1.11 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.97 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 5.78 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.37 years
  male: 74.73 years
  female: 80.15 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 1.71 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Briton(s), British (collective plural)
  adjective: British

Ethnic groups: English 81.5%, Scottish 9.6%, Irish 2.4%, Welsh
  1.9%, Ulster 1.8%, West Indian, Indian, Pakistani, and other 2.8%

Religions: Anglican 27 million, Roman Catholic 9 million, Muslim
  1 million, Presbyterian 800,000, Methodist 760,000, Sikh 400,000,
  Hindu 350,000, Jewish 300,000 (1991 est.)

Languages: English, Welsh (about 26% of the population of Wales),
  Scottish form of Gaelic (about 60,000 in Scotland)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over has completed five or more years of
  schooling
  total population: 99% (1978 est.)
  male: NA%
  female: NA%



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern
  Ireland
  conventional short form: United Kingdom
  abbreviation: UK

Data code: UK

Government type: constitutional monarchy

Capital: London

Administrative divisions: 47 counties, 7 metropolitan counties,
  26 districts, 9 regions, and 3 islands areas; England--39 counties, 7
  metropolitan counties*; Avon, Bedford, Berkshire, Buckingham,
  Cambridge, Cheshire, Cleveland, Cornwall, Cumbria, Derby, Devon,
  Dorset, Durham, East Sussex, Essex, Gloucester, Greater London*,
  Greater Manchester*, Hampshire, Hereford and Worcester, Hertford,
  Humberside, Isle of Wight, Kent, Lancashire, Leicester, Lincoln,
  Merseyside*, Norfolk, Northampton, Northumberland, North Yorkshire,
  Nottingham, Oxford, Shropshire, Somerset, South Yorkshire*,
  Stafford, Suffolk, Surrey, Tyne and Wear*, Warwick, West Midlands*,
  West Sussex, West Yorkshire*, Wiltshire; Northern Ireland--26
  districts; Antrim, Ards, Armagh, Ballymena, Ballymoney, Banbridge,
  Belfast, Carrickfergus, Castlereagh, Coleraine, Cookstown,
  Craigavon, Down, Dungannon, Fermanagh, Larne, Limavady, Lisburn,
  Londonderry, Magherafelt, Moyle, Newry and Mourne, Newtownabbey,
  North Down, Omagh, Strabane; Scotland--9 regions, 3 islands areas*;
  Borders, Central, Dumfries and Galloway, Fife, Grampian, Highland,
  Lothian, Orkney*, Shetland*, Strathclyde, Tayside, Western Isles*;
  Wales--8 counties; Clwyd, Dyfed, Gwent, Gwynedd, Mid Glamorgan,
  Powys, South Glamorgan, West Glamorgan
  note: England may now have 35 counties and Wales 9 counties

Dependent areas: Anguilla, Bermuda, British Indian Ocean
  Territory, British Virgin Islands, Cayman Islands, Falkland Islands,
  Gibraltar, Guernsey, Jersey, Isle of Man, Montserrat, Pitcairn
  Islands, Saint Helena, South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands,
  Turks and Caicos Islands

Independence: England has existed as a unified entity since the
  10th century; the union between England and Wales was enacted under
  the Statute of Rhuddlan in 1284; in the Act of Union of 1707,
  England and Scotland agreed to permanent union as Great Britain; the
  legislative union of Great Britain and Ireland was implemented in
  1801, with the adoption of the name the United Kingdom of Great
  Britain and Ireland; the Anglo-Irish treaty of 1921 formalized a
  partition of Ireland; six northern Irish counties remained part of
  the United Kingdom as Northern Ireland and the current name of the
  country, the United Kingdom of Great Britain and Northern Ireland,
  was adopted in 1927

National holiday: Celebration of the Birthday of the Queen
  (second Saturday in June)

Constitution: unwritten; partly statutes, partly common law and
  practice

Legal system: common law tradition with early Roman and modern
  continental influences; no judicial review of Acts of Parliament;
  accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with reservations; British
  courts and legislation are increasingly subject to review by
  European Union courts

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Queen ELIZABETH II (since 6 February 1952); Heir
  Apparent Prince CHARLES (son of the queen, born 14 November 1948)
  head of government: Prime Minister Anthony C. L. (Tony) BLAIR (since
  2 May 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the prime minister
  elections: none; the monarch is hereditary; the prime minister is
  the leader of the majority party in the House of Commons (assuming
  there is no majority party, a prime minister would have a majority
  coalition or at least a coalition that was not rejected by the
  majority)

Legislative branch: bicameral Parliament consists of House of
  Lords (1,200 seats; four-fifths of the members are hereditary peers,
  two archbishops, 24 other senior bishops, serving and retired Lords
  of Appeal in Ordinary, other life peers, Scottish peers) and House
  of Commons (659 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms unless the House is dissolved earlier)
  elections: House of Lords--no elections; House of Commons--last held 1
  May 1997 (next to be held by NA May 2002); note--in 1998 elections
  were held for a Northern Ireland Parliament; in 1999 there will be
  elections for a new Scottish parliament and a new Welsh Assembly
  election results: House of Commons--percent of vote by party--Labor
  44.5%, Conservative 31%, Liberal Democratic 17%, other 7.5%; seats
  by party--Labor 418, Conservative 165, Liberal Democrat 46, other 30

Judicial branch: House of Lords, several Lords of Appeal in
  Ordinary are appointed by the monarch for life

Political parties and leaders: Conservative and Unionist Party

Political pressure groups and leaders: Trades Union Congress;
  Confederation of British Industry; National Farmers' Union; Campaign
  for Nuclear Disarmament

International organization participation: AfDB, AsDB, Australia
  Group, BIS, C, CCC, CDB (non-regional), CE, CERN, CP, EAPC, EBRD,
  ECA (associate), ECE, ECLAC, EIB, ESA, ESCAP, EU, FAO, G- 5, G- 7,
  G-10, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM
  (observer), ISO, ITU, MTCR, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS (observer), OECD,
  OPCW, OSCE, PCA, UN, UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNFICYP,
  UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG, UNOMSIL, UNRWA, UNU, UPU, WCL,
  WEU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Sir Christopher J. R. MEYER
  chancery: 3100 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008
  consulate(s) general: Atlanta, Boston, Chicago, Cleveland, Houston,
  Los Angeles, New York, and San Francisco
  consulate(s): Dallas, Miami, and Seattle

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Philip LADER
  embassy: 24/31 Grosvenor Square, London, W. 1A1AE
  mailing address: PSC 801, Box 40, FPO AE 09498-4040
  consulate(s) general: Belfast, Edinburgh

Flag description: blue with the red cross of Saint George (patron
  saint of England) edged in white superimposed on the diagonal red
  cross of Saint Patrick (patron saint of Ireland) which is
  superimposed on the diagonal white cross of Saint Andrew (patron
  saint of Scotland); known as the Union Flag or Union Jack; the
  design and colors (especially the Blue Ensign) have been the basis
  for a number of other flags including other Commonwealth countries
  and their constituent states or provinces, as well as British
  overseas territories



Economy



Economy--overview: The UK is one of the world's great trading
  powers and financial centers, and its essentially capitalistic
  economy ranks among the four largest in Western Europe. Over the
  past two decades the government has greatly reduced public ownership
  and contained the growth of social welfare programs. Agriculture is
  intensive, highly mechanized, and efficient by European standards,
  producing about 60% of food needs with only 1% of the labor force.
  The UK has large coal, natural gas, and oil reserves; primary energy
  production accounts for 10% of GDP, one of the highest shares of any
  industrial nation. Services, particularly banking, insurance, and
  business services, account by far for the largest proportion of GDP
  while industry continues to decline in importance, now employing
  only 18% of the work force. Economic growth is slowing, and Britain
  may experience a short recession in 1999. As a result, unemployment
  probably will begin to rise again. The BLAIR government has put off
  the question of participation in the euro system until after the
  next election, not expected until 2001, but Chancellor of the
  Exchequer BROWN is committed to preparing the British economy for
  eventual membership.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.252 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.6% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$21,200 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 1.5%
  industry: 31.5%
  services: 67% (1997)

Population below poverty line: 17%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.4%
  highest 10%: 24.7% (1986)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.7% (1998)

Labor force: 28.8 million (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: services 68.9%, manufacturing and
  construction 17.5%, government 11.3%, energy 1.2%, agriculture 1.1%
  (1996)

Unemployment rate: 7.5% (1998 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $487.7 billion
  expenditures: $492.6 billion, including capital expenditures of
  $23.1 billion (1997 est.)

Industries: production machinery including machine tools,
  electric power equipment, automation equipment, railroad equipment,
  shipbuilding, aircraft, motor vehicles and parts, electronics and
  communications equipment, metals, chemicals, coal, petroleum, paper
  and paper products, food processing, textiles, clothing, and other
  consumer goods

Industrial production growth rate: 0.5% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 309.672 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 72.28%
  hydro: 1.28%
  nuclear: 26.33%
  other: 0.11% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 326.322 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 16.65 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cereals, oilseed, potatoes, vegetables;
  cattle, sheep, poultry; fish

Exports: $271 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: manufactured goods, fuels, chemicals; food,
  beverages, tobacco

Exports--partners: EU countries 56% (Germany 12%, France 10%,
  Netherlands 8%), US 12% (1997)

Imports: $304 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: manufactured goods, machinery, fuels,
  foodstuffs

Imports--partners: EU countries 53% (Germany 14%, France 10%,
  Netherlands 7%, Ireland 5%), US 13% (1997)

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $3.4 billion (1996)

Currency: 1 British pound (L) = 100 pence

Exchange rates: British pounds (L) per US$1--0.6057 (January
  1999), 0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995),
  0.6529 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 April--31 March



Communications



Telephones: 29.5 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: technologically advanced domestic and
  international system
  domestic: equal mix of buried cables, microwave radio relay, and
  fiber-optic systems
  international: 40 coaxial submarine cables; satellite earth
  stations--10 Intelsat (7 Atlantic Ocean and 3 Indian Ocean), 1
  Inmarsat (Atlantic Ocean region), and 1 Eutelsat; at least 8 large
  international switching centers

Radio broadcast stations: AM 225, FM 525 (mostly repeaters),
  shortwave 0

Radios: 70 million

Television broadcast stations: 78 (in addition, there are 869
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 20 million



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 16,878 km
  broad gauge: 342 km 1.600-m gauge (190 km double track); note--all
  1.600-m gauge track, of which 342 km is in common carrier use, is in
  Northern Ireland
  standard gauge: 16,536 km 1.435-m gauge (4,928 km electrified;
  12,591 km double or multiple track) (1996)

Highways:
  total: 372,000 km
  paved: 372,000 km (including 3,270 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 0 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 3,200 km

Pipelines: crude oil (almost all insignificant) 933 km; petroleum
  products 2,993 km; natural gas 12,800 km

Ports and harbors: Aberdeen, Belfast, Bristol, Cardiff, Dover,
  Falmouth, Felixstowe, Glasgow, Grangemouth, Hull, Leith, Liverpool,
  London, Manchester, Peterhead, Plymouth, Scapa Flow, Sullom Voe,
  Tees, Tyne

Merchant marine:
  total: 155 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 2,460,361
  GRT/2,517,875 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 3, cargo 29, chemical tanker 6, combination
  ore/oil 1, container 25, liquefied gas tanker 1, oil tanker 51,
  passenger 8, passenger-cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 17, short-sea
  passenger 12, specialized tanker 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 497 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 356
  over 3,047 m: 10
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 32
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 169
  914 to 1,523 m: 91
  under 914 m: 54 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 141
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 23
  under 914 m: 117 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 12 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Royal Navy (includes Royal Marines),
  Royal Air Force

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 14,458,646 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 12,053,320 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $36.7 billion (FY98/99)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 2.6% (FY98/99)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: Northern Ireland issue with Ireland
  (historic peace agreement signed 10 April 1998); Gibraltar issue
  with Spain; Argentina claims Falkland Islands (Islas Malvinas);
  Argentina claims South Georgia and the South Sandwich Islands;
  Mauritius claims island of Diego Garcia in British Indian Ocean
  Territory; Rockall continental shelf dispute involving Denmark,
  Iceland, and Ireland (Ireland and the UK have signed a boundary
  agreement in the Rockall area); territorial claim in Antarctica
  (British Antarctic Territory); Seychelles claims Chagos Archipelago
  in British Indian Ocean Territory

Illicit drugs: gateway country for Latin American cocaine
  entering the European market; producer and major consumer of
  synthetic drugs, synthetic precursor chemicals; transshipment point
  for Southwest Asian heroin; money-laundering center



======================================================================




@United States
-------------





Introduction



Background: Buoyed by victories in World Wars I and II and the
  end of the Cold War in 1991, the US remains the world's most
  powerful nation-state. The economy is marked by steady growth, low
  unemployment, low inflation, and rapid advances in technology. The
  biggest cloud over this affluent society is the distribution of
  gains--since 1975 most of the increase in national income has gone to
  the 20% of people at the top of the income ladder.



Geography



Location: North America, bordering both the North Atlantic Ocean
  and the North Pacific Ocean, between Canada and Mexico

Geographic coordinates: 38 00 N, 97 00 W

Map references: North America

Area:
  total: 9,629,091 sq km
  land: 9,158,960 sq km
  water: 470,131 sq km
  note: includes only the 50 states and District of Columbia

Area--comparative: about one-half the size of Russia; about
  three-tenths the size of Africa; about one-half the size of South
  America (or slightly larger than Brazil); slightly larger than
  China; about two and one-half times the size of Western Europe

Land boundaries:
  total: 12,248 km
  border countries: Canada 8,893 km (including 2,477 km with Alaska),
  Cuba 29 km (US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay), Mexico 3,326 km
  note: Guantanamo Naval Base is leased by the US and thus remains
  part of Cuba

Coastline: 19,924 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 12 nm
  continental shelf: not specified
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly temperate, but tropical in Hawaii and Florida,
  arctic in Alaska, semiarid in the great plains west of the
  Mississippi River, and arid in the Great Basin of the southwest; low
  winter temperatures in the northwest are ameliorated occasionally in
  January and February by warm chinook winds from the eastern slopes
  of the Rocky Mountains

Terrain: vast central plain, mountains in west, hills and low
  mountains in east; rugged mountains and broad river valleys in
  Alaska; rugged, volcanic topography in Hawaii

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Death Valley -86 m
  highest point: Mount McKinley 6,194 m

Natural resources: coal, copper, lead, molybdenum, phosphates,
  uranium, bauxite, gold, iron, mercury, nickel, potash, silver,
  tungsten, zinc, petroleum, natural gas, timber

Land use:
  arable land: 19%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 25%
  forests and woodland: 30%
  other: 26% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 207,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tsunamis, volcanoes, and earthquake activity
  around Pacific Basin; hurricanes along the Atlantic and Gulf of
  Mexico coasts; tornadoes in the midwest and southeast; mud slides in
  California; forest fires in the west; flooding; permafrost in
  northern Alaska, a major impediment to development

Environment--current issues: air pollution resulting in acid rain
  in both the US and Canada; the US is the largest single emitter of
  carbon dioxide from the burning of fossil fuels; water pollution
  from runoff of pesticides and fertilizers; very limited natural
  fresh water resources in much of the western part of the country
  require careful management; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Air Pollution, Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides,
  Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty, Climate Change,
  Endangered Species, Environmental Modification, Marine Dumping,
  Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection,
  Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83, Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Air Pollution-Persistent Organic
  Pollutants, Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds, Biodiversity,
  Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Desertification, Hazardous Wastes

Geography--note: world's third-largest country (after Russia and
  Canada)



People



Population: 272,639,608 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 22% (male 30,097,125; female 28,699,568)
  15-64 years: 66% (male 89,024,052; female 90,379,328)
  65 years and over: 12% (male 14,189,132; female 20,250,403) (1999
  est.)

Population growth rate: 0.85% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 14.3 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.8 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 3 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.99 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.7 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 6.33 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 76.23 years
  male: 72.95 years
  female: 79.67 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.07 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: American(s)
  adjective: American

Ethnic groups: white 83.5%, black 12.4%, Asian 3.3%, Amerindian
  0.8% (1992)

Religions: Protestant 56%, Roman Catholic 28%, Jewish 2%, other
  4%, none 10% (1989)

Languages: English, Spanish (spoken by a sizable minority)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97%
  male: 97%
  female: 97% (1979 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: United States of America
  conventional short form: United States
  abbreviation: US or USA

Data code: US

Government type: federal republic; strong democratic tradition

Capital: Washington, DC

Administrative divisions: 50 states and 1 district*; Alabama,
  Alaska, Arizona, Arkansas, California, Colorado, Connecticut,
  Delaware, District of Columbia*, Florida, Georgia, Hawaii, Idaho,
  Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Kansas, Kentucky, Louisiana, Maine,
  Maryland, Massachusetts, Michigan, Minnesota, Mississippi, Missouri,
  Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Jersey, New Mexico,
  New York, North Carolina, North Dakota, Ohio, Oklahoma, Oregon,
  Pennsylvania, Rhode Island, South Carolina, South Dakota, Tennessee,
  Texas, Utah, Vermont, Virginia, Washington, West Virginia,
  Wisconsin, Wyoming

Dependent areas: American Samoa, Baker Island, Guam, Howland
  Island, Jarvis Island, Johnston Atoll, Kingman Reef, Midway Islands,
  Navassa Island, Northern Mariana Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Puerto
  Rico, Virgin Islands, Wake Atoll
  note: from 18 July 1947 until 1 October 1994, the US administered
  the Trust Territory of the Pacific Islands, but recently entered
  into a new political relationship with all four political units: the
  Northern Mariana Islands is a commonwealth in political union with
  the US (effective 3 November 1986); Palau concluded a Compact of
  Free Association with the US (effective 1 October 1994); the
  Federated States of Micronesia signed a Compact of Free Association
  with the US (effective 3 November 1986); the Republic of the
  Marshall Islands signed a Compact of Free Association with the US
  (effective 21 October 1986)

Independence: 4 July 1776 (from England)

National holiday: Independence Day, 4 July (1776)

Constitution: 17 September 1787, effective 4 March 1789

Legal system: based on English common law; judicial review of
  legislative acts; accepts compulsory ICJ jurisdiction, with
  reservations

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20
  January 1993) and Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
  1993); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President William Jefferson CLINTON (since 20
  January 1993) and Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
  1993); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president with Senate approval
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by a college of representatives who are elected directly from each
  state; president and vice president serve four-year terms; election
  last held 5 November 1996 (next to be held 7 November 2000)
  election results: William Jefferson CLINTON reelected president;
  percent of popular vote--William Jefferson CLINTON (Democratic Party)
  49.2%, Robert DOLE (Republican Party) 40.7%, Ross PEROT (Reform
  Party) 8.4%, other 1.7%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress consists of Senate (100
  seats, one-third are renewed every two years; two members are
  elected from each state by popular vote to serve six-year terms) and
  House of Representatives (435 seats; members are directly elected by
  popular vote to serve two-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 2 November 1998 (next to be held 7
  November 2000); House of Representatives--last held 2 November 1998
  (next to be held 7 November 2000)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Republican Party 55, Democratic Party 45; House of
  Representatives--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Republican Party 223, Democratic Party 211, independent 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court (the nine justices are appointed
  for life by the president with confirmation by the Senate)

Political parties and leaders: Republican Party [Jim NICHOLSON,
  national committee chairman]; several other groups or parties of
  minor political significance

International organization participation: AfDB, ANZUS, APEC,
  AsDB, Australia Group, BIS, CCC, CE (observer), CERN (observer), CP,
  EAPC, EBRD, ECE, ECLAC, ESCAP, FAO, G-5, G-7, G-10, IADB, IAEA,
  IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IEA, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Inmarsat, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, MINURSO,
  MIPONUH, MTCR, NATO, NEA, NSG, OAS, OECD, OPCW, OSCE, PCA, SPC, UN,
  UN Security Council, UNCTAD, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMIBH, UNOMIG,
  UNPREDEP, UNRWA, UNTSO, UNU, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WTrO, ZC

Flag description: thirteen equal horizontal stripes of red (top
  and bottom) alternating with white; there is a blue rectangle in the
  upper hoist-side corner bearing 50 small, white, five-pointed stars
  arranged in nine offset horizontal rows of six stars (top and
  bottom) alternating with rows of five stars; the 50 stars represent
  the 50 states, the 13 stripes represent the 13 original colonies;
  known as Old Glory; the design and colors have been the basis for a
  number of other flags, including Chile, Liberia, Malaysia, and
  Puerto Rico



Economy



Economy--overview: The US has the most powerful, diverse, and
  technologically advanced economy in the world, with a per capita GDP
  of $31,500, the largest among major industrial nations. In this
  market-oriented economy, private individuals and business firms make
  most of the decisions, and government buys needed goods and services
  predominantly in the private marketplace. US business firms enjoy
  considerably greater flexibility than their counterparts in Western
  Europe and Japan in decisions to expand capital plant, lay off
  surplus workers, and develop new products. At the same time, they
  face higher barriers to entry in their rivals' home markets than the
  barriers to entry of foreign firms in US markets. US firms are at or
  near the forefront in technological advances, especially in
  computers and in medical, aerospace, and military equipment,
  although their advantage has narrowed since the end of World War II.
  The onrush of technology largely explains the gradual development of
  a "two-tier labor market" in which those at the bottom lack the
  education and the professional/technical skills of those at the top
  and, more and more, fail to get pay raises, health insurance
  coverage, and other benefits. Since 1975, practically all the gains
  in household income have gone to the top 20% of households. The
  years 1994-98 witnessed solid increases in real output, low
  inflation rates, and a drop in unemployment to below 5%. Long-term
  problems include inadequate investment in economic infrastructure,
  rapidly rising medical costs of an aging population, sizable trade
  deficits, and stagnation of family income in the lower economic
  groups. The outlook for 1999 is for GDP growth somewhat below
  1998's, continued low inflation, and about the same level of
  unemployment. Two shadows for 1999 are the severe financial crises
  in East Asia and Russia and the exuberant level of stock prices in
  relation to corporate earnings.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.511 trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$31,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 2%
  industry: 23%
  services: 75% (1998 est.)

Population below poverty line: 13% (1997 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.5%
  highest 10%: 28.5% (1994)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 1.6% (1998)

Labor force: 137.7 million (includes unemployed) (1998)

Labor force--by occupation: managerial and professional 29.6%,
  technical, sales and administrative support 29.3%, services 13.6%,
  manufacturing, mining, transportation, and crafts 24.8%, farming,
  forestry, and fishing 2.7% (1998)
  note: figures exclude the unemployed

Unemployment rate: 4.5% (1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $1.722 trillion
  expenditures: $1.653 trillion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998)

Industries: leading industrial power in the world, highly
  diversified and technologically advanced; petroleum, steel, motor
  vehicles, aerospace, telecommunications, chemicals, electronics,
  food processing, consumer goods, lumber, mining

Industrial production growth rate: 3.6% (1998)

Electricity--production: 3.629 trillion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 65.1%
  hydro: 9.6%
  nuclear: 18.59%
  other: 6.71% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 3.666 trillion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 9.02 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 46.543 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, other grains, corn, fruits,
  vegetables, cotton; beef, pork, poultry, dairy products; forest
  products; fish

Exports: $663 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: capital goods, automobiles, industrial
  supplies and raw materials, consumer goods, agricultural products

Exports--partners: Canada 22%, Western Europe 21%, Japan 10%,
  Mexico 10% (1997)

Imports: $912 billion (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: crude oil and refined petroleum products,
  machinery, automobiles, consumer goods, industrial raw materials,
  food and beverages

Imports--partners: Canada, 19%, Western Europe 18%, Japan 14%,
  Mexico 10%, China 7% (1997)

Debt--external: $862 billion (1995 est.)

Economic aid--donor: ODA, $7.4 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: British pounds (L) per US$--0.6057 (January 1999),
  0.6037 (1998), 0.6106 (1997), 0.6403 (1996), 0.6335 (1995), 0.6529
  (1994); Canadian dollars (Can$) per US$--1.5192 (January 1999),
  1.4835 (1998), 1.3846 (1997), 1.3635 (1996), 1.3724 (1995), 1.3656
  (1994); French francs (F) per US$--5.65 (January 1999), 5.8995
  (1998), 5.8367 (1997), 5.1155 (1996), 4.9915 (1995), 5.5520 (1994);
  Italian lire (Lit) per US$--1,668.7 (January 1999), 1,763.2 (1998),
  1,703.1 (1997), 1,542.9 (1996), 1,628.9 (1995), 1,612.4 (1994);
  Japanese yen (Y) per US$--113.18 (January 1999), 130.91 (1998),
  120.99 (1997), 108.78 (1996), 94.06 (1995), 102.21 (1994); German
  deutsche marks (DM) per US$--1.69 (January 1999), 1.9692 (1998),
  1.7341 (1997), 1.5048 (1996), 1.4331 (1995), 1.6228 (1994); Euro per
  US$--0.8597 (January 1999)

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 182.558 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: a large system of fiber-optic cable, microwave radio
  relay, coaxial cable, and domestic satellites carries conventional
  telephone traffic; a rapidly growing cellular system carries mobile
  telephone traffic throughout country
  international: 24 ocean cable systems in use; satellite earth
  stations--61 Intelsat (45 Atlantic Ocean and 16 Pacific Ocean), 5
  Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region), and 4 Inmarsat (Pacific and
  Atlantic Ocean regions) (1990 est.)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4,987, FM 4,932, shortwave 0

Radios: 540.5 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: more than 1,500 (including nearly
  1,000 stations affiliated with the five major networks--NBC, ABC,
  CBS, FOX, and PBS; in addition, there are about 9,000 cable TV
  systems) (1997)

Televisions: 215 million (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 240,000 km mainline routes (nongovernment owned)
  standard gauge: 240,000 km 1.435-m gauge (1989)

Highways:
  total: 6.42 million km
  paved: 3,903,360 km (including 88,400 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 2,516,640 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 41,009 km of navigable inland channels, exclusive of
  the Great Lakes

Pipelines: petroleum products 276,000 km; natural gas 331,000 km
  (1991)

Ports and harbors: Anchorage, Baltimore, Boston, Charleston,
  Chicago, Duluth, Hampton Roads, Honolulu, Houston, Jacksonville, Los
  Angeles, New Orleans, New York, Philadelphia, Port Canaveral,
  Portland (Oregon), Prudhoe Bay, San Francisco, Savannah, Seattle,
  Tampa, Toledo

Merchant marine:
  total: 385 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 11,123,848
  GRT/15,255,996 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 10, bulk 61, cargo 28, chemical tanker
  13, combination bulk 2, container 83, liquefied gas tanker 9,
  multifunctional large-load carrier 3, oil tanker 114, passenger 7,
  passenger-cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 43, short-sea passenger 3,
  specialized tanker 1, vehicle carrier 7 (1998 est.)

Airports: 14,459 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 5,167
  over 3,047 m: 180
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 219
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1,294
  914 to 1,523 m: 2,447
  under 914 m: 1,027 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 9,292
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 6
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 156
  914 to 1,523 m: 1,647
  under 914 m: 7,482 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 122 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Department of the Army, Department of the Navy
  (includes Marine Corps), Department of the Air Force
  note: the Coast Guard falls under the Department of Transportation,
  but in wartime reports to the Department of the Navy

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $267.2 billion (1997 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 3.4% (1997 est.)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary disputes with Canada
  (Dixon Entrance, Beaufort Sea, Strait of Juan de Fuca, Machias Seal
  Island); US Naval Base at Guantanamo Bay is leased from Cuba and
  only mutual agreement or US abandonment of the area can terminate
  the lease; Haiti claims Navassa Island; US has made no territorial
  claim in Antarctica (but has reserved the right to do so) and does
  not recognize the claims of any other nation; Marshall Islands
  claims Wake Atoll

Illicit drugs: consumer of cocaine shipped from Colombia through
  Mexico and the Caribbean; consumer of heroin, marijuana, and
  increasingly methamphetamines from Mexico; consumer of high-quality
  Southeast Asian heroin; illicit producer of cannabis, marijuana,
  depressants, stimulants, hallucinogens, and methamphetamines;
  drug-money-laundering center



======================================================================




@Uruguay
-------





Geography



Location: Southern South America, bordering the South Atlantic
  Ocean, between Argentina and Brazil

Geographic coordinates: 33 00 S, 56 00 W

Map references: South America

Area:
  total: 176,220 sq km
  land: 173,620 sq km
  water: 2,600 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than the state of Washington

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,564 km
  border countries: Argentina 579 km, Brazil 985 km

Coastline: 660 km

Maritime claims:
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  territorial sea: 200 nm; overflight and navigation guaranteed beyond
  12 nm

Climate: warm temperate; freezing temperatures almost unknown

Terrain: mostly rolling plains and low hills; fertile coastal
  lowland

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Atlantic Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Cerro Catedral 514 m

Natural resources: fertile soil, hydropower, minor minerals,
  fisheries

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 77%
  forests and woodland: 6%
  other: 10% (1997 est.)

Irrigated land: 7,700 sq km (1997 est.)

Natural hazards: seasonally high winds (the pampero is a chilly
  and occasional violent wind which blows north from the Argentine
  pampas), droughts, floods; because of the absence of mountains,
  which act as weather barriers, all locations are particularly
  vulnerable to rapid changes in weather fronts

Environment--current issues: working with Brazil to monitor and
  minimize transboundary pollution caused by Brazilian power plant
  near border; water pollution from meat packing/tannery industry;
  inadequate solid/hazardous waste disposal

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Antarctic-Environmental Protocol, Antarctic Treaty,
  Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered Species,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands,
  Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Marine
  Dumping, Marine Life Conservation



People



Population: 3,308,523 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 24% (male 407,990; female 388,293)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 1,026,554; female 1,054,513)
  65 years and over: 13% (male 179,331; female 251,842) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 0.73% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 16.84 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.81 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.95 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 13.49 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 75.83 years
  male: 72.69 years
  female: 79.15 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.27 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Uruguayan(s)
  adjective: Uruguayan

Ethnic groups: white 88%, mestizo 8%, black 4%, Amerindian,
  practically nonexistent

Religions: Roman Catholic 66% (less than one-half of the adult
  population attends church regularly), Protestant 2%, Jewish 2%,
  nonprofessing or other 30%

Languages: Spanish, Portunol, or Brazilero (Portuguese-Spanish
  mix on the Brazilian frontier)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 97.3%
  male: 96.9%
  female: 97.7% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Oriental Republic of Uruguay
  conventional short form: Uruguay
  local long form: Republica Oriental del Uruguay
  local short form: Uruguay

Data code: UY

Government type: republic

Capital: Montevideo

Administrative divisions: 19 departments (departamentos,
  singular--departamento); Artigas, Canelones, Cerro Largo, Colonia,
  Durazno, Flores, Florida, Lavalleja, Maldonado, Montevideo,
  Paysandu, Rio Negro, Rivera, Rocha, Salto, San Jose, Soriano,
  Tacuarembo, Treinta y Tres

Independence: 25 August 1825 (from Brazil)

National holiday: Independence Day, 25 August (1825)

Constitution: 27 November 1966, effective February 1967,
  suspended 27 June 1973, new constitution rejected by referendum 30
  November 1980; two constitutional reforms approved by plebiscite 26
  November 1989 and 7 January 1997

Legal system: based on Spanish civil law system; accepts
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal and compulsory

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Julio Maria SANGUINETTI (since 1 March
  1995) and Vice President Hugo FERNANDEZ Faingold (since 5 October
  1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  head of government: President Julio Maria SANGUINETTI (since 1 March
  1995) and Vice President Hugo FERNANDEZ Faingold (since 5 October
  1998); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president with
  parliamentary approval
  elections: president and vice president elected on the same ticket
  by popular vote for five-year terms; election last held 27 November
  1994 (next to be held 31 October 1999 with run-off election if
  necessary on 28 November 1999)
  election results: Julio Maria SANGUINETTI elected president; percent
  of vote--23%

Legislative branch: bicameral General Assembly or Asamblea
  General consists of Chamber of Senators or Camara de Senadores (30
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  and Chamber of Representatives or Camara de Representantes (99
  seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Chamber of Senators--last held 27 November 1994 (next to
  be held 31 October 1999); Chamber of Representatives--last held 27
  November 1994 (next to be held 31 October 1999)
  election results: Chamber of Senators--percent of vote by
  party--Colorado 36%, Blanco 34%, Encuentro Progresista 27%, New
  Sector/Space 3%; seats by party--Colorado 11, Blanco 10, Encuentro
  Progresista 8, New Sector/Space 1; Chamber of
  Representatives--percent of vote by party--Colorado 32%, Blanco 31%,
  Encuentro Progresista 31%, New Sector/Space 5%; seats by
  party--Colorado 32, Blanco 31, Encuentro Progresista 31, New
  Sector/Space 5

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are nominated by the
  president and elected for 10-year terms by the General Assembly

Political parties and leaders: National Party or Blanco [Walter
  leader--Gen. Liber SEREGNI]; Progressive Encounter in the Broad Front

International organization participation: CCC, ECLAC, FAO, G-11,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS, IHO, ILO,
  IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES, LAIA,
  Mercosur, MINURSO, MONUA, NAM (observer), OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, PCA,
  RG, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNMOGIP, UNMOT, UNOMIG, UPU,
  WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Alvaro DIEZ DE MEDINA SUAREZ
  chancery: 2715 M Street, NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Los Angeles, Miami, and New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Christopher C. ASHBY
  embassy: Lauro Muller 1776, Montevideo
  mailing address: APO AA 34035

Flag description: nine equal horizontal stripes of white (top and
  bottom) alternating with blue; there is a white square in the upper
  hoist-side corner with a yellow sun bearing a human face known as
  the Sun of May and 16 rays alternately triangular and wavy



Economy



Economy--overview: Uruguay's small economy benefits from a
  favorable climate for agriculture and substantial hydropower
  production. The SANGUINETTI government's conservative monetary and
  fiscal policies are aimed at reducing inflation; other priorities
  include moving toward a more market-oriented economy, completing
  reform of the social security system, and increasing investment in
  education. Economic performance remains sensitive to conditions in
  Argentina and Brazil, largely because more than half of Uruguay's
  trade is conducted with its partners in Mercosur (the Southern Cone
  Common Market).

GDP: purchasing power parity--$28.4 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 3% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$8,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 8%
  industry: 26%
  services: 66% (1997)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 8.6% (1998)

Labor force: 1.38 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: government 25%, manufacturing 19%,
  agriculture 11%, commerce 12%, utilities, construction, transport,
  and communications 12%, other services 21% (1988 est.)

Unemployment rate: 10.5% (November 1998)

Budget:
  revenues: $4 billion
  expenditures: $4.3 billion, with capital expenditures of $385
  million (1997 est.)

Industries: meat processing, wool and hides, sugar, textiles,
  footwear, leather apparel, tires, cement, petroleum refining, wine

Industrial production growth rate: 5.6% (1997)

Electricity--production: 8.35 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 10.18%
  hydro: 89.82%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 8.223 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 437 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 310 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: wheat, rice, corn, sorghum; livestock; fish

Exports: $2.7 billion (f.o.b., 1997)

Exports--commodities: wool and textile manufactures, beef and
  other animal products, rice, fish and shellfish, chemicals

Exports--partners: Brazil, Argentina, US, Germany, Italy, UK

Imports: $3.7 billion (c.i.f., 1997)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, vehicles,
  chemicals, minerals, plastics, oil

Imports--partners: Brazil, Argentina, US, Italy, Germany, France,
  Spain

Debt--external: $4.6 billion (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $79.7 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Uruguayan peso ($Ur) = 100 centesimos

Exchange rates: Uruguayan pesos ($Ur) per US$1--11.08 (January
  1999), 9.98 (January 1998), 9.4418 (1997), 7.9718 (1996), 6.3491
  (1995), 5.0529 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 767,333 (1997)

Telephone system: some modern facilities
  domestic: most modern facilities concentrated in Montevideo; new
  nationwide microwave radio relay network
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 72, FM 0, shortwave 28

Radios: 1.89 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 26 (in addition, there are ten
  low-power repeaters for the Montevideo station) (1997)

Televisions: 1,131,065 (1996)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,994 km
  standard gauge: 2,073 km 1.435-m gauge (921 km closed) (1997)

Highways:
  total: 8,420 km
  paved: 7,578 km
  unpaved: 842 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,600 km; used by coastal and shallow-draft river craft

Ports and harbors: Fray Bentos, Montevideo, Nueva Palmira,
  Paysandu, Punta del Este, Colonia, Piriapolis

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 oil tankers (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 44,042 GRT/83,684
  DWT (1998 est.)

Airports: 65 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 15
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 8
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 50
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 15
  under 914 m: 33 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy (includes Naval Air Arm, Coast
  Guard, Marines), Air Force, Police (Coracero Guard, Grenadier Guard)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 806,451 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 653,796 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $172 million (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 0.9% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: two short sections of the boundary with
  Brazil are in dispute--Arroyo de la Invernada (Arroio Invernada) area
  of the Rio Cuareim (Rio Quarai) and the islands at the confluence of
  the Rio Cuareim (Rio Quarai) and the Uruguay River



======================================================================




@Uzbekistan
----------





Geography



Location: Central Asia, north of Afghanistan

Geographic coordinates: 41 00 N, 64 00 E

Map references: Commonwealth of Independent States

Area:
  total: 447,400 sq km
  land: 425,400 sq km
  water: 22,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than California

Land boundaries:
  total: 6,221 km
  border countries: Afghanistan 137 km, Kazakhstan 2,203 km,
  Kyrgyzstan 1,099 km, Tajikistan 1,161 km, Turkmenistan 1,621 km

Coastline: 0 km
  note: Uzbekistan includes the southern portion of the Aral Sea with
  a 420 km shoreline

Maritime claims: none (doubly landlocked)

Climate: mostly midlatitude desert, long, hot summers, mild
  winters; semiarid grassland in east

Terrain: mostly flat-to-rolling sandy desert with dunes; broad,
  flat intensely irrigated river valleys along course of Amu Darya,
  Sirdaryo (Syr Darya), and Zarafshon; Fergana Valley in east
  surrounded by mountainous Tajikistan and Kyrgyzstan; shrinking Aral
  Sea in west

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sariqarnish Kuli -12 m
  highest point: Adelunga Toghi 4,301 m

Natural resources: natural gas, petroleum, coal, gold, uranium,
  silver, copper, lead and zinc, tungsten, molybdenum

Land use:
  arable land: 9%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 46%
  forests and woodland: 3%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 40,000 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: drying up of the Aral Sea is
  resulting in growing concentrations of chemical pesticides and
  natural salts; these substances are then blown from the increasingly
  exposed lake bed and contribute to desertification; water pollution
  from industrial wastes and the heavy use of fertilizers and
  pesticides is the cause of many human health disorders; increasing
  soil salination; soil contamination from agricultural chemicals,
  including DDT

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Ozone Layer
  Protection
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: along with Liechtenstein, one of the only two
  doubly landlocked countries in the world



People



Population: 24,102,473 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 37% (male 4,556,973; female 4,413,617)
  15-64 years: 58% (male 6,938,090; female 7,068,839)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 443,604; female 681,350) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.32% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 23.43 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 7.75 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -2.44 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.65 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.98 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 71.58 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 63.91 years
  male: 60.29 years
  female: 67.71 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.82 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Uzbekistani(s)
  adjective: Uzbekistani

Ethnic groups: Uzbek 80%, Russian 5.5%, Tajik 5%, Kazakh 3%,
  Karakalpak 2.5%, Tatar 1.5%, other 2.5% (1996 est.)

Religions: Muslim 88% (mostly Sunnis), Eastern Orthodox 9%, other
  3%

Languages: Uzbek 74.3%, Russian 14.2%, Tajik 4.4%, other 7.1%

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 99%
  male: 99%
  female: 99% (yearend 1996)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Uzbekistan
  conventional short form: Uzbekistan
  local long form: Uzbekiston Respublikasi
  local short form: none
  former: Uzbek Soviet Socialist Republic

Data code: UZ

Government type: republic; effectively authoritarian presidential
  rule, with little power outside the executive branch; executive
  power concentrated in the presidency

Capital: Tashkent (Toshkent)

Administrative divisions: 12 wiloyatlar (singular--wiloyat), 1
  autonomous republic* (respublikasi), and 1 city** (shahri); Andijon
  Wiloyati, Bukhoro Wiloyati, Farghona Wiloyati, Jizzakh Wiloyati,
  Khorazm Wiloyati (Urganch), Namangan Wiloyati, Nawoiy Wiloyati,
  Qashqadaryo Wiloyati (Qarshi), Qoraqalpoghiston* (Nukus), Samarqand
  Wiloyati, Sirdaryo Wiloyati (Guliston), Surkhondaryo Wiloyati
  (Termiz), Toshkent Shahri**, Toshkent Wiloyati
  note: administrative divisions have the same names as their
  administrative centers (exceptions have the administrative center
  name following in parentheses)

Independence: 31 August 1991 (from Soviet Union)

National holiday: Independence Day, 1 September (1991)

Constitution: new constitution adopted 8 December 1992

Legal system: evolution of Soviet civil law; still lacks
  independent judicial system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Islom KARIMOV (since 24 March 1990, when
  he was elected president by the then Supreme Soviet)
  head of government: Prime Minister Otkir SULTONOV (since 21 December
  1995) and 10 deputy prime ministers
  cabinet: Cabinet of Ministers appointed by the president with
  approval of the Supreme Assembly
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 29 December 1991 (next to be held NA January
  2000; note--extension of President KARIMOV's term for an additional
  four years overwhelmingly approved--99.6% of total vote in favor--by
  national referendum held 26 March 1995); prime minister and all
  other ministers appointed by the president
  election results: Islom KARIMOV elected president; percent of
  vote--Islom KARIMOV 86%, Muhammed SOLIH 12%, other 2%

Legislative branch: unicameral Supreme Assembly or Oliy Majlis
  (250 seats; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 25 December 1994 (next to be held NA December
  1999)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--People's Democratic Party 207, Fatherland Progress Party 12,
  other 31; note--seating following the final runoff elections were
  held 22 January 1995: People's Democratic Party 69, Fatherland
  Progress Party 14, Social Democratic Party 47, local government 120
  note: all parties in parliament support President KARIMOV

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, judges are nominated by the
  president and confirmed by the Supreme Assembly

Political parties and leaders: People's Democratic Party or NDP
  YULDASHEV, chairman]; Adolat (Justice) Social Democratic Party
  secretary]

Political pressure groups and leaders: Birlik (Unity) Movement

International organization participation: AsDB, CCC, CIS, EAPC,
  EBRD, ECE, ECO, ESCAP, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, ILO,
  IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ISO, ITU, NAM, OIC, OPCW, OSCE, PFP,
  UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO
  (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Sadyk SAFAYEV
  chancery: 1746 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20036
  consulate(s) general: New York

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Joseph A. PRESEL
  embassy: 82 Chilanzarskaya, Tashkent 700115
  mailing address: use embassy street address; US Embassy Tashkent,
  Department of State, Washington, DC 20521-7110

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of blue (top),
  white, and green separated by red fimbriations with a white crescent
  moon and 12 white stars in the upper hoist-side quadrant



Economy



Economy--overview: Uzbekistan is a dry, landlocked country of
  which 10% consists of intensely cultivated, irrigated river valleys.
  It was one of the poorest areas of the former Soviet Union with more
  than 60% of its population living in densely populated rural
  communities. Uzbekistan is now the world's third largest cotton
  exporter, a major producer of gold and natural gas, and a regionally
  significant producer of chemicals and machinery. Following
  independence in December 1991, the government sought to prop up its
  Soviet-style command economy with subsidies and tight controls on
  production and prices. Faced with high rates of inflation, however,
  the government began to reform in mid-1994, by introducing tighter
  monetary policies, expanding privatization, slightly reducing the
  role of the state in the economy, and improving the environment for
  foreign investors. Nevertheless, the state continues to be a
  dominating influence in the economy, and reforms have so far failed
  to bring about much-needed structural changes. The IMF suspended
  Uzbekistan's $185 million standby arrangement in late 1996 because
  of governmental steps that made impossible fulfillment of Fund
  conditions. Uzbekistan has responded to the negative external
  conditions generated by the Asian and Russian financial crises by
  tightening export and currency controls within its already largely
  closed economy.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$59.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 26%
  industry: 27%
  services: 47% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 40% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 11.9 million (1998 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture and forestry 44%, industry
  20%, services 36% (1995)

Unemployment rate: 5% plus another 10% underemployed (December
  1996 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $4.4 billion
  expenditures: $4.7 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.1
  billion (1997 est.)

Industries: textiles, food processing, machine building,
  metallurgy, natural gas

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1998)

Electricity--production: 47.9 billion kWh (1998)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 84.18%
  hydro: 15.82%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 43.885 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 5.6 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 6.5 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: cotton, vegetables, fruits, grain; livestock

Exports: $3.8 billion (1998)

Exports--commodities: cotton, gold, natural gas, mineral
  fertilizers, ferrous metals, textiles, food products, autos

Exports--partners: Russia, Ukraine, Eastern Europe, Western Europe

Imports: $4.1 billion (1998)

Imports--commodities: grain, machinery and parts, consumer
  durables, other foods

Imports--partners: principally other FSU, Czech Republic, Western
  Europe

Debt--external: $2.6 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $276.6 million (1995)

Currency: Uzbekistani som (UKS)

Exchange rates: Uzbekistani soms (UKS) per US$1--111.9 (February
  1999), 110.95 (December 1998), 75.8 (September 1997), 41.1 (1996),
  30.2 (1995), 11.4 (1994), 1.0 (1993)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.475 million (1998 est.)

Telephone system: poorly developed; ambitiously engaged in
  telecommunications modernization
  domestic: in 1998 there were six cellular networks operating in
  Uzbekistan; 4 GSM, 1 D-AMPS, 1 AMPS standard
  international: linked by landline or microwave radio relay with CIS
  member states and to other countries by leased connection via the
  Moscow international gateway switch; new Intelsat links to Tokyo
  (Japan) and Ankara (Turkey) give Uzbekistan international access
  independent of Russian facilities; satellite earth stations--NA
  Orbita and NA Intelsat; Trans-Asia-Europe Fiber-Optic Line

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA; note--there
  are 12 radio broadcast stations including one state-owned broadcast
  station of NA type and four independent stations

Radios: 29,016,870

Television broadcast stations: 4 (in addition, there are two
  repeater stations that relay Russian ORT programs and Kazakh,
  Kyrgyz, and Tadzhik programs) (1997)

Televisions: 24,497,850



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 3,380 km in common carrier service; does not include
  industrial lines
  broad gauge: 3,380 km 1.520-m gauge (300 km electrified) (1993)

Highways:
  total: 81,600 km
  paved: 71,237 km (note--these roads are said to be hard surfaced,
  meaning that some are paved and some are all-weather gravel surfaced)
  unpaved: 10,363 km dirt (1996 est.)

Waterways: 1,100 (1990)

Pipelines: crude oil 250 km; petroleum products 40 km; natural
  gas 810 km (1992)

Ports and harbors: Termiz (Amu Darya river)

Airports: 3 (1997 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1997 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air and Air Defense Forces, Security
  Forces (internal and border troops), National Guard

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 6,172,436 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 5,012,944 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 254,114 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $200 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.4% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none

Illicit drugs: limited illicit cultivation of cannabis and very
  small amounts of opium poppy, mostly for domestic consumption,
  almost entirely eradicated by an effective government eradication
  program; increasingly used as transshipment point for illicit drugs
  from Afghanistan to Russia and Western Europe and for acetic
  anhydride destined for Afghanistan



======================================================================




@Vanuatu
-------





Geography



Location: Oceania, group of islands in the South Pacific Ocean,
  about three-quarters of the way from Hawaii to Australia

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 S, 167 00 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 14,760 sq km
  land: 14,760 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes more than 80 islands

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Connecticut

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 2,528 km

Maritime claims: measured from claimed archipelagic baselines
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; moderated by southeast trade winds

Terrain: mostly mountains of volcanic origin; narrow coastal
  plains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Tabwemasana 1,877 m

Natural resources: manganese, hardwood forests, fish

Land use:
  arable land: 2%
  permanent crops: 10%
  permanent pastures: 2%
  forests and woodland: 75%
  other: 11% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: tropical cyclones or typhoons (January to
  April); volcanism causes minor earthquakes

Environment--current issues: a majority of the population does not
  have access to a potable and reliable supply of water; deforestation

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Endangered Species, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Ship Pollution
  signed, but not ratified: Desertification, Law of the Sea



People



Population: 189,036 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 39% (male 37,040; female 35,760)
  15-64 years: 58% (male 56,649; female 53,799)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 3,125; female 2,663) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.02% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 28.49 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 8.26 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.17 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.05 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 59.58 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 61.44 years
  male: 59.41 years
  female: 63.57 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.61 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Ni-Vanuatu (singular and plural)
  adjective: Ni-Vanuatu

Ethnic groups: indigenous Melanesian 94%, French 4%, Vietnamese,
  Chinese, Pacific Islanders

Religions: Presbyterian 36.7%, Anglican 15%, Catholic 15%,
  indigenous beliefs 7.6%, Seventh-Day Adventist 6.2%, Church of
  Christ 3.8%, other 15.7%

Languages: English (official), French (official), pidgin (known
  as Bislama or Bichelama)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 53%
  male: 57%
  female: 48% (1979 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Vanuatu
  conventional short form: Vanuatu
  former: New Hebrides

Data code: NH

Government type: republic

Capital: Port-Vila

Administrative divisions: 6 provinces; Malampa, Penama, Sanma,
  Shefa, Tafea, Torba

Independence: 30 July 1980 (from France and UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 30 July (1980)

Constitution: 30 July 1980

Legal system: unified system being created from former dual
  French and British systems

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jean Marie LEYE (since 2 March 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Donald KALPOKAS (since 30 March
  1998); Deputy Prime Minister Willie JIMMY (since 19 October 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the prime minister,
  responsible to Parliament
  elections: president elected by an electoral college consisting of
  Parliament and the presidents of the regional councils for a
  five-year term; election for president last held 2 March 1994 (next
  to be held NA 1999); following legislative elections, the leader of
  the majority party or majority coalition is usually elected prime
  minister by Parliament from among its members; election for prime
  minister last held 6 March 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: Jean Marie LEYE elected president; percent of
  electoral college vote--NA; Donald KALPOKAS elected prime minister by
  Parliament with a total of 35 votes; other candidate, Rialuth Serge
  VOHOR, received 17 votes
  note: the general legislative elections in November 1995 did not
  give a majority to any of the political parties; since the election,
  there have been four changes of government--all of which have been
  coalitions formed by Parliamentary vote; Rialuth Serge VOHOR was
  prime minister from November 1995 until he resigned 7 February 1996
  when faced with a no-confidence vote in Parliament; Maxime Carlot
  KORMAN was then elected prime minister and served until he was
  ousted in a no-confidence motion on 30 September 1996; VOHOR was
  then elected prime minister for a second time; as a result of
  legislative elections in March 1998, KALPOKAS was elected prime
  minister and formed a coalition government with Father LINI's
  National United Party (NUP)

Legislative branch: unicameral Parliament (52 seats; members
  elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 6 March 1998 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--VP 18,
  UMP 12, NUP 11, other and independent 11; note--political party
  associations are fluid; there have been four changes of government
  since the November 1995 elections
  note: the National Council of Chiefs advises on matters of custom
  and land

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, chief justice is appointed by the
  president after consultation with the prime minister and the leader
  of the opposition, three other justices are appointed by the
  president on the advice of the Judicial Service Commission

Political parties and leaders: Union of Moderate Parties or UMP

International organization participation: ACCT, ACP, AsDB, C,
  ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFC, IFRCS, IMF,
  IMO, Intelsat (nonsignatory user), IOC, ITU, NAM, Sparteca, SPC,
  SPF, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WMO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US: Vanuatu does not have an
  embassy in the US, it does, however, have a Permanent Mission to the
  UN

Diplomatic representation from the US: the US does not have an
  embassy in Vanuatu; the ambassador to Papua New Guinea is accredited
  to Vanuatu

Flag description: two equal horizontal bands of red (top) and
  green with a black isosceles triangle (based on the hoist side) all
  separated by a black-edged yellow stripe in the shape of a
  horizontal Y (the two points of the Y face the hoist side and
  enclose the triangle); centered in the triangle is a boar's tusk
  encircling two crossed namele leaves, all in yellow



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is based primarily on subsistence
  or small-scale agriculture which provides a living for 65% of the
  population. Fishing, offshore financial services, and tourism, with
  about 50,000 visitors in 1997, are other mainstays of the economy.
  Mineral deposits are negligible; the country has no known petroleum
  deposits. A small light industry sector caters to the local market.
  Tax revenues come mainly from import duties. Economic development is
  hindered by dependence on relatively few commodity exports,
  vulnerability to natural disasters, and long distances from main
  markets and between constituent islands.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$240 million (1997 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,300 (1997 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 23%
  industry: 13%
  services: 64% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 2.2% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, services 32%,
  industry 3% (1995 est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $94.4 million
  expenditures: $99.8 million, including capital expenditures of $30.4
  million (1996 est.)

Industries: food and fish freezing, wood processing, meat canning

Industrial production growth rate: 6.4% (1996 est.)

Electricity--production: 30 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 30 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: copra, coconuts, cocoa, coffee, taro, yams,
  coconuts, fruits, vegetables; fish, beef

Exports: $30 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Exports--commodities: copra, beef, cocoa, timber, coffee

Exports--partners: Japan 28%, Spain 21%, Germany 14%, UK 7%, Cote
  d'Ivoire 7%, Australia, New Caledonia (1996 est.)

Imports: $97 million (f.o.b., 1996)

Imports--commodities: machines and vehicles, food and beverages,
  basic manufactures, raw materials and fuels, chemicals

Imports--partners: Japan 47%, Australia 23%, Singapore 8%, New
  Zealand 6%, France 3%, Fiji (1996 est.)

Debt--external: $63 million (1996 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $45.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 vatu (VT) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: vatu (VT) per US$1--129.66 (January 1999), 127.52
  (1998), 115.87 (1997), 111.72 (1996), 112.11 (1995), 116.41 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 4,000 (1994 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Pacific Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: 49,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 1 (1997)

Televisions: 2,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 1,070 km
  paved: 256 km
  unpaved: 814 km (1996 est.)

Ports and harbors: Forari, Port-Vila, Santo (Espiritu Santo)

Merchant marine:
  total: 82 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 1,327,078 GRT/1,764,558
  DWT
  ships by type: bulk 31, cargo 24, chemical tanker 3, combination
  bulk 1, liquefied gas tanker 4, oil tanker 2, refrigerated cargo 11,
  vehicle carrier 6
  note: a flag of convenience registry; includes ships from 15
  countries among which are ships of Japan 28, India 10, US 10, Greece
  3, Hong Kong 3, Australia 2, Canada 1, China 1, and France 1 (1998
  est.)

Airports: 32 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 29
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 11
  under 914 m: 17 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: no regular military forces; Vanuatu Police
  Force (VPF; includes the paramilitary Vanuatu Mobile Force or VMF)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims Matthew and Hunter Islands east of
  New Caledonia



======================================================================




@Venezuela
---------





Geography



Location: Northern South America, bordering the Caribbean Sea and
  the North Atlantic Ocean, between Colombia and Guyana

Geographic coordinates: 8 00 N, 66 00 W

Map references: South America, Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 912,050 sq km
  land: 882,050 sq km
  water: 30,000 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly more than twice the size of California

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,993 km
  border countries: Brazil 2,200 km, Colombia 2,050 km, Guyana 743 km

Coastline: 2,800 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 15 nm
  continental shelf: 200-m depth or to the depth of exploitation
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, humid; more moderate in highlands

Terrain: Andes Mountains and Maracaibo Lowlands in northwest;
  central plains (llanos); Guiana Highlands in southeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Pico Bolivar (La Columna) 5,007 m

Natural resources: petroleum, natural gas, iron ore, gold,
  bauxite, other minerals, hydropower, diamonds

Land use:
  arable land: 4%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 20%
  forests and woodland: 34%
  other: 41% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,900 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: subject to floods, rockslides, mud slides;
  periodic droughts

Environment--current issues: sewage pollution of Lago de Valencia;
  oil and urban pollution of Lago de Maracaibo; deforestation; soil
  degradation; urban and industrial pollution, especially along the
  Caribbean coast

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Marine Life Conservation, Nuclear Test
  Ban, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Tropical Timber 83,
  Tropical Timber 94, Wetlands, Whaling
  signed, but not ratified: Marine Dumping

Geography--note: on major sea and air routes linking North and
  South America



People



Population: 23,203,466 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 33% (male 3,988,499; female 3,741,568)
  15-64 years: 62% (male 7,231,546; female 7,184,769)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 484,071; female 573,013) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.71% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.25 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.93 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.23 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.08 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.07 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.84 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 26.51 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.95 years
  male: 69.97 years
  female: 76.16 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.61 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Venezuelan(s)
  adjective: Venezuelan

Ethnic groups: Spanish, Italian, Portuguese, Arab, German,
  African, indigenous people

Religions: nominally Roman Catholic 96%, Protestant 2%

Languages: Spanish (official), numerous indigenous dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 91.1%
  male: 91.8%
  female: 90.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Venezuela
  conventional short form: Venezuela
  local long form: Republica de Venezuela
  local short form: Venezuela

Data code: VE

Government type: republic

Capital: Caracas

Administrative divisions: 22 states (estados, singular--estado),1
  federal district* (distrito federal), and 1 federal dependency**
  (dependencia federal); Amazonas, Anzoategui, Apure, Aragua, Barinas,
  Bolivar, Carabobo, Cojedes, Delta Amacuro, Dependencias Federales**,
  Distrito Federal*, Falcon, Guarico, Lara, Merida, Miranda, Monagas,
  Nueva Esparta, Portuguesa, Sucre, Tachira, Trujillo, Yaracuy, Zulia
  note: the federal dependency consists of 11 federally controlled
  island groups with a total of 72 individual islands

Independence: 5 July 1811 (from Spain)

National holiday: Independence Day, 5 July (1811)

Constitution: 23 January 1961

Legal system: based on Napoleonic code; judicial review of
  legislative acts in Cassation Court only; has not accepted
  compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Hugo CHAVEZ Frias (since 3 February 1999);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Hugo CHAVEZ Frias (since 3 February
  1999); note--the president is both the chief of state and head of
  government
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 6 December 1998 (next to be held NA December 2003)
  election results: Hugo CHAVEZ Frias elected president; percent of
  vote--NA%

Legislative branch: bicameral Congress of the Republic or
  Congreso de la Republica consists of the Senate or Senado (52 seats,
  two from each state and the federal district (46), one for each of
  the retired presidents, and others representing minorities (6);
  members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms) and
  Chamber of Deputies or Camara de Diputados (207 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: Senate--last held 6 December 1998 (next to be held NA
  December 2003); Chamber of Deputies--last held 6 December 1998 (next
  to be held NA December 2003)
  election results: Senate--percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--AD 16, COPEI 14, Causa R 9, National Convergence 5, MAS 3,
  independents 5; note--two former presidents (1 from AD, 1 from COPEI)
  hold lifetime Senate seats; Chamber of Deputies--percent of vote by
  party--AD 25.6%, COPEI 24.6%, MAS 10.6%, National Convergence 8.7%,
  Causa R 19.3%; seats by party--AD 53, COPEI 51, Causa R 40, MAS 22,
  National Convergence 18, other 23

Judicial branch: Supreme Court of Justice (Corte Suprema de
  Justicia), magistrates are elected by both chambers in joint session
  for a nine-year term, one-third are reelected every three years

Political parties and leaders: National Convergence or
  Campins, president, and Donald RAMIREZ, secretary general];
  ALFARO Ucero, secretary general]; Movement Toward Socialism or MAS

Political pressure groups and leaders: FEDECAMARAS, a
  conservative business group; Venezuelan Confederation of Workers or
  CTV (labor organization dominated by the Democratic Action); VECINOS
  groups

International organization participation: CAN, Caricom
  (observer), CCC, CDB, ECLAC, FAO, G- 3, G-11, G-15, G-19, G-24,
  G-77, IADB, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICC, ICFTU, ICRM, IFAD, IFC, IFRCS,
  IHO, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ISO, ITU, LAES,
  LAIA, MINURSO, NAM, OAS, OPANAL, OPCW, OPEC, PCA, RG, UN, UNCTAD,
  UNESCO, UNHCR, UNIDO, UNIKOM, UNU, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO,
  WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador (vacant)
  chancery: 1099 30th Street NW, Washington, DC 20007
  consulate(s) general: Boston, Chicago, Houston, Miami, New Orleans,
  New York, San Francisco, and San Juan (Puerto Rico)

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador John Francis MAISTO
  embassy: Calle F con Calle Suapure, Colinas de Valle Arriba, Caracas
  1060
  mailing address: P. O. Box 62291, Caracas 1060-A; APO AA 34037

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of yellow (top),
  blue, and red with the coat of arms on the hoist side of the yellow
  band and an arc of seven white five-pointed stars centered in the
  blue band



Economy



Economy--overview: The petroleum sector dominates the economy,
  accounting for roughly a third of GDP, around 80% of export
  earnings, and more than half of government operating revenues. As a
  result, the steep downturn in international oil prices has had a
  severe impact on the economy; fiscal cuts spurred by the loss of
  revenues, high interest rates, and the sharp downturn in export
  earnings drove the economy into recession in 1998. The recession
  continued into 1999 with oil prices forecast to stay relatively low,
  but rising. Although the government has pursued moderate austerity
  measures to address the downturn in revenues, Venezuela's ongoing
  reform program has largely stalled. Pressure on the
  bolivar--overvalued by as much as 40%--was also significant through
  much of 1998, increasing the probability of an adjustment of the
  currency in 1999. Newly elected President Hugo CHAVEZ will be hard
  pressed to address Venezuela's many economic ills. He has promised
  to strike a balance between reforms designed to address the
  structural deformities of the economy and addressing declining
  living standards. CHAVEZ has sought to play down the populism that
  marked his political campaign for the presidency in an effort to
  allay investor concerns. The wide range of viewpoints represented on
  CHAVEZ's economic team is likely to make rapid implementation of a
  coherent policy difficult.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$194.5 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -0.9% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$8,500 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 4%
  industry: 63%
  services: 33% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 31.3% (1989 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.5%
  highest 10%: 35.6% (1995)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 29.9% (1998)

Labor force: 9.2 million

Labor force--by occupation: services 64%, industry 23%,
  agriculture 13% (1997 est.)

Unemployment rate: 11.5% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $11.99 billion
  expenditures: $11.48 billion, including capital expenditures of $3
  billion (1996 est.)

Industries: petroleum, iron ore mining, construction materials,
  food processing, textiles, steel, aluminum, motor vehicle assembly

Industrial production growth rate: 0.5% (1995 est.)

Electricity--production: 73 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 20.55%
  hydro: 79.45%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 72.85 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 150 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, sorghum, sugarcane, rice, bananas,
  vegetables, coffee; beef, pork, milk, eggs; fish

Exports: $16.9 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Exports--commodities: petroleum, bauxite and aluminum, steel,
  chemicals, agricultural products, basic manufactures (1998)

Exports--partners: US and Puerto Rico 57%, Colombia, Brazil (1997)

Imports: $12.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998)

Imports--commodities: raw materials, machinery and equipment,
  transport equipment, construction materials (1998)

Imports--partners: US 53%, Japan, Colombia, Italy, Germany (1997)

Debt--external: $26.5 billion (1996)

Economic aid--recipient: $50.8 million (1995)

Currency: 1 bolivar (Bs) = 100 centimos

Exchange rates: bolivares (Bs) per US$1--570.267 (January 1999),
  547.556 (1998), 488.635 (1997), 417.333 (1996), 176.843 (1995),
  148.503 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 1.44 million (1987 est.)

Telephone system: modern and expanding
  domestic: domestic satellite system with 3 earth stations
  international: 3 submarine coaxial cables; satellite earth station--1
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 181, FM 0, shortwave 26

Radios: 9.04 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 66 (in addition, there are 45
  repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 3.3 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 584 km (248 km privately owned)
  standard gauge: 584 km 1.435-m gauge

Highways:
  total: 84,300 km
  paved: 33,214 km
  unpaved: 51,086 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 7,100 km; Rio Orinoco and Lago de Maracaibo accept
  oceangoing vessels

Pipelines: crude oil 6,370 km; petroleum products 480 km; natural
  gas 4,010 km

Ports and harbors: Amuay, Bajo Grande, El Tablazo, La Guaira, La
  Salina, Maracaibo, Matanzas, Palua, Puerto Cabello, Puerto la Cruz,
  Puerto Ordaz, Puerto Sucre, Punta Cardon

Merchant marine:
  total: 32 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 535,882 GRT/937,461 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 5, cargo 9, combination bulk 1, liquefied gas
  tanker 2, oil tanker 8, passenger-cargo 1, roll-on/roll-off cargo 5,
  short-sea passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 371 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 122
  over 3,047 m: 5
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 10
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 32
  914 to 1,523 m: 59
  under 914 m: 16 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 249
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 94
  under 914 m: 145 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: National Armed Forces (Fuerzas Armadas
  Nacionales or FAN) includes Ground Forces or Army (Fuerzas
  Terrestres or Ejercito), Naval Forces (Fuerzas Navales or Armada),
  Air Force (Fuerzas Aereas or Aviacion), Armed Forces of Cooperation
  or National Guard (Fuerzas Armadas de Cooperacion or Guardia
  Nacional)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 6,268,982 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 4,522,757 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 242,362 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $1.1 billion (1998)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1% (1998)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claims all of Guyana west of the
  Essequibo River; maritime boundary dispute with Colombia in the Gulf
  of Venezuela

Illicit drugs: illicit producer of cannabis, opium, and coca leaf
  for the international drug trade on a small scale; however, large
  quantities of cocaine and heroin transit the country from Colombia
  bound for US and Europe; important money-laundering hub; active
  eradication program primarily targeting opium



======================================================================




@Vietnam
-------





Geography



Location: Southeastern Asia, bordering the Gulf of Thailand, Gulf
  of Tonkin, and South China Sea, alongside China, Laos, and Cambodia

Geographic coordinates: 16 00 N, 106 00 E

Map references: Southeast Asia

Area:
  total: 329,560 sq km
  land: 325,360 sq km
  water: 4,200 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than New Mexico

Land boundaries:
  total: 4,639 km
  border countries: Cambodia 1,228 km, China 1,281 km, Laos 2,130 km

Coastline: 3,444 km (excludes islands)

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical in south; monsoonal in north with hot, rainy
  season (mid-May to mid-September) and warm, dry season (mid-October
  to mid-March)

Terrain: low, flat delta in south and north; central highlands;
  hilly, mountainous in far north and northwest

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: South China Sea 0 m
  highest point: Ngoc Linh 3,143 m

Natural resources: phosphates, coal, manganese, bauxite,
  chromate, offshore oil and gas deposits, forests

Land use:
  arable land: 17%
  permanent crops: 4%
  permanent pastures: 1%
  forests and woodland: 30%
  other: 48% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 18,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons (May to January) with
  extensive flooding

Environment--current issues: logging and slash-and-burn
  agricultural practices contribute to deforestation and soil
  degradation; water pollution and overfishing threaten marine life
  populations; groundwater contamination limits potable water supply;
  growing urban industrialization and population migration are rapidly
  degrading environment in Hanoi and Ho Chi Minh City

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the
  Sea, Ozone Layer Protection, Ship Pollution, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol, Nuclear
  Test Ban



People



Population: 77,311,210 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 34% (male 13,377,315; female 12,603,906)
  15-64 years: 61% (male 22,934,553; female 24,277,488)
  65 years and over: 5% (male 1,645,288; female 2,472,660) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.37% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 20.78 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 6.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.53 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.94 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.67 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.96 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 34.84 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 68.1 years
  male: 65.71 years
  female: 70.64 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.41 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Vietnamese (singular and plural)
  adjective: Vietnamese

Ethnic groups: Vietnamese 85%-90%, Chinese 3%, Muong, Tai, Meo,
  Khmer, Man, Cham

Religions: Buddhist, Taoist, Roman Catholic, indigenous beliefs,
  Islam, Protestant, Cao Dai, Hoa Hao

Languages: Vietnamese (official), Chinese, English, French,
  Khmer, tribal languages (Mon-Khmer and Malayo-Polynesian)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 93.7%
  male: 96.5%
  female: 91.2% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Socialist Republic of Vietnam
  conventional short form: Vietnam
  local long form: Cong Hoa Chu Nghia Viet Nam
  local short form: Viet Nam
  abbreviation: SRV

Data code: VM

Government type: Communist state

Capital: Hanoi

Administrative divisions: 58 provinces (tinh, singular and
  plural), 3 municipalities* (thu do, singular and plural); An Giang,
  Bac Giang, Bac Kan, Bac Lieu, Bac Ninh, Ba Ria-Vung Tau, Ben Tre,
  Binh Dinh, Binh Duong, Binh Phuoc, Binh Thuan, Ca Mau, Can Tho, Cao
  Bang, Dac Lac, Da Nang, Dong Nai, Dong Thap, Gia Lai, Ha Giang, Hai
  Duong, Hai Phong*, Ha Nam, Ha Noi*, Ha Tay, Ha Tinh, Hoa Binh, Ho
  Chi Minh*, Hung Yen, Khanh Hoa, Kien Giang, Kon Tum, Lai Chau, Lam
  Dong, Lang Son, Lao Cai, Long An, Nam Dinh, Nghe An, Ninh Binh, Ninh
  Thuan, Phu Tho, Phu Yen, Quang Binh, Quang Nam, Quang Ngai, Quang
  Ninh, Quang Tri, Soc Trang, Son La, Tay Ninh, Thai Binh, Thai
  Nguyen, Thanh Hoa, Thua Thien-Hue, Tien Giang, Tra Vinh, Tuyen
  Quang, Vinh Long, Vinh Phuc, Yen Bai

Independence: 2 September 1945 (from France)

National holiday: Independence Day, 2 September (1945)

Constitution: 15 April 1992

Legal system: based on communist legal theory and French civil
  law system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Tran Duc LUONG (since 24 September 1997)
  and Vice President Nguyen Thi BINH (since NA October 1992)
  head of government: Prime Minister Phan Van KHAI (since 25 September
  1997); First Deputy Prime Minister Nguyen Tan DUNG (since 29
  September 1997); Deputy Prime Ministers Nguyen Cong TAN (since 29
  September 1997), Ngo Xuan LOC (since 29 September 1997), Nguyen Manh
  CAM (since 29 September 1997), and Pham Gia KHIEM (since 29
  September 1997)
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president on the proposal of the
  prime minister and ratification of the National Assembly
  elections: president elected by the National Assembly from among its
  members for a five-year term; election last held 25 September 1997
  (next to be held when National Assembly meets following legislative
  elections in NA 2002); prime minister appointed by the president
  from among the members of the National Assembly; deputy prime
  ministers appointed by the prime minister
  election results: Tran Duc LUONG elected president; percent of
  National Assembly vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly or Quoc-Hoi (450
  seats; members elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 20 July 1997 (next to be held NA 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--CPV 92%, other 8% (the 8%
  are not CPV members but are approved by the CPV to stand for
  election); seats by party--CPV or CPV-approved 450

Judicial branch: Supreme People's Court, chief justice is elected
  for a five-year term by the National Assembly on the recommendation
  of the president

Political parties and leaders: only party--Communist Party of

International organization participation: ACCT, APEC, AsDB,
  ASEAN, CCC, ESCAP, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer),
  ISO, ITU, NAM, OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WCL, WFTU, WHO,
  WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador LE VAN BANG
  chancery: 1233 20th Street NW, Washington, DC 20036, Suite 400
  consulate(s) general: San Francisco

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Douglas B. "Pete" Peterson
  embassy: 7 Lang Ha Road, Ba Dinh District, Hanoi
  mailing address: PSC 461, Box 400, FPO AP 96521-0002
  consulate(s) general: Ho Chi Minh City

Flag description: red with a large yellow five-pointed star in
  the center



Economy



Economy--overview: Vietnam is a poor, densely populated country
  that has had to recover from the ravages of war, the loss of
  financial support from the old Soviet Bloc, and the rigidities of a
  centrally planned economy. Substantial progress has been achieved
  over the past 10 years in moving forward from an extremely low
  starting point, though the regional downturn is now limiting that
  progress. GDP growth of 8.5% in 1997 fell to 4% in 1998. These
  numbers masked some major difficulties that are emerging in economic
  performance. Many domestic industries, including coal, cement,
  steel, and paper, have reported large stockpiles of inventory and
  tough competition from more efficient foreign producers, giving
  Vietnam a trade deficit of $3.3 billion in 1997. While disbursements
  of aid and foreign direct investment have risen, they are not large
  enough to finance the rapid increase in imports; and it is widely
  believed that Vietnam may be using short-term trade credits to
  bridge the gap--a risky strategy that could result in a foreign
  exchange crunch. Meanwhile, Vietnamese authorities continue to move
  slowly toward implementing the structural reforms needed to
  revitalize the economy and produce more competitive, export-driven
  industries. Privatization of state enterprises remains bogged down
  in political controversy, while the country's dynamic private sector
  is denied both financing and access to markets. Reform of the
  banking sector is proceeding slowly, raising concerns that the
  country will be unable to tap sufficient domestic savings to
  maintain current high levels of growth. Administrative and legal
  barriers are also causing costly delays for foreign investors and
  are raising similar doubts about Vietnam's ability to maintain the
  inflow of foreign capital. Ideological bias in favor of state
  intervention and control of the economy is slowing progress toward a
  more liberalized investment environment.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$134.8 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 4% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$1,770 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 28%
  industry: 30%
  services: 42% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: 50.9% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 3.5%
  highest 10%: 29% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 9% (1998)

Labor force: 32.7 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 65%, industry and services
  35% (1990 est.)

Unemployment rate: 25% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $5.6 billion
  expenditures: $6 billion, including capital expenditures of $1.7
  billion (1996 est.)

Industries: food processing, garments, shoes, machine building,
  mining, cement, chemical fertilizer, glass, tires, oil, coal, steel,
  paper

Industrial production growth rate: 12% (1998 est.)

Electricity--production: 14.88 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 12.1%
  hydro: 84%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 3.9% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 14.88 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: paddy rice, corn, potatoes, rubber,
  soybeans, coffee, tea, bananas; poultry, pigs; fish

Exports: $9.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil, marine products, rice, coffee,
  rubber, tea, garments, shoes

Exports--partners: Japan, Germany, Singapore, Taiwan, Hong Kong,
  France, South Korea

Imports: $11.4 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and equipment, petroleum products,
  fertilizer, steel products, raw cotton, grain, cement, motorcycles

Imports--partners: Singapore, South Korea, Japan, France, Hong
  Kong, Taiwan

Debt--external: $7.3 billion Western countries; $4.5 billion CEMA
  debts primarily to Russia; $9 billion to $18 billion nonconvertible
  debt (former CEMA, Iraq, Iran)

Economic aid--recipient: $2.2 billion in credits and grants
  pledged by international donors for 1999

Currency: 1 new dong (D) = 100 xu

Exchange rates: new dong (D) per US$1--13,900 (December 1998),
  11,100 (December 1996), 11,193 (1995 average), 11,000 (October
  1994), 10,800 (November 1993), 8,100 (July 1991)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 800,000 (1995 est.)

Telephone system: while Vietnam's telecommunication sector lags
  far behind other countries in Southeast Asia, Hanoi has made
  considerable progress since 1991 in upgrading the system; Vietnam
  has digitized all provincial switch boards, while fiber-optic and
  microwave transmission systems have been extended from Hanoi, Da
  Nang, and Ho Chi Minh City to all provinces; the density of
  telephone receivers nationwide doubled from 1993 to 1995, but is
  still far behind other countries in the region; Vietnam's
  telecommunications strategy aims to increase telephone density to 30
  per 1,000 inhabitants by the year 2000 and authorities estimate that
  approximately $2.7 billion will be spent on telecommunications
  upgrades through the end of the decade
  domestic: NA
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intersputnik (Indian Ocean
  region)

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM 228, shortwave 0

Radios: 7.215 million (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: 2.9 million (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,835 km (in addition, there are 224 km not restored to
  service after war damage)
  standard gauge: 151 km 1.435-m gauge
  narrow gauge: 2,454 km 1.000-m gauge
  dual gauge: 230 km NA-m gauges (three rails)

Highways:
  total: 93,300 km
  paved: 23,418 km
  unpaved: 69,882 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 17,702 km navigable; more than 5,149 km navigable at
  all times by vessels up to 1.8 m draft

Pipelines: petroleum products 150 km

Ports and harbors: Cam Ranh, Da Nang, Haiphong, Ho Chi Minh City,
  Hong Gai, Qui Nhon, Nha Trang

Merchant marine:
  total: 123 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 527,920 GRT/820,515 DWT
  ships by type: bulk 7, cargo 98, chemical tanker 1, combination bulk
  1, oil tanker 12, refrigerated cargo 4 (1998 est.)

Airports: 48 (1994 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 8
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 13
  under 914 m: 7 (1994 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 12
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 5 (1994 est.)



Military



Military branches: People's Army of Vietnam (PAVN) (includes
  Ground Forces, Navy, and Air Force), Coast Guard

Military manpower--military age: 17 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 20,492,806 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 12,933,945 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 877,714 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $650 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 9.3% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: maritime boundary with Cambodia not
  defined; involved in a complex dispute over the Spratly Islands with
  China, Malaysia, Philippines, Taiwan, and possibly Brunei; maritime
  boundary with Thailand resolved, August 1997; maritime boundary
  dispute with China in the Gulf of Tonkin; Paracel Islands occupied
  by China but claimed by Vietnam and Taiwan; offshore islands and
  sections of boundary with Cambodia are in dispute; sections of land
  border with China are indefinite

Illicit drugs: minor producer of opium poppy with 3,000 hectares
  cultivated in 1998, capable of producing 20 metric tons of opium;
  probably minor transit point for Southeast Asian heroin destined for
  the US and Europe; growing opium/heroin addiction; possible
  small-scale heroin production



======================================================================




@Virgin Islands
--------------





Geography



Location: Caribbean, islands between the Caribbean Sea and the
  North Atlantic Ocean, east of Puerto Rico

Geographic coordinates: 18 20 N, 64 50 W

Map references: Central America and the Caribbean

Area:
  total: 352 sq km
  land: 349 sq km
  water: 3 sq km

Area--comparative: twice the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 188 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: subtropical, tempered by easterly trade winds,
  relatively low humidity, little seasonal temperature variation;
  rainy season May to November

Terrain: mostly hilly to rugged and mountainous with little level
  land

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Caribbean Sea 0 m
  highest point: Crown Mountain 474 m

Natural resources: sun, sand, sea, surf

Land use:
  arable land: 15%
  permanent crops: 6%
  permanent pastures: 26%
  forests and woodland: 6%
  other: 47% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: several hurricanes in recent years; frequent and
  severe droughts and floods; occasional earthquakes

Environment--current issues: lack of natural freshwater resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: important location along the Anegada Passage?a
  key shipping lane for the Panama Canal; Saint Thomas has one of the
  best natural, deepwater harbors in the Caribbean



People



Population: 119,827 (July 1999 est.)
  note: West Indian (45% born in the Virgin Islands and 29% born
  elsewhere in the West Indies) 74%, US mainland 13%, Puerto Rican 5%,
  other 8%

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 28% (male 17,454; female 16,585)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 34,712; female 41,325)
  65 years and over: 9% (male 4,237; female 5,514) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.19% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 17.08 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 5.34 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0.13 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.84 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.77 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.89 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 10.07 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 77.74 years
  male: 74.04 years
  female: 81.67 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.42 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Virgin Islander(s)
  adjective: Virgin Islander

Ethnic groups: black 80%, white 15%, other 5%

Religions: Baptist 42%, Roman Catholic 34%, Episcopalian 17%,
  other 7%

Languages: English (official), Spanish, Creole

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Virgin Islands of the United States
  conventional short form: Virgin Islands
  former: Danish West Indies

Data code: VQ

Dependency status: organized, unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered by the Office of Insular Affairs, US Department of the
  Interior

Government type: NA

Capital: Charlotte Amalie

Administrative divisions: none (territory of the US); there are
  no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the US
  Government, but there are three islands at the second order; Saint
  Croix, Saint John, Saint Thomas

National holiday: Transfer Day, 31 March (1917) (from Denmark to
  US)

Constitution: Revised Organic Act of 22 July 1954

Legal system: based on US laws

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal; note--indigenous inhabitants
  are US citizens but do not vote in US presidential elections

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President William Jefferson CLINTON of the US (since
  20 January 1993); Vice President Albert GORE, Jr. (since 20 January
  1993)
  head of government: Governor Dr. Charles Wesley TURNBULL (since 5
  January 1999) and Lieutenant Governor Gerald LUZ James II (since 5
  January 1999)
  cabinet: NA
  elections: US president and vice president elected on the same
  ticket for four-year terms; governor and lieutenant governor elected
  by popular vote for four-year terms; election last held 3 November
  1998 (next to be held NA November 2002)
  election results: Dr. Charles Wesley TURNBULL elected governor;
  percent of vote--Dr. Charles W. TURNBULL (Democrat) 58.9%, former
  Governor Roy L. SCHNEIDER (ICM) 41.1%

Legislative branch: unicameral Senate (15 seats; members are
  elected by popular vote to serve two-year terms)
  elections: last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held NA November
  2000)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--Democratic Party 6, independents 5, Republican Party 2,
  Independent Citizens Movement 2
  note: the Virgin Islands elect one representative to the US House of
  Representatives; election last held 3 November 1998 (next to be held
  NA November 2000); results--Dr. Donna GREEN (Democrat) 80%, Victor O.
  FRAZER (ICM) 20%

Judicial branch: US District Court (judges are appointed by the
  president); Territorial Court (judges appointed by the governor)

Political parties and leaders: Democratic Party [James O'BRYON

International organization participation: ECLAC (associate),
  Interpol (subbureau), IOC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (territory of the US)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (territory of the US)

Flag description: white, with a modified US coat of arms in the
  center between the large blue initials V and I; the coat of arms
  shows a yellow eagle holding an olive branch in one talon and three
  arrows in the other with a superimposed shield of vertical red and
  white stripes below a blue panel



Economy



Economy--overview: Tourism is the primary economic activity,
  accounting for more than 70% of GDP and 70% of employment. The
  islands normally host 2 million visitors a year. The number of US
  tourists in the first five months of 1996 was down by 55% from the
  same period in 1995, the lingering result of the fierce hurricanes
  of 1995. Unemployment rose sharply in 1996. The manufacturing sector
  consists of textile, electronics, pharmaceutical, and watch assembly
  plants. The agricultural sector is small, with most food being
  imported. International business and financial services are a small
  but growing component of the economy. One of the world's largest
  petroleum refineries is at Saint Croix. A major economic problem at
  the beginning of 1997 was the more than $1 billion in governmental
  arrears, income tax refunds, payments to vendors, and overdue wages.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$1.2 billion (1987 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$12,500 (1987 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 47,443 (1990 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 1%, industry 20%, services
  62%, other 17% (1990)

Unemployment rate: 6.2% (March 1994)

Budget:
  revenues: $364.4 million
  expenditures: $364.4 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1990 est.)

Industries: tourism, petroleum refining, watch assembly, rum
  distilling, construction, pharmaceuticals, textiles, electronics

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.02 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.02 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: truck garden products, fruit, vegetables,
  sorghum; Senepol cattle

Exports: $1.8 billion (f.o.b., 1992)

Exports--commodities: refined petroleum products

Exports--partners: US, Puerto Rico

Imports: $2.2 billion (c.i.f., 1992)

Imports--commodities: crude oil, foodstuffs, consumer goods,
  building materials

Imports--partners: US, Puerto Rico

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 United States dollar (US$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: US currency is used

Fiscal year: 1 October--30 September



Communications



Telephones: 60,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: modern, uses fiber-optic cable and microwave radio relay
  international: submarine cable and satellite communications;
  satellite earth stations--NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 8, shortwave 0 (1988)

Radios: 105,000 (1994 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: 66,000 (1994 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 856 km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Charlotte Amalie, Christiansted, Cruz Bay,
  Port Alucroix

Merchant marine: none

Airports: 2
  note: international airports on Saint Thomas and Saint Croix; there
  is an airfield on St. John (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@Wake Atoll
----------





Geography



Location: Oceania, atoll in the North Pacific Ocean, about
  two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to the Northern Mariana Islands

Geographic coordinates: 19 17 N, 166 36 E

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 6.5 sq km
  land: 6.5 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about 11 times the size of The Mall in
  Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 19.3 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical

Terrain: atoll of three coral islands built up on an underwater
  volcano; central lagoon is former crater, islands are part of the rim

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: unnamed location 6 m

Natural resources: none

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 0%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 100%

Irrigated land: 0 sq km (1998)

Natural hazards: occasional typhoons

Environment--current issues: NA

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: strategic location in the North Pacific Ocean;
  emergency landing location for transpacific flights



People



Population: no indigenous inhabitants
  note: US military personnel have left the island, but some civilian
  personnel remain (1999 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Wake Atoll

Data code: WQ

Dependency status: unincorporated territory of the US;
  administered from Washington, DC by the Department of the Interior;
  occasional activities on the island are managed by the US Army under
  a US Air Force contract

Legal system: NA

Flag description: the flag of the US is used



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic activity is limited to providing
  services to contractors located on the island. All food and
  manufactured goods must be imported.

Electricity--production: NA kWh
  note: electricity supplied by the US military

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh



Communications



Telephone system: satellite communications; 1 DSN circuit off the
  Overseas Telephone System (OTS)
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 0, FM NA, shortwave NA
  note: Armed Forces Radio/Television Service (AFRTS) radio service
  provided by satellite

Television broadcast stations: 0 (1997)



Transportation



Ports and harbors: none; two offshore anchorages for large ships

Airports: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Transportation--note: formerly an important commercial aviation
  base, now occasionally used by US military, some commercial cargo
  planes, and for emergency landings



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of the US



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed by Marshall Islands



======================================================================




@Wallis and Futuna
-----------------





Geography



Location: Oceania, islands in the South Pacific Ocean, about
  two-thirds of the way from Hawaii to New Zealand

Geographic coordinates: 13 18 S, 176 12 W

Map references: Oceania

Area:
  total: 274 sq km
  land: 274 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Ile Uvea (Wallis Island), Ile Futuna (Futuna Island),
  Ile Alofi, and 20 islets

Area--comparative: 1.5 times the size of Washington, DC

Land boundaries: 0 km

Coastline: 129 km

Maritime claims:
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: tropical; hot, rainy season (November to April); cool,
  dry season (May to October); rains 2,500-3,000 mm per year (80%
  humidity); average temperature 26.6 degrees C

Terrain: volcanic origin; low hills

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Pacific Ocean 0 m
  highest point: Mont Singavi 765 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 5%
  permanent crops: 20%
  permanent pastures: NA%
  forests and woodland: NA%
  other: 75% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: deforestation (only small portions of
  the original forests remain) largely as a result of the continued
  use of wood as the main fuel source; as a consequence of cutting
  down the forests, the mountainous terrain of Futuna is particularly
  prone to erosion; there are no permanent settlements on Alofi
  because of the lack of natural fresh water resources

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: NA
  signed, but not ratified: NA

Geography--note: both island groups have fringing reefs



People



Population: 15,129 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA%
  15-64 years: NA%
  65 years and over: NA%

Population growth rate: 1.04% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22.34 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.66 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -7.26 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: NA deaths/1,000 live births

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: NA years
  male: NA years
  female: NA years

Total fertility rate: NA children born/woman

Nationality:
  noun: Wallisian(s), Futunan(s), or Wallis and Futuna Islanders
  adjective: Wallisian, Futunan, or Wallis and Futuna Islander

Ethnic groups: Polynesian

Religions: Roman Catholic 100%

Languages: French, Wallisian (indigenous Polynesian language)

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 50%
  male: 50%
  female: 50% (1969 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Territory of the Wallis and Futuna Islands
  conventional short form: Wallis and Futuna
  local long form: Territoire des Iles Wallis et Futuna
  local short form: Wallis et Futuna

Data code: WF

Dependency status: overseas territory of France

Government type: NA

Capital: Mata-Utu (on Ile Uvea)

Administrative divisions: none (overseas territory of France);
  there are no first-order administrative divisions as defined by the
  US Government, but there are three kingdoms named Wallis, Sigave, Alo

Independence: none (overseas territory of France)

Constitution: 28 September 1958 (French Constitution)

Legal system: French legal system

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Jacques CHIRAC of France (since 17 May
  1995), represented by High Administrator Claude PIERRET (since NA)
  head of government: President of the Territorial Assembly Victor
  BRIAL (since 1 June 1997)
  cabinet: Council of the Territory consists of three kings and three
  members appointed by the high administrator on the advice of the
  Territorial Assembly
  note: there are three traditional kings with limited powers
  elections: French president elected by popular vote for a seven-year
  term; high administrator appointed by the French president on the
  advice of the French Ministry of the Interior; the presidents of the
  Territorial Government and the Territorial Assembly are elected by
  the members of the assembly

Legislative branch: unicameral Territorial Assembly or Assemblee
  Territoriale (20 seats; members are elected by popular vote to serve
  five-year terms)
  elections: last held 16 March 1997 (next to be held NA March 2002)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--NA
  note: Wallis and Futuna elects one senator to the French Senate and
  one deputy to the French National Assembly; French Senate--elections
  last held 27 September 1998 (next to be held by NA September 2007);
  results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats--RPR 1; French National
  Assembly--elections last held 25 May-1 June 1997 (next to be held by
  NA March 2002); results--percent of vote by party--NA; seats--RPR 1

Judicial branch: none; justice generally administered under
  French law by the high administrator, but the three traditional
  kings administer customary law and there is a magistrate in Mata-Utu

Political parties and leaders: Rally for the Republic or RPR

International organization participation: FZ, SPC

Diplomatic representation in the US: none (overseas territory of
  France)

Diplomatic representation from the US: none (overseas territory
  of France)

Flag description: a large white modified Maltese cross centered
  on a red background; the flag of France outlined in white on two
  sides is in the upper hoist quadrant; the flag of France is used for
  official occasions



Economy



Economy--overview: The economy is limited to traditional
  subsistence agriculture, with about 80% of the labor force earning
  its livelihood from agriculture (coconuts and vegetables), livestock
  (mostly pigs), and fishing. About 4% of the population is employed
  in government. Revenues come from French Government subsidies,
  licensing of fishing rights to Japan and South Korea, import taxes,
  and remittances from expatriate workers in New Caledonia. Wallis and
  Futuna imports food--particularly flour, sugar, rice, and beef--fuel,
  clothing, machinery, and transport equipment, but its exports are
  negligible, consisting mostly of breadfruit, yams, and taro root.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$28.7 million (1995 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,000 (1995 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture, livestock, and fishing
  80%, government 4% (est.)

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $20 million
  expenditures: $20 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)

Industries: copra, handicrafts, fishing, lumber

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: breadfruit, yams, taro, bananas; pigs, goats

Exports: $370,000 (f.o.b., 1995 est.)

Exports--commodities: copra, handicrafts

Exports--partners: NA

Imports: $13.5 million (c.i.f., 1995 est.)

Imports--commodities: foodstuffs, manufactured goods,
  transportation equipment, fuel, clothing

Imports--partners: France, Australia, New Zealand

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $1 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique franc (CFPF) = 100
  centimes

Exchange rates: Comptoirs Francais du Pacifique francs (CFPF) per
  US$1--102.72 (January 1999), 107.25 (1998), 106.11 (1997), 93.00
  (1996), 90.75 (1995), 100.94 (1994); note--linked at the rate of
  18.18 to the French franc

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 340 (1985 est.)

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: 2 (1997)

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 120 km (Ile Uvea 100 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)
  paved: 16 km (all on Ile Uvea)
  unpaved: 104 km (Ile Uvea 84 km, Ile Futuna 20 km)

Waterways: none

Ports and harbors: Leava, Mata-Utu

Merchant marine:
  total: 2 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 44,160 GRT/41,656 DWT
  ships by type: oil tanker 1, passenger 1 (1998 est.)

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military--note: defense is the responsibility of France



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: none



======================================================================




@West Bank
---------





Introduction



Background: The Israel-PLO Declaration of Principles on Interim
  Self-Government Arrangements ("the DOP"), signed in Washington on 13
  September 1993, provides for a transitional period not exceeding
  five years of Palestinian interim self-government in the Gaza Strip
  and the West Bank. Permanent status negotiations began on 5 May
  1996, but have not resumed since the initial meeting. Under the DOP,
  Israel agreed to transfer certain powers and responsibilities to the
  Palestinian Authority, which includes a Palestinian Legislative
  Council elected in January 1996, as part of interim self-governing
  arrangements in the West Bank and Gaza Strip. A transfer of powers
  and responsibilities for the Gaza Strip and Jericho took place
  pursuant to the Israel-PLO 4 May 1994 Cairo Agreement on the Gaza
  Strip and the Jericho Area and in additional areas of the West Bank
  pursuant to the Israel-PLO 28 September 1995 Interim Agreement, the
  Israel-PLO 15 January 1997 Protocol Concerning Redeployment in
  Hebron, and the Israel-PLO 23 October 1998 Wye River Memorandum. The
  DOP provides that Israel will retain responsibility during the
  transitional period for external security and for internal security
  and public order of settlements and Israelis. Permanent status is to
  be determined through direct negotiations.



Geography



Location: Middle East, west of Jordan

Geographic coordinates: 32 00 N, 35 15 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 5,860 sq km
  land: 5,640 sq km
  water: 220 sq km
  note: includes West Bank, Latrun Salient, and the northwest quarter
  of the Dead Sea, but excludes Mt. Scopus; East Jerusalem and
  Jerusalem No Man's Land are also included only as a means of
  depicting the entire area occupied by Israel in 1967

Area--comparative: slightly smaller than Delaware

Land boundaries:
  total: 404 km
  border countries: Israel 307 km, Jordan 97 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: temperate, temperature and precipitation vary with
  altitude, warm to hot summers, cool to mild winters

Terrain: mostly rugged dissected upland, some vegetation in west,
  but barren in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
  highest point: Tall Asur 1,022 m

Natural resources: NEGL

Land use:
  arable land: 27%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 32%
  forests and woodland: 1%
  other: 40%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: NA

Environment--current issues: adequacy of fresh water supply;
  sewage treatment

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked; highlands are main recharge area for
  Israel's coastal aquifers; there are 216 Israeli settlements and
  civilian land use sites in the West Bank and 29 in East Jerusalem
  (August 1998 est.)



People



Population: 1,611,109 (July 1999 est.)
  note: in addition, there are some 166,000 Israeli settlers in the
  West Bank and about 176,000 in East Jerusalem (August 1998 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 45% (male 370,770; female 352,803)
  15-64 years: 52% (male 422,209; female 411,597)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 22,376; female 31,354) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.14% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 35.59 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 4.2 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.05 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.03 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.71 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 25.22 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 72.83 years
  male: 70.96 years
  female: 74.79 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 4.78 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: NA
  adjective: NA

Ethnic groups: Palestinian Arab and other 83%, Jewish 17%

Religions: Muslim 75% (predominantly Sunni), Jewish 17%,
  Christian and other 8%

Languages: Arabic, Hebrew (spoken by Israeli settlers and many
  Palestinians), English (widely understood)

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: West Bank

Data code: WE



Economy



Economy--overview: Economic conditions in the West Bank?where
  economic activity is governed by the Paris Economic Protocol of
  April 1994 between Israel and the Palestinian Authority--have
  deteriorated since the early 1990s. Real per capita GDP for the West
  Bank and Gaza Strip (WBGS) declined 36.1% between 1992 and 1996
  owing to the combined effect of falling aggregate incomes and robust
  population growth. The downturn in economic activity was largely the
  result of Israeli closure policies--the imposition of generalized
  border closures in response to security incidents in Israel--which
  disrupted previously established labor and commodity market
  relationships between Israel and the WBGS. The most serious negative
  social effect of this downturn has been the emergence of chronic
  unemployment; average unemployment rates in the WBGS during the
  1980s were generally under 5%, by the mid-1990s this level had risen
  to over 20%. Since 1997 Israel's use of comprehensive closures has
  decreased and, in 1998, Israel implemented new policies to reduce
  the impact of closures and other security procedures on the movement
  of Palestinian goods and labor. These positive changes to the
  conduct of economic activity, combined with international donor
  pledges of over $3 billion made to the Palestinian Authority in
  November, may fuel a moderate economic recovery in 1999.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$3.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2.2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,000 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 33%
  industry: 25%
  services: 42% (1995 est., includes Gaza Strip)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 7.6% (1997 est.)

Labor force: NA
  note: excluding Israeli settlers

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 13%, industry 13%,
  commerce, restaurants, and hotels 12%, construction 8%, other
  services 54% (1996)

Unemployment rate: 17.3% (1997 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $816 million
  expenditures: $866 million, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1997 est.)
  note: includes Gaza Strip

Industries: generally small family businesses that produce
  cement, textiles, soap, olive-wood carvings, and mother-of-pearl
  souvenirs; the Israelis have established some small-scale, modern
  industries in the settlements and industrial centers

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: NA kWh
  note: most electricity imported from Israel; East Jerusalem Electric
  Company buys and distributes electricity to Palestinians in East
  Jerusalem and its concession in the West Bank; the Israel Electric
  Company directly supplies electricity to most Jewish residents and
  military facilities; at the same time, some Palestinian
  municipalities, such as Nabulus and Janin, generate their own
  electricity from small power plants

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: NA kWh

Electricity--exports: NA kWh

Electricity--imports: NA kWh

Agriculture--products: olives, citrus, vegetables; beef, dairy
  products

Exports: $781 million (f.o.b., 1997 est.) (includes Gaza Strip)

Exports--commodities: olives, fruit, vegetables, limestone

Exports--partners: Israel, Jordan

Imports: $2.1 billion (c.i.f., 1997 est.) (includes Gaza Strip)

Imports--commodities: food, consumer goods, construction materials

Imports--partners: Israel, Jordan

Debt--external: $108 million (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 new Israeli shekel (NIS) = 100 new agorot; 1
  Jordanian dinar (JD) = 1,000 fils

Exchange rates: new Israeli shekels (NIS) per US$1--4.2260
  (November 1998), 3.4494 (1997), 3.1917 (1996), 3.0113 (1995), 3.0111
  (1994); Jordanian dinars (JD) per US$1--0.7090 (January 1999), 0.7090
  (1998), 0.7090 (1997), 0.7090 (1996), 0.7005 (1995), 0.6987 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year (since 1 January 1992)



Communications



Telephones: NA; 3.1% of Palestinian households have telephones

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA
  note: Israeli company BEZEK and the Palestinian company PALTEL are
  responsible for communication services in the West Bank

Radio broadcast stations: AM 1, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA; note--82% of Palestinian households have radios (1992
  est.)

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA; note--54% of Palestinian households have
  televisions (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 4,500 km
  paved: 2,700 km
  unpaved: 1,800 km (1997 est.)
  note: Israelis have developed many highways to service Jewish
  settlements

Ports and harbors: none

Airports: 2 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: West Bank and Gaza Strip are
  Israeli-occupied with current status subject to the
  Israeli-Palestinian Interim Agreement--permanent status to be
  determined through further negotiation



======================================================================




@Western Sahara
--------------





Geography



Location: Northern Africa, bordering the North Atlantic Ocean,
  between Mauritania and Morocco

Geographic coordinates: 24 30 N, 13 00 W

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 266,000 sq km
  land: 266,000 sq km
  water: 0 sq km

Area--comparative: about the size of Colorado

Land boundaries:
  total: 2,046 km
  border countries: Algeria 42 km, Mauritania 1,561 km, Morocco 443 km

Coastline: 1,110 km

Maritime claims: contingent upon resolution of sovereignty issue

Climate: hot, dry desert; rain is rare; cold offshore air
  currents produce fog and heavy dew

Terrain: mostly low, flat desert with large areas of rocky or
  sandy surfaces rising to small mountains in south and northeast

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Sebjet Tah -55 m
  highest point: unnamed location 463 m

Natural resources: phosphates, iron ore

Land use:
  arable land: 0%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 19%
  forests and woodland: 0%
  other: 81%

Irrigated land: NA sq km

Natural hazards: hot, dry, dust/sand-laden sirocco wind can occur
  during winter and spring; widespread harmattan haze exists 60% of
  time, often severely restricting visibility

Environment--current issues: sparse water and arable land

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: none of the selected agreements
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements



People



Population: 239,333 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: NA
  15-64 years: NA
  65 years and over: NA

Population growth rate: 2.34% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 45.42 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 16.58 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -5.41 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 136.67 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 49.1 years
  male: 47.98 years
  female: 50.57 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.7 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Sahrawi(s), Sahraoui(s)
  adjective: Sahrawian, Sahraouian

Ethnic groups: Arab, Berber

Religions: Muslim

Languages: Hassaniya Arabic, Moroccan Arabic

Literacy: NA



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: none
  conventional short form: Western Sahara

Data code: WI

Government type: legal status of territory and question of
  sovereignty unresolved; territory contested by Morocco and Polisario
  Front (Popular Front for the Liberation of the Saguia el Hamra and
  Rio de Oro), which in February 1976 formally proclaimed a
  government-in-exile of the Sahrawi Arab Democratic Republic (SADR);
  territory partitioned between Morocco and Mauritania in April 1976,
  with Morocco acquiring northern two-thirds; Mauritania, under
  pressure from Polisario guerrillas, abandoned all claims to its
  portion in August 1979; Morocco moved to occupy that sector shortly
  thereafter and has since asserted administrative control; the
  Polisario's government-in-exile was seated as an OAU member in 1984;
  guerrilla activities continued sporadically, until a UN-monitored
  cease-fire was implemented 6 September 1991

Capital: none

Administrative divisions: none (under de facto control of Morocco)

Suffrage: none; a UN sponsored voter identification campaign has
  yet to be completed

Executive branch: none

International organization participation: none

Diplomatic representation in the US: none

Diplomatic representation from the US: none



Economy



Economy--overview: Western Sahara, a territory poor in natural
  resources and lacking sufficient rainfall, depends on pastoral
  nomadism, fishing, and phosphate mining as the principal sources of
  income for the population. Most of the food for the urban population
  must be imported. All trade and other economic activities are
  controlled by the Moroccan Government. Incomes and standards of
  living are substantially below the Moroccan level.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$NA

GDP--real growth rate: NA%

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$NA

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: 40%-45% (1996 est.)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): NA%

Labor force: 12,000

Labor force--by occupation: animal husbandry and subsistence
  farming 50%

Unemployment rate: NA%

Budget:
  revenues: $NA
  expenditures: $NA, including capital expenditures of $NA

Industries: phosphate mining, handicrafts

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 85 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 85 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: fruits and vegetables (grown in the few
  oases); camels, sheep, goats (kept by nomads)

Exports: $NA

Exports--commodities: phosphates 62%

Exports--partners: Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara,
  so trade partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

Imports: $NA

Imports--commodities: fuel for fishing fleet, foodstuffs

Imports--partners: Morocco claims and administers Western Sahara,
  so trade partners are included in overall Moroccan accounts

Debt--external: $NA

Economic aid--recipient: $NA

Currency: 1 Moroccan dirham (DH) = 100 centimes

Exchange rates: Moroccan dirhams (DH) per US$1--9.320 (January
  1999), 9.604 (1998), 9.527 (1997), 8.716 (1996), 8.540 (1995), 9.203
  (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 2,000

Telephone system: sparse and limited system
  domestic: NA
  international: tied into Morocco's system by microwave radio relay,
  tropospheric scatter, and satellite; satellite earth stations--2
  Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean) linked to Rabat, Morocco

Radio broadcast stations: AM 2, FM 0, shortwave 0

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 6,200 km
  paved: 1,350 km
  unpaved: 4,850 km (1991 est.)

Ports and harbors: Ad Dakhla, Cabo Bojador, Laayoune (El Aaiun)

Airports: 12 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 5
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)

Heliports: 1 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: NA

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $NA

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: NA%



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: claimed and administered by Morocco, but
  sovereignty is unresolved and the UN is attempting to hold a
  referendum on the issue; the UN-administered cease-fire has been in
  effect since September 1991



======================================================================




@World
-----





Geography



Map references: World, Time Zones

Area:
  total: 510.072 million sq km
  land: 148.94 million sq km
  water: 361.132 million sq km
  note: 70.8% of the world's surface is water, 29.2% is land

Area--comparative: land area about 15 times the size of the US

Land boundaries: the land boundaries in the world total
  251,480.24 km (not counting shared boundaries twice)

Coastline: 356,000 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 24 nm claimed by most, but can vary
  continental shelf: 200-m depth claimed by most or to depth of
  exploitation; others claim 200 nm or to the edge of the continental
  margin
  exclusive fishing zone: 200 nm claimed by most, but can vary
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm claimed by most, but can vary
  territorial sea: 12 nm claimed by most, but can vary
  note: boundary situations with neighboring states prevent many
  countries from extending their fishing or economic zones to a full
  200 nm; 43 nations and other areas that are landlocked include
  Afghanistan, Andorra, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Belarus, Bhutan,
  Bolivia, Botswana, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Central African Republic,
  Chad, Czech Republic, Ethiopia, Holy See (Vatican City), Hungary,
  Kazakhstan, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
  Malawi, Mali, Moldova, Mongolia, Nepal, Niger, Paraguay, Rwanda, San
  Marino, Slovakia, Swaziland, Switzerland, Tajikistan, The Former
  Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Turkmenistan, Uganda, Uzbekistan,
  West Bank, Zambia, Zimbabwe

Climate: two large areas of polar climates separated by two
  rather narrow temperate zones from a wide equatorial band of
  tropical to subtropical climates

Terrain: the greatest ocean depth is the Mariana Trench at 10,924
  m in the Pacific Ocean

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Dead Sea -408 m
  highest point: Mount Everest 8,848 m

Natural resources: the rapid using up of nonrenewable mineral
  resources, the depletion of forest areas and wetlands, the
  extinction of animal and plant species, and the deterioration in air
  and water quality (especially in Eastern Europe, the former USSR,
  and China) pose serious long-term problems that governments and
  peoples are only beginning to address

Land use:
  arable land: 10%
  permanent crops: 1%
  permanent pastures: 26%
  forests and woodland: 32%
  other: 31% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 2,481,250 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: large areas subject to severe weather (tropical
  cyclones), natural disasters (earthquakes, landslides, tsunamis,
  volcanic eruptions)

Environment--current issues: large areas subject to
  overpopulation, industrial disasters, pollution (air, water, acid
  rain, toxic substances), loss of vegetation (overgrazing,
  deforestation, desertification), loss of wildlife, soil degradation,
  soil depletion, erosion

Environment--international agreements: selected international
  environmental agreements are included under the
  Environment--international agreements entry for each country and in
  the Selected International Environmental Agreements appendix



People



Population: 5,995,544,836 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 30% (male 934,816,288; female 884,097,095)
  15-64 years: 63% (male 1,905,701,066; female 1,861,265,079)
  65 years and over: 7% (male 179,094,601; female 230,570,707) (1999
  est.)

Population growth rate: 1.3% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 22 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.06 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.06 male(s)/female
  15-64: 1.02 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.78 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.02 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 56 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 63 years
  male: 61 years
  female: 65 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 2.8 children born/woman (1999 est.)



Government



Data code: none; there is no FIPS 10-4 country code for the
  World, so the Factbook uses the "W" data code from DIAM 65-18
  "Geopolitical Data Elements and Related Features," Data Standard No.
  3, March 1984, published by the Defense Intelligence Agency; see the
  Cross-Reference List of Country Data Codes appendix

Administrative divisions: 266 nations, dependent areas, other,
  and miscellaneous entries

Legal system: all members of the UN (excluding Yugoslavia) plus
  Nauru and Switzerland are parties to the statute that established
  the International Court of Justice (ICJ) or World Court



Economy



Economy--overview: Growth in global output (gross world product,
  GWP) dropped to 2% in 1998 from 4% in 1997 because of continued
  recession in Japan, severe financial difficulties in other East
  Asian countries, and widespread dislocations in the Russian economy.
  The US economy continued its remarkable sustained prosperity,
  growing at 3.9% in 1998, and accounted for 22% of GWP. Western
  Europe's economies grew at roughly 2.5%, not enough to cut deeply
  into the region's high unemployment; these economies produced 21% of
  GWP. China, the second largest economy in the world, continued its
  rapid growth and accounted for 11% of GWP. Japan posted a decline of
  2.6% in 1998 and its share in GWP dropped to 7.4%. As usual, the 15
  successor nations of the USSR and the other old Warsaw Pact nations
  experienced widely different rates of growth. Russia's national
  product dropped by 5% whereas the nations of central and eastern
  Europe grew by 3.4% on average. The developing nations varied widely
  in their growth results, with many countries facing population
  increases that eat up gains in output. Externally, the nation-state,
  as a bedrock economic-political institution, is steadily losing
  control over international flows of people, goods, funds, and
  technology. Internally, the central government finds its control
  over resources slipping as separatist regional movements--typically
  based on ethnicity--gain momentum, e.g., in the successor states of
  the former Soviet Union, in the former Yugoslavia, in India, and in
  Canada. In Western Europe, governments face the difficult political
  problem of channeling resources away from welfare programs in order
  to increase investment and strengthen incentives to seek employment.
  The addition of more than 80 million people each year to an already
  overcrowded globe is exacerbating the problems of pollution,
  desertification, underemployment, epidemics, and famine. Because of
  their own internal problems, the industrialized countries have
  inadequate resources to deal effectively with the poorer areas of
  the world, which, at least from the economic point of view, are
  becoming further marginalized. In 1998, serious financial
  difficulties in several high-growth East Asia countries cast a
  shadow over short-term global economic prospects. The introduction
  of the euro as the common currency of much of Western Europe in
  January 1999 poses serious economic risks because of varying levels
  of income and cultural and political differences among the
  participating nations. (For specific economic developments in each
  country of the world in 1998, see the individual country entries.)

GDP: GWP (gross world product)--purchasing power parity?$39
  trillion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$6,600 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: NA%
  industry: NA%
  services: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: NA%
  highest 10%: NA%

Inflation rate (consumer prices): all countries 25%; developed
  countries 2% to 4% typically; developing countries 10% to 60%
  typically (1998 est.)
  note: national inflation rates vary widely in individual cases, from
  stable prices in Japan to hyperinflation in a number of Third World
  countries

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: 30% combined unemployment and underemployment
  in many non-industrialized countries; developed countries typically
  5%-12% unemployment (1998 est.)

Industries: dominated by the onrush of technology, especially in
  computers, robotics, telecommunications, and medicines and medical
  equipment; most of these advances take place in OECD nations; only a
  small portion of non-OECD countries have succeeded in rapidly
  adjusting to these technological forces; the accelerated development
  of new industrial (and agricultural) technology is complicating
  already grim environmental problems

Industrial production growth rate: 5% (1997 est.)

Electricity--production: 12.3427 trillion kWh (1994)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: NA%
  hydro: NA%
  nuclear: NA%
  other: NA%

Electricity--consumption: 12.3427 trillion kWh (1994)

Exports: $5 trillion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: the whole range of industrial and
  agricultural goods and services

Exports--partners: in value, about 75% of exports from the
  developed countries

Imports: $5 trillion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: the whole range of industrial and
  agricultural goods and services

Imports--partners: in value, about 75% of imports by the developed
  countries

Debt--external: $2 trillion for less developed countries (1998
  est.)

Economic aid--recipient: traditional worldwide foreign aid $50
  billion (1995 est.)



Communications



Telephones: NA

Telephone system:
  domestic: NA
  international: NA

Radio broadcast stations: AM NA, FM NA, shortwave NA

Radios: NA

Television broadcast stations: NA

Televisions: NA



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 1,201,337 km includes about 190,000 to 195,000 km of
  electrified routes of which 147,760 km are in Europe, 24,509 km in
  the Far East, 11,050 km in Africa, 4,223 km in South America, and
  4,160 km in North America; note--fastest speed in daily service is
  300 km/hr attained by France's Societe Nationale des Chemins-de-Fer
  Francais (SNCF) Le Train a Grande Vitesse (TGV)--Atlantique line
  broad gauge: 251,153 km
  standard gauge: 710,754 km
  narrow gauge: 239,430 km

Highways:
  total: NA km
  paved: NA km
  unpaved: NA km

Ports and harbors: Chiba, Houston, Kawasaki, Kobe, Marseille,
  Mina' al Ahmadi (Kuwait), New Orleans, New York, Rotterdam, Yokohama

Merchant marine:
  total: 28,310 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 495,299,489
  GRT/764,129,056 DWT
  ships by type: barge carrier 23, bulk 5,745, cargo 8,766, chemical
  tanker 1,326, combination bulk 319, combination ore/oil 227,
  container 2,615, liquefied gas tanker 802, livestock carrier 60,
  multifunction large-load carrier 90, oil tanker 4,521, passenger
  392, passenger-cargo 126, railcar carrier 19, refrigerated cargo
  1,067, roll-on/roll-off cargo 1,117, short-sea passenger 484,
  specialized tanker 118, vehicle carrier 493 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: ground, maritime, and air forces at all levels
  of technology

Military expenditures--dollar figure: aggregate real expenditure
  on arms worldwide in 1998 remained at approximately the 1997 level,
  about three-quarters of a trillion dollars (1998 est.)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: roughly 2% of gross world
  product (1998 est.)



======================================================================




@Yemen
-----





Geography



Location: Middle East, bordering the Arabian Sea, Gulf of Aden,
  and Red Sea, between Oman and Saudi Arabia

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 N, 48 00 E

Map references: Middle East

Area:
  total: 527,970 sq km
  land: 527,970 sq km
  water: 0 sq km
  note: includes Perim, Socotra, the former Yemen Arab Republic (YAR
  or North Yemen), and the former People's Democratic Republic of
  Yemen (PDRY or South Yemen)

Area--comparative: slightly larger than twice the size of Wyoming

Land boundaries:
  total: 1,746 km
  border countries: Oman 288 km, Saudi Arabia 1,458 km

Coastline: 1,906 km

Maritime claims:
  contiguous zone: 18 nm in the North; 24 nm in the South
  continental shelf: 200 nm or to the edge of the continental margin
  exclusive economic zone: 200 nm
  territorial sea: 12 nm

Climate: mostly desert; hot and humid along west coast; temperate
  in western mountains affected by seasonal monsoon; extraordinarily
  hot, dry, harsh desert in east

Terrain: narrow coastal plain backed by flat-topped hills and
  rugged mountains; dissected upland desert plains in center slope
  into the desert interior of the Arabian Peninsula

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Arabian Sea 0 m
  highest point: Jabal an Nabi Shu'ayb 3,760 m

Natural resources: petroleum, fish, rock salt, marble, small
  deposits of coal, gold, lead, nickel, and copper, fertile soil in
  west

Land use:
  arable land: 3%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 30%
  forests and woodland: 4%
  other: 63% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 3,600 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: sandstorms and dust storms in summer

Environment--current issues: very limited natural fresh water
  resources; inadequate supplies of potable water; overgrazing; soil
  erosion; desertification

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification,
  Environmental Modification, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea,
  Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: strategic location on Bab el Mandeb, the strait
  linking the Red Sea and the Gulf of Aden, one of world's most active
  shipping lanes



People



Population: 16,942,230 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 48% (male 4,118,292; female 3,971,886)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 4,243,809; female 4,065,429)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 278,133; female 264,681) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 3.34% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 43.31 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 9.88 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: 0 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.05 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 1.04 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 1.05 male(s)/female
  total population: 1.04 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 69.82 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 59.98 years
  male: 58.17 years
  female: 61.88 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 7.06 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Yemeni(s)
  adjective: Yemeni

Ethnic groups: predominantly Arab; Afro-Arab concentrations in
  western coastal locations; South Asians in southern regions; small
  European communities in major metropolitan areas

Religions: Muslim including Shaf'i (Sunni) and Zaydi (Shi'a),
  small numbers of Jewish, Christian, and Hindu

Languages: Arabic

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write
  total population: 38%
  male: 53%
  female: 26% (1990 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Yemen
  conventional short form: Yemen
  local long form: Al Jumhuriyah al Yamaniyah
  local short form: Al Yaman

Data code: YM

Government type: republic

Capital: Sanaa

Administrative divisions: 17 governorates (muhafazat,
  singular--muhafazah); Abyan, 'Adan, Al Bayda', Al Hudaydah, Al Jawf,
  Al Mahrah, Al Mahwit, 'Ataq, Dhamar, Hadhramawt, Hajjah, Ibb, Lahij,
  Ma'rib, Sa'dah, San'a', Ta'izz
  note: there may be a new governorate for the capital city of Sanaa

Independence: 22 May 1990 Republic of Yemen was established with
  and the Marxist-dominated People's Democratic Republic of Yemen
  independent on NA November 1918 (from the Ottoman Empire) and South
  Yemen had become independent on 30 November 1967 (from the UK)

National holiday: Proclamation of the Republic, 22 May (1990)

Constitution: 16 May 1991; amended 29 September 1994

Legal system: based on Islamic law, Turkish law, English common
  law, and local tribal customary law; does not accept compulsory ICJ
  jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Lt. Gen. Ali Abdallah SALIH (since 22 May
  1990, the former president of North Yemen, assumed office upon the
  merger of North and South Yemen); Vice President Maj. Gen. Abd
  al-Rab Mansur al-HADI (since NA October 1994)
  head of government: Prime Minister Dr. Abd al-Karim Ali al-IRYANI
  (since NA April 1998)
  cabinet: Council of Ministers appointed by the president on the
  advice of the prime minister
  elections: President SALIH was elected by the House of
  Representatives for a five-year term, however, future presidents
  will be elected by direct, popular vote for five-year terms;
  election last held 1 October 1994 (next to be held NA 1999); vice
  president appointed by the president; prime minister and deputy
  prime ministers appointed by the president
  election results: Ali Abdallah SALIH elected president; percent of
  House of Representatives vote--NA

Legislative branch: unicameral House of Representatives (301
  seats; members elected by popular vote to serve four-year terms)
  elections: last held 27 April 1997 (next to be held NA April 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--GPC
  189, Islah 52, Nasserite Unionist Party 3, National Arab Socialist
  Baath Party 2, independents 54, election pending 1
  note: in May 1997, the president created a consultative council,
  sometimes referred to as the upper house of Parliament; its 59
  members are all appointed by the president

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: there are over 12 political
  parties active in Yemen, some of the more prominent are: General
  SALAAM]
  note: President SALIH's General People's Congress or GPC won a
  landslide victory in the April 1997 legislative election and no
  longer governs in coalition with Shaykh Abdallah bin Husayn
  al-AHMAR's Islamic Reform Grouping or Islaah--the two parties had
  been in coalition since the end of the civil war in 1994; the YSP, a
  loyal opposition party, boycotted the April 1997 legislative election

Political pressure groups and leaders: NA

International organization participation: ACC, AFESD, AL, AMF,
  CAEU, CCC, ESCWA, FAO, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICRM, IDA, IDB, IFAD,
  IFC, IFRCS, ILO, IMF, IMO, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, ITU, NAM, OIC,
  OPCW, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO,
  WTrO (applicant)

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Abd al-Wahhab Abdallah al-HAJRI
  chancery: Suite 705, 2600 Virginia Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20037

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Barbara K. BODINE
  embassy: Dhahr Himyar Zone, Sheraton Hotel District, Sanaa
  mailing address: P. O. Box 22347, Sanaa

Flag description: three equal horizontal bands of red (top),
  white, and black; similar to the flag of Syria which has two green
  stars and of Iraq which has three green stars (plus an Arabic
  inscription) in a horizontal line centered in the white band; also
  similar to the flag of Egypt which has a symbolic eagle centered in
  the white band



Economy



Economy--overview: Yemen, one of the poorest countries in the Arab
  world, reported strong growth in the mid-1990s with the onset of oil
  production, but was harmed by low oil prices in 1998. Yemen has
  embarked on an IMF-supported structural adjustment program designed
  to modernize and streamline the economy, which has led to foreign
  debt relief and restructuring. Yemen will work in 1999 to maintain
  tight control over spending and implement additional components of
  the IMF program. The high population growth rate of 3.3%, internal
  political dissension, and continued low prices make the government's
  task especially difficult.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$12.1 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.8% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$740 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 16%
  industry: 46%
  services: 38% (1996)

Population below poverty line: NA%

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 2.3%
  highest 10%: 30.8% (1992)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 11% (1998 est.)

Labor force: NA

Labor force--by occupation: most people are employed in
  agriculture and herding or as expatriate laborers; services,
  construction, industry, and commerce account for less than one-half
  of the labor force

Unemployment rate: 30% (1995 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.3 billion
  expenditures: $2.6 billion, including capital expenditures of $NA
  (1998 budget est.)

Industries: crude oil production and petroleum refining;
  small-scale production of cotton textiles and leather goods; food
  processing; handicrafts; small aluminum products factory; cement

Industrial production growth rate: NA%

Electricity--production: 1.9 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 100%
  hydro: 0%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 1.9 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 0 kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 0 kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: grain, fruits, vegetables, qat (mildly
  narcotic shrub), coffee, cotton; dairy products, poultry, beef; fish

Exports: $1.6 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: crude oil, cotton, coffee, dried and salted
  fish

Exports--partners: China 31%, South Korea 19%, Thailand 17%,
  Thailand 5%, Brazil 5%, Japan 5% (1997)

Imports: $2.8 billion (c.i.f., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: food and live animals, machinery and
  equipment, manufactured goods

Imports--partners: UAE 9%, Saudi Arabia 8%, US 7%, France 6%,
  Brazil 5% (1997)

Debt--external: $4.9 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $176.1 million (1995)

Currency: Yemeni rial (YRl) (new currency)

Exchange rates: Yemeni rials (YRl) per US$1--140.940 (October
  1998), 129.286 (1997), 94.157 (1996), 40.839 (1995), 12.010
  (official fixed rate 1991-94)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 131,655 (1992 est.)

Telephone system: since unification in 1990, efforts have been
  made to create a national telecommunications network
  domestic: the network consists of microwave radio relay, cable, and
  tropospheric scatter
  international: satellite earth stations--3 Intelsat (2 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean), 1 Intersputnik (Atlantic Ocean region), and 2
  Arabsat; microwave radio relay to Saudi Arabia and Djibouti

Radio broadcast stations: AM 4, FM 1, shortwave 0

Radios: 325,000 (1993 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 7 (in addition, there are several
  low-power repeaters) (1997)

Televisions: 100,000 (1993 est.)



Transportation



Railways: 0 km

Highways:
  total: 64,725 km
  paved: 5,243 km
  unpaved: 59,482 km (1996 est.)

Pipelines: crude oil 644 km; petroleum products 32 km

Ports and harbors: Aden, Al Hudaydah, Al Mukalla, As Salif,
  Mocha, Nishtun

Merchant marine:
  total: 3 ships (1,000 GRT or over) totaling 12,059 GRT/18,563 DWT
  ships by type: cargo 1, oil tanker 2 (1998 est.)

Airports: 48 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 7
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 1
  914 to 1,523 m: 1
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 36
  over 3,047 m: 2
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 9
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 10
  914 to 1,523 m: 12
  under 914 m: 3 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Navy, Air Force, Air Defense Forces,
  paramilitary (includes Police)

Military manpower--military age: 18 years of age

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 3,776,075 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 2,119,308 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--reaching military age annually:
  males: 212,005 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $413.6 million (1999)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 7.6% (1999)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: a large section of boundary with Saudi
  Arabia is not defined; Hanish Islands dispute with Eritrea resolved
  by arbitral tribunal in October 1998



======================================================================




@Zambia
------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, east of Angola

Geographic coordinates: 15 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 752,610 sq km
  land: 740,720 sq km
  water: 11,890 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Texas

Land boundaries:
  total: 5,664 km
  border countries: Angola 1,110 km, Democratic Republic of the Congo
  1,930 km, Malawi 837 km, Mozambique 419 km, Namibia 233 km, Tanzania
  338 km, Zimbabwe 797 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; modified by altitude; rainy season (October to
  April)

Terrain: mostly high plateau with some hills and mountains

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: Zambezi river 329 m
  highest point: unnamed location in Mafinga Hills 2,301 m

Natural resources: copper, cobalt, zinc, lead, coal, emeralds,
  gold, silver, uranium, hydropower

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 40%
  forests and woodland: 39%
  other: 14% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 460 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: tropical storms (November to April)

Environment--current issues: air pollution and resulting acid rain
  in the mineral extraction and refining region; poaching seriously
  threatens rhinoceros and elephant populations; deforestation; soil
  erosion; desertification; lack of adequate water treatment presents
  human health risks

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Hazardous Wastes, Law of the Sea, Nuclear Test Ban, Ozone
  Layer Protection, Wetlands
  signed, but not ratified: Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 9,663,535 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 49% (male 2,381,937; female 2,355,807)
  15-64 years: 49% (male 2,308,715; female 2,379,994)
  65 years and over: 2% (male 107,427; female 129,655) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 2.12% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 44.51 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 22.56 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: -0.78 migrant(s)/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.01 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.97 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.83 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 91.85 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 36.96 years
  male: 36.72 years
  female: 37.21 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 6.35 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Zambian(s)
  adjective: Zambian

Ethnic groups: African 98.7%, European 1.1%, other 0.2%

Religions: Christian 50%-75%, Muslim and Hindu 24%-49%,
  indigenous beliefs 1%

Languages: English (official), major vernaculars--Bemba, Kaonda,
  Lozi, Lunda, Luvale, Nyanja, Tonga, and about 70 other indigenous
  languages

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write English
  total population: 78.2%
  male: 85.6%
  female: 71.3% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Zambia
  conventional short form: Zambia
  former: Northern Rhodesia

Data code: ZA

Government type: republic

Capital: Lusaka

Administrative divisions: 9 provinces; Central, Copperbelt,
  Eastern, Luapula, Lusaka, Northern, North-Western, Southern, Western

Independence: 24 October 1964 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 24 October (1964)

Constitution: 2 August 1991

Legal system: based on English common law and customary law;
  judicial review of legislative acts in an ad hoc constitutional
  council; has not accepted compulsory ICJ jurisdiction

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: President Frederick CHILUBA (since 31 October 1991);
  Vice President Christon TEMBO (since NA December 1997); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: President Frederick CHILUBA (since 31 October
  1991); Vice President Christon TEMBO (since NA December 1997);
  note--the president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president from among the members
  of the National Assembly
  elections: president elected by popular vote for a five-year term;
  election last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held NA October
  2001); vice president appointed by the president
  election results: Frederick CHILUBA reelected president; percent of
  vote--Frederick CHILUBA 70%, Dean MUNGO'MBA 12%, Humphrey MULEMBA 6%,
  Akashambatwa LEWANIKA 4%, Chama CHAKOMBOKA 3%, others 5%

Legislative branch: unicameral National Assembly (150 seats;
  members are elected by popular vote to serve five-year terms)
  elections: last held 18 November 1996 (next to be held NA October
  2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by party--MMD
  130, NP 5, ZADECO 2, AZ 2, independents 11

Judicial branch: Supreme Court, justices are appointed by the
  president

Political parties and leaders: Agenda for Zambia or AZ

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-19, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM, ITU, MONUA, NAM, OAU,
  OPCW, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UNOMSIL, UPU, WCL, WHO, WIPO,
  WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Dunstan Weston KAMANA
  chancery: 2419 Massachusetts Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20008

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Arlene RENDER
  embassy: corner of Independence and United Nations Avenues
  mailing address: P. O. Box 31617, Lusaka

Flag description: green with a panel of three vertical bands of
  red (hoist side), black, and orange below a soaring orange eagle, on
  the outer edge of the flag



Economy



Economy--overview: Despite progress in privatization and budgetary
  reform, Zambia's economy has a long way to go. Inflation, while
  slowing somewhat, continues to be a major concern to the CHILUBA
  government. Zambia's copper mining sector, which accounts for over
  80% of the nation's foreign currency intake, is struggling.
  Production rates are down as are world copper prices. Aid cuts by
  Zambia's donors, arising out of concern for the November 1996 flawed
  election, also have damaged Zambia's economic prospects. Urged by
  the World Bank, Zambia has embarked on a privatization program which
  is to include the all-important copper industry. Until a deal on the
  copper sector is concluded, perhaps by mid-1999, economic prospects
  will remain clouded.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$8.3 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: -2% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$880 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 23%
  industry: 40%
  services: 37% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 86% (1993 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.5%
  highest 10%: 31.3% (1993)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 43.9% (1996)

Labor force: 3.4 million

Labor force--by occupation: agriculture 85%, mining,
  manufacturing, and construction 6%, transport and services 9%

Unemployment rate: 22% (1991)

Budget:
  revenues: $888 million
  expenditures: $835 million, including capital expenditures of $110
  million (1995 est.)

Industries: copper mining and processing, construction,
  foodstuffs, beverages, chemicals, textiles, fertilizer

Industrial production growth rate: 3.5% (1996)

Electricity--production: 7.84 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 0.51%
  hydro: 99.49%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 6.393 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1.47 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 23 million kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, sorghum, rice, peanuts, sunflower
  seed, tobacco, cotton, sugarcane, cassava (tapioca); cattle, goats,
  pigs, poultry, beef, pork, poultry meat, milk, eggs, hides

Exports: $905 million (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: copper, cobalt, zinc, lead, tobacco

Exports--partners: Japan, South Africa, US, Saudi Arabia, India,
  Thailand, Malaysia (1997)

Imports: $1.1 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery, transportation equipment,
  foodstuffs, fuels, petroleum products, electricity, fertilizer

Imports--partners: South Africa 48%, Saudi Arabia, UK, Zimbabwe
  (1997)

Debt--external: $7.1 billion (1997 est.)

Economic aid--recipient: $1.991 billion (1995)

Currency: 1 Zambian kwacha (ZK) = 100 ngwee

Exchange rates: Zambian kwacha (ZK) per US$1--1,428 (October
  1998), 1,333.81 (1997), 1,203.71 (1996), 857.23 (1995), 669.37 (1994)

Fiscal year: calendar year



Communications



Telephones: 80,900 (1987 est.)

Telephone system: facilities are among the best in Sub-Saharan
  Africa
  domestic: high-capacity microwave radio relay connects most larger
  towns and cities
  international: satellite earth stations--2 Intelsat (1 Indian Ocean
  and 1 Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 11, FM 5, shortwave 0

Radios: 1,889,140

Television broadcast stations: 9 (1997)

Televisions: 215,000 (1995 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,164 km (1995)
  narrow gauge: 2,164 km 1.067-m gauge (13 km double track)
  note: the total includes 891 km of the Tanzania-Zambia Railway
  Authority (TAZARA), which operates 1,860 km of 1.067-m narrow gauge
  track between Dar es Salaam and Kapiri Mposhi where it connects to
  the Zambia Railways system; TAZARA is not a part of Zambia Railways

Highways:
  total: 39,700 km
  paved: 7,265 km (including 60 km of expressways)
  unpaved: 32,435 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: 2,250 km, including Zambezi and Luapula rivers, Lake
  Tanganyika

Pipelines: crude oil 1,724 km

Ports and harbors: Mpulungu

Airports: 112 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 12
  over 3,047 m: 1
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 3
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 5
  914 to 1,523 m: 2
  under 914 m: 1 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 100
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 1
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 2
  914 to 1,523 m: 66
  under 914 m: 31 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Army, Air Force, paramilitary forces, Police

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,102,167 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,113,174 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $76 million (1997)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 1.8% (1997)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: quadripoint with Botswana, Namibia, and
  Zimbabwe is in disagreement

Illicit drugs: transshipment point for methaqualone, heroin, and
  cocaine bound for Southern Africa and Europe; regional
  money-laundering center



======================================================================




@Zimbabwe
--------





Geography



Location: Southern Africa, northeast of Botswana

Geographic coordinates: 20 00 S, 30 00 E

Map references: Africa

Area:
  total: 390,580 sq km
  land: 386,670 sq km
  water: 3,910 sq km

Area--comparative: slightly larger than Montana

Land boundaries:
  total: 3,066 km
  border countries: Botswana 813 km, Mozambique 1,231 km, South Africa
  225 km, Zambia 797 km

Coastline: 0 km (landlocked)

Maritime claims: none (landlocked)

Climate: tropical; moderated by altitude; rainy season (November
  to March)

Terrain: mostly high plateau with higher central plateau (high
  veld); mountains in east

Elevation extremes:
  lowest point: junction of the Runde and Save rivers 162 m
  highest point: Inyangani 2,592 m

Natural resources: coal, chromium ore, asbestos, gold, nickel,
  copper, iron ore, vanadium, lithium, tin, platinum group metals

Land use:
  arable land: 7%
  permanent crops: 0%
  permanent pastures: 13%
  forests and woodland: 23%
  other: 57% (1993 est.)

Irrigated land: 1,930 sq km (1993 est.)

Natural hazards: recurring droughts; floods and severe storms are
  rare

Environment--current issues: deforestation; soil erosion; land
  degradation; air and water pollution; the black rhinoceros herd--once
  the largest concentration of the species in the world--has been
  significantly reduced by poaching

Environment--international agreements:
  party to: Biodiversity, Climate Change, Desertification, Endangered
  Species, Law of the Sea, Ozone Layer Protection
  signed, but not ratified: none of the selected agreements

Geography--note: landlocked



People



Population: 11,163,160 (July 1999 est.)

Age structure:
  0-14 years: 43% (male 2,432,785; female 2,389,029)
  15-64 years: 54% (male 2,986,531; female 3,059,186)
  65 years and over: 3% (male 132,532; female 163,097) (1999 est.)

Population growth rate: 1.02% (1999 est.)

Birth rate: 30.64 births/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Death rate: 20.43 deaths/1,000 population (1999 est.)

Net migration rate: NA migrant(s)/1,000 population
  note: there is a small but steady flow of Zimbabweans into South
  Africa in search of better paid employment

Sex ratio:
  at birth: 1.03 male(s)/female
  under 15 years: 1.02 male(s)/female
  15-64 years: 0.98 male(s)/female
  65 years and over: 0.81 male(s)/female
  total population: 0.99 male(s)/female (1999 est.)

Infant mortality rate: 61.21 deaths/1,000 live births (1999 est.)

Life expectancy at birth:
  total population: 38.86 years
  male: 38.77 years
  female: 38.94 years (1999 est.)

Total fertility rate: 3.71 children born/woman (1999 est.)

Nationality:
  noun: Zimbabwean(s)
  adjective: Zimbabwean

Ethnic groups: African 98% (Shona 71%, Ndebele 16%, other 11%),
  white 1%, mixed and Asian 1%

Religions: syncretic (part Christian, part indigenous beliefs)
  50%, Christian 25%, indigenous beliefs 24%, Muslim and other 1%

Languages: English (official), Shona, Sindebele (the language of
  the Ndebele, sometimes called Ndebele), numerous but minor tribal
  dialects

Literacy:
  definition: age 15 and over can read and write English
  total population: 85%
  male: 90%
  female: 80% (1995 est.)



Government



Country name:
  conventional long form: Republic of Zimbabwe
  conventional short form: Zimbabwe
  former: Southern Rhodesia

Data code: ZI

Government type: parliamentary democracy

Capital: Harare

Administrative divisions: 8 provinces and 2 cities* with
  provincial status; Bulawayo*, Harare*, Manicaland, Mashonaland
  Central, Mashonaland East, Mashonaland West, Masvingo, Matabeleland
  North, Matabeleland South, Midlands

Independence: 18 April 1980 (from UK)

National holiday: Independence Day, 18 April (1980)

Constitution: 21 December 1979

Legal system: mixture of Roman-Dutch and English common law

Suffrage: 18 years of age; universal

Executive branch:
  chief of state: Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE (since 31
  December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA (since 31
  December 1987) and Joshua M. NKOMO (since 6 August 1990); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  head of government: Executive President Robert Gabriel MUGABE (since
  31 December 1987); Co-Vice Presidents Simon Vengai MUZENDA (since 31
  December 1987) and Joshua M. NKOMO (since 6 August 1990); note--the
  president is both the chief of state and head of government
  cabinet: Cabinet appointed by the president; responsible to the
  House of Assembly
  elections: president nominated by the House of Assembly for a
  six-year term (if more than one nomination, an electoral college
  consisting of members of the House of Assembly elects the
  president); election last held 26-27 March 1996 (next to be held NA
  March 2002); co-vice presidents appointed by the president
  election results: Robert Gabriel MUGABE reelected president; percent
  of electoral college vote--Robert Gabriel MUGABE 92.7%, Abel MUZOREWA
  4.8%; Ndabaningi SITHOLE 2.4%

Legislative branch: unicameral parliament, called House of
  Assembly (150 seats--120 elected by popular vote for six-year terms,
  12 nominated by the president, 10 occupied by traditional chiefs
  chosen by their peers, and 8 occupied by provincial governors)
  elections: last held 8-9 April 1995 (next to be held NA April 2001)
  election results: percent of vote by party--NA; seats by
  party--ZANU-PF 117, ZANU-Ndonga 2, independent 1

Judicial branch: Supreme Court

Political parties and leaders: Zimbabwe African National

International organization participation: ACP, AfDB, C, CCC, ECA,
  FAO, G-15, G-77, IAEA, IBRD, ICAO, ICFTU, ICRM, IDA, IFAD, IFC,
  IFRCS, ILO, IMF, Intelsat, Interpol, IOC, IOM (observer), ISO, ITU,
  MONUA, NAM, OAU, OPCW, PCA, SADC, UN, UNCTAD, UNESCO, UNIDO, UPU,
  WCL, WFTU, WHO, WIPO, WMO, WToO, WTrO

Diplomatic representation in the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Amos Bernard Muvengwa MIDZI
  chancery: 1608 New Hampshire Avenue NW, Washington, DC 20009

Diplomatic representation from the US:
  chief of mission: Ambassador Thomas McDONALD
  embassy: 172 Herbert Chitepo Avenue, Harare
  mailing address: P. O. Box 3340, Harare

Flag description: seven equal horizontal bands of green, yellow,
  red, black, red, yellow, and green with a white equilateral triangle
  edged in black based on the hoist side; a yellow Zimbabwe bird is
  superimposed on a red five-pointed star in the center of the triangle



Economy



Economy--overview: The government of Zimbabwe faces a wide variety
  of difficult economic problems as it struggles to consolidate
  earlier progress in developing a market-oriented economy. Its
  involvement in the war in the Democratic Republic of the Congo, for
  example, has already drained hundreds of millions of dollars from
  the economy. Badly needed support from the IMF suffers delays in
  part because of the country's failure to meet budgetary goals.
  Inflation rose from an annual rate of 25% in January 1998 to 47% in
  December and will almost certainly continue to increase in 1999. The
  economy is being steadily weakened by AIDS; Zimbabwe has one of the
  highest rates of infection in the world. Per capita GDP, which is
  twice the average of the poorer sub-Saharan nations, will increase
  little if any in the near-term, and Zimbabwe will suffer continued
  frustrations in developing its agricultural and mineral resources.

GDP: purchasing power parity--$26.2 billion (1998 est.)

GDP--real growth rate: 1.5% (1998 est.)

GDP--per capita: purchasing power parity?$2,400 (1998 est.)

GDP--composition by sector:
  agriculture: 28%
  industry: 32%
  services: 40% (1997 est.)

Population below poverty line: 25.5% (1990-91 est.)

Household income or consumption by percentage share:
  lowest 10%: 1.8%
  highest 10%: 46.9% (1990)

Inflation rate (consumer prices): 32% (1998 est.)

Labor force: 5 million (1997 est.)

Labor force--by occupation: NA

Unemployment rate: at least 45% (1994 est.)

Budget:
  revenues: $2.5 billion
  expenditures: $2.9 billion, including capital expenditures of $279
  million (FY96/97 est.)

Industries: mining (coal, clay, numerous metallic and nonmetallic
  ores), copper, steel, nickel, tin, wood products, cement, chemicals,
  fertilizer, clothing and footwear, foodstuffs, beverages

Industrial production growth rate: 10% (1994)

Electricity--production: 8.5 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--production by source:
  fossil fuel: 71.76%
  hydro: 28.24%
  nuclear: 0%
  other: 0% (1996)

Electricity--consumption: 10.769 billion kWh (1996)

Electricity--exports: 1 million kWh (1996)

Electricity--imports: 2.27 billion kWh (1996)

Agriculture--products: corn, cotton, tobacco, wheat, coffee,
  sugarcane, peanuts; cattle, sheep, goats, pigs

Exports: $1.7 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Exports--commodities: tobacco, gold, ferroalloys, cotton (1997)

Exports--partners: South Africa 12%, UK 11%, Germany 8%, Japan 6%,
  US 6% (1997 est.)

Imports: $2 billion (f.o.b., 1998 est.)

Imports--commodities: machinery and transport equipment 39%, other
  manufactures 18%, chemicals 15%, fuels 10% (1997 est.)

Imports--partners: South Africa 37%, UK 7%, US 6%, Japan 6% (1997
  est.)

Debt--external: $5 billion (1998)

Economic aid--recipient: $437.6 million (1995)

Currency: 1 Zimbabwean dollar (Z$) = 100 cents

Exchange rates: Zimbabwean dollars (Z$) per US$1--39.3701 (January
  1999), 21.4133 (1998), 11.8906 (1997), 9.9206 (1996), 8.6580 (1995),
  8.1500 (1994)

Fiscal year: 1 July--30 June



Communications



Telephones: 301,000 (1990 est.)

Telephone system: system was once one of the best in Africa, but
  now suffers from poor maintenance
  domestic: consists of microwave radio relay links, open-wire lines,
  and radiotelephone communication stations
  international: satellite earth station--1 Intelsat (Atlantic Ocean)

Radio broadcast stations: AM 8, FM 18, shortwave 0

Radios: 890,000 (1992 est.)

Television broadcast stations: 16 (1997)

Televisions: 280,000 (1992 est.)



Transportation



Railways:
  total: 2,759 km (1995)
  narrow gauge: 2,759 km 1.067-m gauge (313 km electrified; 42 km
  double track) (1995 est.)

Highways:
  total: 18,338 km
  paved: 8,692 km
  unpaved: 9,646 km (1996 est.)

Waterways: the Mazoe and Zambezi rivers are used for transporting
  chrome ore from Harare to Mozambique

Pipelines: petroleum products 212 km

Ports and harbors: Binga, Kariba

Airports: 467 (1998 est.)

Airports--with paved runways:
  total: 18
  over 3,047 m: 3
  2,438 to 3,047 m: 2
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 9 (1998 est.)

Airports--with unpaved runways:
  total: 449
  1,524 to 2,437 m: 4
  914 to 1,523 m: 220
  under 914 m: 225 (1998 est.)



Military



Military branches: Zimbabwe National Army, Air Force of Zimbabwe,
  Zimbabwe Republic Police (includes Police Support Unit, Paramilitary
  Police)

Military manpower--availability:
  males age 15-49: 2,738,963 (1999 est.)

Military manpower--fit for military service:
  males age 15-49: 1,707,348 (1999 est.)

Military expenditures--dollar figure: $427 million (FY97/98)

Military expenditures--percent of GDP: 4.6% (FY97/98)



Transnational Issues



Disputes--international: quadripoint with Botswana, Namibia, and
  Zambia is in disagreement

Illicit drugs: significant transit point for African cannabis and
  South Asian heroin, mandrax, and methamphetamines destined for the
  South African and European markets



======================================================================




Appendix A: Abbreviations


A       ABEDA            Arab Bank for Economic Development
                         in Africa
        ACC              Arab Cooperation Council
        ACCT             Agence de Cooperation Culturelle et
                         Technique; see Agency for Cultural
                         and Technical Cooperation; changed
                         name in 1996 to Agence de la
                         francophonie or Agency for the
                         French-Speaking Community
        ACP Group        African, Caribbean, and Pacific
                         Group of States
        AfDB             African Development Bank
        AFESD            Arab Fund for Economic and Social
                         Development
        AG               Andean Group; see Andean Community
                         of Nations (CAN)
        Air Pollution    Convention on Long-Range
                         Transboundary Air Pollution
        Air Pollution-   Protocol to the 1979 Convention on
        Nitrogen Oxides  Long-Range Transboundary Air
                         Pollution Concerning the Control of
                         Emissions of Nitrogen Oxides or
                         Their Transboundary Fluxes
        Air Pollution-   Protocol to the 1979 Convention on
        Persistent       Long-Range Transboundary Air
        Organic          Pollution on Persistent Organic
        Pollutants       Pollutants
        Air Pollution-   Protocol to the 1979 Convention on
        Sulphur 85       Long-Range Transboundary Air
                         Pollution on the Reduction of
                         Sulphur Emissions or Their
                         Transboundary Fluxes by at Least
                         30%
        Air Pollution-   Protocol to the 1979 Convention on
        Sulphur 94       Long-Range Transboundary Air
                         Pollution on Further Reduction of
                         Sulphur Emissions
        Air Pollution-   Protocol to the 1979 Convention on
        Volatile Organic Long-Range Transboundary Air
        Compounds        Pollution Concerning the Control of
                         Emissions of Volatile Organic
                         Compounds or Their Transboundary
                         Fluxes
        AL               Arab League
        ALADI            Asociacion Latinoamericana de
                         Integracion; see Latin American
                         Integration Association (LAIA)
        AMF              Arab Monetary Fund
        AMU              Arab Maghreb Union
        Ancom            Andean Common Market; see Andean
                         Community ofNations (CAN)
        Antarctic-       Protocol on Environmental
        Environmental    Protection to the Antarctic Treaty
        Protocol
        ANZUS            Australia-New Zealand-United States
                         Security Treaty
        APEC             Asia Pacific Economic Cooperation
        Arabsat          Arab Satellite Communications
                         Organization
        AsDB             Asian Development Bank
        ASEAN            Association of Southeast Asian
                         Nations
        Autodin          Automatic Digital Network
B       BAD              Banque africaine de developpement;
                         see African Development Bank (AfDB)
        BADEA            Banque Arabe de Developpement
                         Economique en Afrique; see Arab
                         Bank for Economic Development in
                         Africa (ABEDA)
        BCIE             Banco Centroamericano de
                         Integracion Economico; see Central
                         American Bank for Economic
                         Integration (BCIE)
        BDEAC            Banque de Developpment des Etats de
                         l'Afrique Centrale; see Central
                         African States Development Bank
                         (BDEAC)
        Benelux          Benelux Economic Union
        BID              Banco Interamericano de Desarrollo;
                         see Inter-American Development Bank
                         (IADB) Biodiversity Convention on
                         Biological Diversity
        BIS              Bank for International Settlements
        BOAD             Banque Ouest-Africaine de
                         Developpement; see West African
                         Development Bank (WADB)
        BSEC             Black Sea Economic Cooperation Zone
C       C                Commonwealth
        CACM             Central American Common Market
        CAEU             Council of Arab Economic Unity
        CAN              Andean Community of Nations
        Caricom          Caribbean Community and Common
                         Market
        CB               citizen's band mobile radio
                         communications
        CBSS             Council of the Baltic Sea States
        CCC              Customs Cooperation Council
        CDB              Caribbean Development Bank
        CE               Council of Europe
        CEAO             Communaute Economique de l'Afrique
                         de l'Ouest; see West African
                         Economic Community (CEAO)
        CEEAC            Communaute Economique des Etats de
                         l'Afrique Centrale; see Economic
                         Community of Central African States
                         (CEEAC)
        CEI              Central European Initiative
        CEMA             Council for Mutual Economic
                         Assistance; also known as CMEA or
                         Comecon
        CEPGL            Communaute Economique des Pays des
                         Grands Lacs; see Economic Community
                         of the Great Lakes Countries
                         (CEPGL)
        CERN             Conseil Europeen pour la Recherche
                         Nucleaire; see European
                         Organization for Nuclear Research
                         (CERN)
        CG               Contadora Group
        c.i.f.           cost, insurance, and freight
        CIS              Commonwealth of Independent States
        CITES            see Endangered Species
        Climate Change   United Nations Framework Convention
                         on Climate Change
        Climate Change-  Kyoto Protocol to the United
        Kyoto Protocol   Nations Framework Convention on
                         Climate Change
        CMEA             Council for Mutual Economic
                         Assistance (CEMA); also known as
                         Comecon
        COCOM            Coordinating Committee on Export
                         Controls
        Comecon          Council for Mutual Economic
                         Assistance (CEMA); also known as
                         CMEA
        Comsat           Communications Satellite
                         Corporation
        CP               Colombo Plan
        CSCE             Conference on Security and
                         Cooperation in Europe; see
                         Organization on Security and
                         Cooperation in Europe (OSCE)
        CY               calendar year
D       DC               developed country
        Desertification  United Nations Convention to Combat
                         Desertification in Those Countries
                         Experiencing Serious Drought and/or
                         Desertification, Particularly in
                         Africa
        DSN              Defense Switched Network
        DWT              deadweight ton
E       EADB             East African Development Bank
        EAPC             Euro-Atlantic Partnership Council
        EBRD             European Bank for Reconstruction
                         and Development
        EC               European Community; see European
                         Union (EU)
        ECA              Economic Commission for Africa
        ECAFE            Economic Commission for Asia and
                         the Far East; see Economic and
                         Social Commission for Asia and the
                         Pacific (ESCAP)
        ECE              Economic Commission for Europe
        ECLA             Economic Commission for Latin
                         America; see Economic Commission
                         for Latin America and the Caribbean
                         (ECLAC)
        ECLAC            Economic Commission for Latin
                         America and the Caribbean
        ECO              Economic Cooperation Organization
        ECOSOC           Economic and Social Council
        ECOWAS           Economic Community of West African
                         States
        ECSC             European Coal and Steel Community;
                         see European Union (EU)
        ECWA             Economic Commission for Western
                         Asia; see Economic and Social
                         Commission for Western Asia (ESCWA)
        EEC              European Economic Community; see
                         European Union (EU)
        EFTA             European Free Trade Association
        EIB              European Investment Bank
        EMU              European Monetary Union
        Endangered       Convention on the International
        Species          Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
                         Flora and Fauna (CITES)
        Entente          Council of the Entente
        Environmental    Convention on the Prohibition of
        Modification     Military or Any Other Hostile Use
                         of Environmental Modification
                         Techniques
        ESA              European Space Agency
        ESCAP            Economic and Social Commission for
                         Asia and the Pacific
        ESCWA            Economic and Social Commission for
                         Western Asia
        est.             estimate
        EU               European Union
        Euratom          European Atomic Energy Community;
                         see European Community (EC)
        Eutelsat         European Telecommunications
                         Satellite Organization
        Ex-Im            Export-Import Bank of the United
                         States
F       FAO              Food and Agriculture Organization
        FAX              facsimile
        f.o.b.           free on board
        FLS              Front Line States
        FRG              Federal Republic of Germany (West
                         Germany); used for information
                         dated before 3 October 1990 or CY91
        FSU              former Soviet Union
        FY               fiscal year (FY93/94, for example,
                         began in calendar year 1993 and
                         ended in calendar year 1994)
        FYROM            The Former Yugoslav Republic of
                         Macedonia
        FZ               Franc Zone
G       G-2              Group of 2
        G-3              Group of 3
        G-5              Group of 5
        G-6              Group of 6 (not to be confused with
                         the Big Six)
        G-7              Group of 7
        G-8              Group of 8
        G-9              Group of 9
        G-10             Group of 10
        G-11             Group of 11
        G-15             Group of 15
        G-19             Group of 19
        G-24             Group of 24
        G-30             Group of 30
        G-33             Group of 33
        G-77             Group of 77
        GATT             General Agreement on Tariffs and
                         Trade; subsumed by the World Trade
                         Organization (WTrO) on 1 January
                         1995
        GCC              Gulf Cooperation Council
        GDP              gross domestic product
        GDR              German Democratic Republic (East
                         Germany); used for information
                         dated before 3 October 1990 or CY91
        GNP              gross national product
        GRT              gross register ton
        GWP              gross world product
H       Hazardous Wastes Basel Convention on the Control of
                         Transboundary Movements of
                         Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal
        HF               high-frequency
I       IADB             Inter-American Development Bank
        IAEA             International Atomic Energy Agency
        IBEC             International Bank for Economic
                         Cooperation
        IBRD             International Bank for
                         Reconstruction and Development
                         (World Bank)
        ICAO             International Civil Aviation
                         Organization
        ICC              International Chamber of Commerce
        ICEM             Intergovernmental Committee for
                         European Migration; see
                         International Organization for
                         Migration (IOM)
        ICFTU            International Confederation of Free
                         Trade Unions; see World
                         Confederation of Labor (WCL)
        ICJ              International Court of Justice
        ICM              Intergovernmental Committee for
                         Migration; see International
                         Organization for Migration (IOM)
        ICRC             International Committee of the Red
                         Cross
        ICRM             International Red Cross and Red
                         Crescent Movement
        IDA              International Development
                         Association
        IDB              Islamic Development Bank
        IEA              International Energy Agency
        IFAD             International Fund for Agricultural
                         Development
        IFC              International Finance Corporation
        IFCTU            International Federation of
                         Christian Trade Unions
        IFRCS            International Federation of Red
                         Cross and Red Crescent Societies
        IGAD             Inter-Governmental Authority on
                         Development
        IGADD            Inter-Governmental Authority on
                         Drought and Development
        IHO              International Hydrographic
                         Organization
        IIB              International Investment Bank
        ILO              International Labor Organization
        IMCO             Intergovernmental Maritime
                         Consultative Organization; see
                         International Maritime Organization
                         (IMO)
        IMF              International Monetary Fund
        IMO              International Maritime Organization
        Inmarsat         International Mobile Satellite
                         Organization
        InOC             Indian Ocean Commission
        Intelsat         International Telecommunications
                         Satellite Organization
        Interpol         International Criminal Police
                         Organization
        Intersputnik     International Organization of Space
                         Communications
        IOC              International Olympic Committee
        IOM              International Organization for
                         Migration
        ISO              International Organization for
                         Standardization
        ITU              International Telecommunication
                         Union
K       kHz              kilohertz
        km               kilometer
        kW               kilowatt
        kWh              kilowatt hour
L       LAES             Latin American Economic System
        LAIA             Latin American Integration
                         Association
        LAS              League of Arab States; see Arab
                         League (AL)
        Law of the Sea   United Nations Convention on the
                         Law of the Sea (LOS)
        LDC              less developed country
        LLDC             least developed country
        London           see Marine Dumping
        Convention
        LORCS            League of Red Cross and Red
                         Crescent Societies; see
                         International Federation of Red
                         Cross and Red Crescent Societies
                         (IFRCS)
        LOS              see Law of the Sea
M       m                meter
        Marecs           Maritime European Communications
                         Satellite
        Marine Dumping   Convention on the Prevention of
                         Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes
                         and Other Matter
        Marine Life      Convention on Fishing and
        Conservation     Conservation of Living Resources of
                         the High Seas
        MARPOL           see Ship Pollution
        Medarabtel       Middle East Telecommunications
                         Project of the International
                         Telecommunications Union
        Mercosur         Mercado Comun del Cono Sur; see
                         Southern Cone Common Market
        MHz              megahertz
        MINURSO          United Nations Mission for the
                         Referendum in Western Sahara
        MINUGUA          United Nations Verification Mission
                         in Guatemala
        MIPONUH          United Nations Civilian Police
                         Mission in Haiti
        MONUA            United Nations Observer Mission in
                         Angola
        MTCR             Missile Technology Control Regime
N       NA               not available
        NACC             North Atlantic Cooperation Council;
                         see Euro-Atlantic Partnership
                         Council (EAPC)
        NAM              Nonaligned Movement
        NATO             North Atlantic Treaty Organization
        NC               Nordic Council
        NEA              Nuclear Energy Agency
        NEGL             negligible
        NIB              Nordic Investment Bank
        NIC              newly industrializing country; see
                         newly industrializing economy (NIE)
        NIE              newly industrializing economy
        nm               nautical mile
        NMT              Nordic Mobile Telephone
        NSG              Nuclear Suppliers Group
        Nuclear Test Ban Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons
                         Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
                         Space, and Under Water
        NZ               New Zealand
O       OAPEC            Organization of Arab Petroleum
                         Exporting Countries
        OAS              Organization of American States
        OAU              Organization of African Unity
        ODA              official development assistance
        OECD             Organization for Economic
                         Cooperation and Development
        OECS             Organization of Eastern Caribbean
                         States
        OIC              Organization of the Islamic
                         Conference
        ONUMOZ           see United Nations Operation in
                         Mozambique (UNOMOZ)
        ONUSAL           United Nations Observer Mission in
                         El Salvador
        OOF              other official flows
        OPANAL           Organismo para la Proscripcion de
                         las Armas Nucleares en la America
                         Latina y el Caribe; see Agency for
                         the Prohibition of Nuclear Weapons
                         in Latin America and the Caribbean
        OPCW             Organization for the Prohibition of
                         Chemical Weapons
        OPEC             Organization of Petroleum Exporting
                         Countries
        OSCE             Organization on Security and
                         Cooperation in Europe Ozone Layer
                         Protection Montreal Protocol on
                         Substances That Deplete the Ozone
                         Layer
P       PCA              Permanent Court of Arbitration
        PDRY             People's Democratic Republic of
                         Yemen [Yemen (Aden) or South
                         Yemen]; used for information dated
                         before 22 May 1990 or CY91
        PFP              Partnership for Peace
R       Ramsar           see Wetlands
        RG               Rio Group
S       SAARC            South Asian Association for
                         Regional Cooperation
        SACU             Southern African Customs Union
        SADC             Southern African Development
                         Community
        SADCC            Southern African Development
                         Coordination Conference; see
                         Southern African Development
                         Community (SADC)
        SELA             Sistema Economico Latinoamericana;
                         see Latin American Economic System
                         (LAES)
        SFRY             Socialist Federal Republic of
                         Yugoslavia; dissolved 5 December
                         1991
        SHF              super-high-frequency
        Ship Pollution   Protocol of 1978 Relating to the
                         International Convention for the
                         Prevention of Pollution From Ships,
                         1973 (MARPOL)
        Sparteca         South Pacific Regional Trade and
                         Economic Cooperation Agreement
        SPC              South Pacific Commission
        SPF              South Pacific Forum
        sq km            square kilometer
        sq mi            square mile
T       TAT              Trans-Atlantic Telephone
        Tropical Timber  International Tropical Timber
        83               Agreement, 1983
        Tropical Timber  International Tropical Timber
        94               Agreement, 1994
U       UAE              United Arab Emirates
        UDEAC            Union Douaniere et Economique de
                         l'Afrique Centrale; see Central
                         African Customs and Economic Union
                         (UDEAC)
        UEMOA            Union economique et monetaire Ouest
                         africaine; see West African
                         Economic and Monetary Union (WAEMU)
        UHF              ultra-high-frequency
        UK               United Kingdom
        UN               United Nations
        UNAMIR           United Nations Assistance Mission
                         for Rwanda
        UNAVEM III       United Nations Angola Verification
                         Mission III
        UNCRO            United Nations Confidence
                         Restoration Operation in Croatia
        UNCTAD           United Nations Conference on Trade
                         and Development
        UNDOF            United Nations Disengagement
                         Observer Force
        UNDP             United Nations Development Program
        UNEP             United Nations Environment Program
        UNESCO           United Nations Educational,
                         Scientific, and Cultural
                         Organization
        UNFICYP          United Nations Peace-keeping Force
                         in Cyprus
        UNFPA            United Nations Fund for Population
                         Activities; see UN Population Fund
                         (UNFPA)
        UNHCR            United Nations High Commissioner
                         for Refugees
        UNICEF           United Nations Children's Fund
        UNIDO            United Nations Industrial
                         Development Organization
        UNIFIL           United Nations Interim Force in
                         Lebanon
        UNIKOM           United Nations Iraq-Kuwait
                         Observation Mission
        UNITAR           United Nations Institute for
                         Training and Research
        UNMIH            United Nations Mission in Haiti
        UNMIBH           United Nations Mission in Bosnia
                         and Herzegovina
        UNMOGIP          United Nations Military Observer
                         Group in India and Pakistan
        UNMOP            United Nations Mission of Observers
                         in Prevlaka
        UNMOT            United Nations Mission of Observers
                         in Tajikistan
        UNOMIG           United Nations Observer Mission in
                         Georgia
        UNOMIL           United Nations Observer Mission in
                         Liberia
        UNOMOZ           United Nations Operation in
                         Mozambique
        UNOMSIL          United Nations Mission of Observers
                         in Sierra Leone
        UNOMUR           United Nations Observer Mission
                         Uganda-Rwanda
        UNOSOM II        United Nations Operation in Somalia
                         II
        UNPREDEP         United Nations Preventive
                         Deployment Force
        UNPROFOR         United Nations Protection Force
        UNRISD           United Nations Research Institute
                         for Social Development
        UNRWA            United Nations Relief and Works
                         Agency for Palestine Refugees in
                         the Near East
        UNSMIH           United Nations Support Mission in
                         Haiti
        UNTAC            United Nations Transitional
                         Authority in Cambodia
        UNTAES           United Nations Transitional
                         Administration in Eastern Slavonia,
                         Baranja, and Western Sirmium
        UNTSO            United Nations Truce Supervision
                         Organization
        UNU              United Nations University
        UPU              Universal Postal Union
        US               United States
        USSR             Union of Soviet Socialist Republics
                         (Soviet Union); used for
                         information dated before 25
                         December 1991
        USSR/EE          Union of Soviet Socialist
                         Republics/Eastern Europe
V       VHF              very-high-frequency
W       WADB             West African Development Bank
        WAEMU            West African Economic and Monetary
                         Union
        WCL              World Confederation of Labor
        WCO              World Customs Organization; see
                         Customs Cooperation Council
        Wetlands         Convention on Wetlands of
                         International Importance Especially
                         As Waterfowl Habitat
        WEU              Western European Union
        WFC              World Food Council
        WFP              World Food Program
        WFTU             World Federation of Trade Unions
        Whaling          International Convention for the
                         Regulation of Whaling
        WHO              World Health Organization
        WIPO             World Intellectual Property
                         Organization
        WMO              World Meteorological Organization
        WP               Warsaw Pact
        WTO              see WToO for World Tourism
                         Organization or WTrO for World
                         Trade Organization
        WToO             World Tourism Organization
        WTrO             World Trade Organization
Y       YAR              Yemen Arab Republic [Yemen (Sanaa)
                         or North Yemen]; used for
                         information dated before 22 May
                         1990 or CY91
Z       ZC               Zangger Committee



=====================================================================



Appendix B: United Nations System


Transcriber's note: this appeared to be an empty appendix,
possibly under development.  It does not appear in later
editions of the Factbook.



=====================================================================



Appendix D: Selected International Environmental Agreements


Air Pollution

see Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution



Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides

see Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution Concerning the Control of Emissions of Nitrogen Oxides or
Their Transboundary Fluxes



Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants

see Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution on Persistent Organic Pollutants



Air Pollution-Sulphur 85

see Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions or Their Transboundary
Fluxes by at least 30%



Air Pollution-Sulphur 94

see Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution on Further Reduction of Sulphur Emissions



Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds

see Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution Concerning the Control of Emissions of Volatile Organic
Compounds or Their Transboundary Fluxes



Antarctic-Environmental Protocol

see Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty



Antarctic Treaty

opened for signature--1 December 1959
entered into force--23 June 1961
objective--to ensure that Antarctica is used for peaceful purposes, such
as, for international cooperation in scientific research, and that it
does not become the scene or object of international discord
parties--(43) Argentina, Australia, Austria, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, India, Italy,
Japan, North Korea, South Korea, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Poland, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, UK, US, Uruguay



Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of Hazardous
Wastes and Their Disposal

note--abbreviated as Hazardous Wastes
opened for signature--22 March 1989
entered into force--5 May 1992
objective--to reduce transboundary movements of wastes subject to the
Convention to a minimum consistent with the environmentally sound and
efficient management of such wastes; to minimize the amount and
toxicity of wastes generated and ensure their environmentally sound
management as closely as possible to the source of generation; and to
assist LDCs in environmentally sound management of the hazardous and
other wastes they generate
parties--(123) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria, The
Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin,
Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burundi, Canada, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Costa Rica, Cote
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominica,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Estonia, EU, Finland, France, The Gambia,
Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India,
Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, Jordan, South Korea,
Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Latvia, Lebanon, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, The
Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ,
Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania,
Russia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria,
Tanzania, Thailand, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, UAE, UK, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(3) Afghanistan,
Haiti, US



Biodiversity

see Convention on Biological Diversity



Convention on Biological Diversity

note--abbreviated as Biodiversity
opened for signature--5 June 1992
entered into force--29 December 1993
objective--to develop national strategies for the conservation and
sustainable use of biological diversity
parties--(175) Albania, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia, Botswana,
Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon,
Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the
Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus,
Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic,
Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia,
Ethiopia, EU, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia,
Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau,
Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, North Korea, South Korea, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon,
Lesotho, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, The Former Yugoslav
Republic of Macedonia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali,
Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of
Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nauru, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Niue, Norway,
Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru,
Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint
Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa,
San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan, Tanzania,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Uganda, Ukraine, UK, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam,
Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(12) Afghanistan,
Azerbaijan, Kuwait, Liberia, Libya, Malta, Sao Tome and Principe,
Thailand, Tuvalu, UAE, US, former Yugoslavia



Climate Change

see United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change



Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol

see Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on
Climate Change



Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the High
Seas

note--abbreviated as Marine Life Conservation
opened for signature--29 April 1958
entered into force--20 March 1966
objective--to solve through international cooperation the problems
involved in the conservation of living resources of the high seas,
considering that because of the development of modern technology some
of these resources are in danger of being overexploited
parties--(37) Australia, Belgium, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Burkina Faso,
Cambodia, Colombia, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Fiji, Finland, France,
Haiti, Jamaica, Kenya, Lesotho, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia,
Mauritius, Mexico, Netherlands, Nigeria, Portugal, Senegal, Sierra
Leone, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Switzerland, Thailand,
Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Uganda, UK, US, Venezuela, former
Yugoslavia
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(21) Afghanistan,
Argentina, Bolivia, Canada, Costa Rica, Cuba, Ghana, Iceland,
Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Lebanon, Liberia, Nepal, NZ,
Pakistan, Panama, Sri Lanka, Tunisia, Uruguay



Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air Pollution

note--abbreviated as Air Pollution
opened for signature--13 November 1979
entered into force--16 March 1983
objective--to protect the human environment against air pollution and to
gradually reduce and prevent air pollution, including long-range
transboundary air pollution
parties--(44) Armenia, Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bosnia and
Herzegovina, Bulgaria, Canada, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic,
Denmark, EU, Finland, France, Georgia, Germany, Greece, Hungary,
Iceland, Ireland, Italy, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg,
The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Malta, Moldova, Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, Turkey, Ukraine, UK, US, former Yugoslavia
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(2) Holy See, San
Marino



Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Flora and Fauna (CITES)

note--abbreviated as Endangered Species
opened for signature--3 March 1973
entered into force--1 July 1975
objective--to protect certain endangered species from overexploitation
by means of a system of import/export permits
parties--(137) Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad,
Chile, China, Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Republic of the Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, Fiji, Finland, France,
Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, India, Indonesia, Iran, Israel,
Italy, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, South Korea, Latvia, Liberia,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta,
Mauritius, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia,
Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway, Pakistan,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland,
Portugal, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia,
Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri
Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Tanzania,
Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Uganda, UAE, UK,
US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Zambia, Zimbabwe
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(3) Ireland, Kuwait,
Lesotho



Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes and
Other Matter (London Convention)

note--abbreviated as Marine Dumping
opened for signature--29 December 1972
entered into force--30 August 1975
objective--to control pollution of the sea by dumping and to encourage
regional agreements supplementary to the Convention
parties--(75) Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Barbados, Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Brazil,
Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Cyprus, Denmark, Dominican Republic,
Egypt, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Greece, Guatemala, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, Iran, Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan,
Jordan, Kenya, Kiribati, Libya, Luxembourg, Malta, Mexico, Monaco,
Morocco, Nauru, Netherlands, NZ, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Panama, Papua
New Guinea, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Russia, Saint Lucia,
Seychelles, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Tonga, Tunisia, Tuvalu, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US,
former Yugoslavia



Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use of
Environmental Modification Techniques

note--abbreviated as Environmental Modification
opened for signature--10 December 1976
entered into force--5 October 1978
objective--to prohibit the military or other hostile use of
environmental modification techniques in order to further world peace
and trust among nations
parties--(64) Afghanistan, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin, Brazil,
Bulgaria, Canada, Cape Verde, Chile, Costa Rica, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Egypt, Finland, Germany, Ghana, Greece,
Guatemala, Hungary, India, Ireland, Italy, Japan, North Korea, South
Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Malawi, Mauritius, Mongolia, Netherlands, NZ,
Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Papua New Guinea, Poland, Romania, Russia,
Saint Lucia, Sao Tome and Principe, Slovakia, Solomon Islands, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sweden, Switzerland, Tunisia, Ukraine, UK, US, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Yemen
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(17) Bolivia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Ethiopia, Holy See, Iceland, Iran,
Iraq, Lebanon, Liberia, Luxembourg, Morocco, Nicaragua, Portugal,
Sierra Leone, Syria, Turkey, Uganda



Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially as
Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar)

note--abbreviated as Wetlands
opened for signature--2 February 1971
entered into force--21 December 1975
objective--to stem the progressive encroachment on and loss of wetlands
now and in the future, recognizing the fundamental ecological functions
of wetlands and their economic, cultural, scientific, and recreational
value
parties--(101) Albania, Algeria, Argentina, Armenia, Australia, Austria,
The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina
Faso, Canada, Chad, Chile, China, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark, Ecuador,
Egypt, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany,
Greece, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan,
Kenya, South Korea, Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Malawi, Mali,
Malta, Mauritania, Mexico, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Namibia,
Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Norway, Pakistan, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia,
Senegal, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Suriname,
Sweden, Switzerland, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, UK,
US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Vietnam, former Yugoslavia, Zambia



Desertification

see United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in those
Countries Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification,
Particularly in Africa



Endangered Species

see Convention on the International Trade in Endangered Species of Wild
Flora and Fauna (CITES)



Environmental Modification

see Convention on the Prohibition of Military or Any Other Hostile Use
of Environmental Modification Techniques



Hazardous Wastes

see Basel Convention on the Control of Transboundary Movements of
Hazardous Wastes and Their Disposal



International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling

note--abbreviated as Whaling
opened for signature--2 December 1946
entered into force--10 November 1948
objective--to protect all species of whales from overhunting; to
establish a system of international regulation for the whale fisheries
to ensure proper conservation and development of whale stocks; and to
safeguard for future generations the great natural resources
represented by whale stocks
parties--(51) Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia, Austria,
Belize, Brazil, Canada, Chile, China, Costa Rica, Denmark, Dominica,
Ecuador, Egypt, Finland, France, Germany, Grenada, Iceland, India,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kenya, South Korea, Mauritius, Mexico,
Monaco, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Oman, Panama, Peru, Philippines,
Russia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Senegal, Seychelles, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sweden, Switzerland, UK, US, Uruguay, Venezuela



International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1983

note--abbreviated as Tropical Timber 83
opened for signature--18 November 1983
entered into force--1 April 1985; this agreement expired when the
International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1994, went into force
objective--to provide an effective framework for cooperation between
tropical timber producers and consumers and to encourage the
development of national policies aimed at sustainable utilization and
conservation of tropical forests and their genetic resources
parties--(54) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,
Cameroon, Canada, China, Colombia, Democratic Republic of the Congo,
Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire, Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, EU,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guyana, Honduras,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Italy, Japan, South Korea, Liberia,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Panama, Papua New
Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Portugal, Russia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, US, Venezuela



International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1994

note--abbreviated as Tropical Timber 94
opened for signature--26 January 1994
entered into force--1 January 1997
objective--to ensure that by the year 2000 exports of tropical timber
originate from sustainably managed sources; to establish a fund to
assist tropical timber producers in obtaining the resources necessary
to reach this objective
parties--(54) Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Burma,
Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, China, Colombia,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the Congo, Cote d'Ivoire,
Denmark, Ecuador, Egypt, EU, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, Germany,
Ghana, Greece, Guyana, Honduras, India, Indonesia, Italy, Japan, South
Korea, Liberia, Luxembourg, Malaysia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Norway,
Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Spain, Suriname, Sweden,
Switzerland, Thailand, Togo, Trinidad and Tobago, UK, US, Venezuela
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(2) Ireland, Portugal



Kyoto Protocol to the United Nations Framework Convention on Climate
Change

note--abbreviated as Climate Change-Kyoto Protocol
opened for signature--16 March 1998, but not yet in force
objective--to further reduce greenhouse gas emissions by enhancing the
national programs of developed countries aimed at this goal and by
establishing percentage reduction targets for the developed countries
parties--(7) Antigua and Barbuda, El Salvador, Fiji, Maldives, Panama,
Trinidad and Tobago, Tuvalu
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(72) Argentina,
Australia, Austria, Belgium, Bolivia, Brazil, Bulgaria, Canada, Chile,
China, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Croatia, Czech Republic, Denmark,
Ecuador, Estonia, EU, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Guatemala,
Honduras, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Japan, South Korea,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Monaco, Netherlands,
New Zealand, Nicaragua, Niger, Niue, Norway, Papua New Guinea,
Paraguay, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saint
Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Seychelles, Slovakia,
Slovenia, Solomon Islands, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Thailand,
Turkmenistan, UK, US, Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vietnam, Zambia



Law of the Sea

see United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS)



Marine Dumping

see Convention on the Prevention of Marine Pollution by Dumping Wastes
and Other Matter (London Convention)



Marine Life Conservation

see Convention on Fishing and Conservation of Living Resources of the
High Seas



Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer

note--abbreviated as Ozone Layer Protection
opened for signature--16 September 1987
entered into force--1 January 1989
objective--to protect the ozone layer by controlling emissions of
substances that deplete it
parties--(168) Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belarus, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina,
Botswana, Brazil, Brunei, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi,
Cameroon, Canada, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile, China,
Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of the
Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El
Salvador, Estonia, Ethiopia, EU, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea,
Guyana, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland,
Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati,
North Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, The Former
Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated
States of Micronesia, Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique,
Namibia, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal (Portugal has also extended the protocol to Macau),
Qatar, Romania, Russia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain,
Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria,
Tajikistan, Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago,
Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US,
Uruguay, Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, former
Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe



Nuclear Test Ban

see Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapons Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer
Space, and Under Water



Ozone Layer Protection

see Montreal Protocol on Substances That Deplete the Ozone Layer



Protocol of 1978 Relating to the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution From Ships, 1973 (MARPOL)

note--abbreviated as Ship Pollution
opened for signature--17 February 1978
entered into force--2 October 1983
objective--to preserve the marine environment through the complete
elimination of pollution by oil and other harmful substances and the
minimization of accidental discharge of such substances
parties--(100) Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Australia,
Austria, The Bahamas, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Brazil, Brunei,
Bulgaria, Burma, Cambodia, Canada, Chile, China, Colombia, Cote
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti,
Ecuador, Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, Estonia, Finland, France, Gabon, The
Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Guatemala, Hungary, Iceland,
India, Indonesia, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Kazakhstan,
Kenya, North Korea, South Korea, Latvia, Lebanon, Liberia, Lithuania,
Luxembourg, Malaysia, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius,
Mexico, Monaco, Morocco, Netherlands, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Peru, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Russia, Saint
Vincent and the Grenadines, Senegal, Seychelles, Singapore, Slovakia,
Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Suriname, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria,
Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Tuvalu, Ukraine, UK, US, Uruguay,
Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, former Yugoslavia



Protocol on Environmental Protection to the Antarctic Treaty

note--abbreviated as Antarctic-Environmental Protocol
opened for signature--4 October 1991
entered into force--14 January 1998
objective--to enhance the protection of the Antarctic environment and
dependent and associated ecosystems
parties--(28) Argentina, Australia, Belgium, Brazil, Bulgaria, Chile,
China, Ecuador, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, India, Italy, Japan,
South Korea, Netherlands, NZ, Norway, Peru, Poland, Russia, South
Africa, Spain, Sweden, UK, US, Uruguay
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(15) Austria, Canada,
Colombia, Cuba, Czech Republic, Denmark, Guatemala, Hungary, North
Korea, Papua New Guinea, Romania, Slovakia, Switzerland, Turkey,
Ukraine



Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution Concerning the Control of Emissions of Nitrogen Oxides or
Their Transboundary Fluxes

note--abbreviated as Air Pollution-Nitrogen Oxides
opened for signature--31 October 1988
entered into force--14 February 1991
objective--to provide for the control or reduction of nitrogen oxides
and their transboundary fluxes
parties--(26) Austria, Belarus, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech Republic,
Denmark, EU, Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Ireland, Italy,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Slovakia,
Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine, UK, US
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(2) Belgium, Poland



Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution Concerning the Control of Emissions of Volatile Organic
Compounds or Their Transboundary Fluxes

note--abbreviated as Air Pollution-Volatile Organic Compounds
opened for signature--18 November 1991
entered into force--29 September 1997
objective--to provide for the control and reduction of emissions of
volatile organic compounds in order to reduce their transboundary
fluxes so as to protect human health and the environment from adverse
effects
parties--(17) Austria, Bulgaria, Czech Republic, Denmark, Finland,
France, Germany, Hungary, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Norway, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(7) Belgium, Canada,
EU, Greece, Portugal, Ukraine, US



Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution on Further Reduction of Sulphur Emissions

note--abbreviated as Air Pollution-Sulphur 94
opened for signature--14 June 1994
entered into force--5 August 1998
objective--to provide for a further reduction in sulfur emissions or
transboundary fluxes
parties--(21) Austria, Canada, Czech Republic, Denmark, EU, Finland,
France, Germany, Greece, Ireland, Italy, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Netherlands, Norway, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden, Switzerland, UK
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(7) Belgium, Bulgaria,
Croatia, Hungary, Poland, Russia, Ukraine



Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution on Persistent Organic Pollutants

note--abbreviated as Air Pollution-Persistent Organic Pollutants
opened for signature--24 June 1998, but not yet in force
objective--to provide for the control and reduction of emissions of
persistent organic pollutants in order to reduce their transboundary
fluxes so as to protect human health and the environment from adverse
effects

partie--(1) Canada
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(35) Armenia, Austria,
Belgium, Bulgaria, Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, EU,
Finland, France, Germany, Greece, Hungary, Iceland, Ireland, Italy,
Latvia, Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, Moldova, Netherlands,
Norway, Poland, Portugal, Romania, Slovakia, Slovenia, Spain, Sweden,
Switzerland, Ukraine, UK, US



Protocol to the 1979 Convention on Long-Range Transboundary Air
Pollution on the Reduction of Sulphur Emissions or Their Transboundary
Fluxes by at Least 30%

note--abbreviated as Air Pollution-Sulphur 85
opened for signature--8 July 1985
entered into force--2 September 1987
objective--to provide for a 30% reduction in sulfur emissions or
transboundary fluxes by 1993
parties--(21) Austria, Belarus, Belgium, Bulgaria, Canada, Czech
Republic, Denmark, Finland, France, Germany, Hungary, Italy,
Liechtenstein, Luxembourg, Netherlands, Norway, Russia, Slovakia,
Sweden, Switzerland, Ukraine



Ship Pollution

see Protocol of 1978 Relating to the International Convention for the
Prevention of Pollution From Ships, 1973 (MARPOL)



Treaty Banning Nuclear Weapon Tests in the Atmosphere, in Outer Space,
and Under Water

note--abbreviated as Nuclear Test Ban
opened for signature--5 August 1963
entered into force--10 October 1963
objective--to obtain an agreement on general and complete disarmament
under strict international control in accordance with the objectives of
the United Nations; to put an end to the armaments race and eliminate
incentives for the production and testing of all kinds of weapons,
including nuclear weapons
parties--(122) Afghanistan, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina, Armenia,
Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bangladesh, Belarus, Belgium, Benin,
Bhutan, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria,
Burma, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
Colombia, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire,
Croatia, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Dominican Republic, Ecuador,
Egypt, El Salvador, Fiji, Finland, Gabon, The Gambia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Guatemala, Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Iraq, Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, South
Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Lebanon, Liberia, Libya, Luxembourg, Madagascar,
Malawi, Malaysia, Malta, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Mongolia,
Morocco, Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Norway,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Peru, Philippines, Poland, Romania,
Russia, Rwanda, Samoa, San Marino, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone,
Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan,
Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tanzania, Thailand,
Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Turkey, Uganda, Ukraine, UK,
US, Uruguay, Venezuela, Yemen, former Yugoslavia, Zambia
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(12) Algeria, Burkina
Faso, Burundi, Cameroon, China, Ethiopia, Haiti, Mali, Paraguay,
Portugal, Somalia, Vietnam



Tropical Timber 83

see International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1983



Tropical Timber 94

see International Tropical Timber Agreement, 1994



United Nations Convention on the Law of the Sea (LOS)

note--abbreviated as Law of the Sea
opened for signature--10 December 1982
entered into force--16 November 1994
objective--to set up a comprehensive new legal regime for the sea and
oceans; to include rules concerning environmental standards as well as
enforcement provisions dealing with pollution of the marine environment
parties--(130) Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Australia, Austria, The Bahamas, Bahrain, Barbados, Belgium, Belize,
Benin, Bolivia, Bosnia and Herzegovina, Botswana, Brazil, Brunei,
Bulgaria, Burma, Cameroon, Cape Verde, Chile, China, Comoros,
Democratic Republic of the Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote
d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba, Cyprus, Czech Republic, Djibouti, Dominica,
Egypt, Equatorial Guinea, EU, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia,
Georgia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iraq,
Ireland, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kenya, South Korea, Kuwait,
Laos, Lebanon, The Former Yugoslav Republic of Macedonia, Malaysia,
Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated
States of Micronesia, Monaco, Mongolia, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru,
Nepal, Netherlands, NZ, Nigeria, Norway, Oman, Pakistan, Palau, Panama,
Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Philippines, Poland, Portugal, Romania,
Russia, Saint Kitts and Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the
Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal,
Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore, Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon
Islands, Somalia, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Suriname,
Sweden, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia, Uganda,
UK, Uruguay, Vietnam, Yemen, former Yugoslavia, Zambia, Zimbabwe
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(40) Afghanistan,
Bangladesh, Belarus, Bhutan, Burkina Faso, Burundi, Cambodia, Canada,
Central African Republic, Chad, Colombia, Republic of the Congo,
Denmark, Dominican Republic, El Salvador, Ethiopia, Hungary, Iran,
North Korea, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya, Liechtenstein, Luxembourg,
Madagascar, Malawi, Maldives, Morocco, Nicaragua, Niger, Niue, Qatar,
Rwanda, Swaziland, Switzerland, Thailand, Tuvalu, Ukraine, UAE, Vanuatu



United Nations Convention to Combat Desertification in Those Countries
Experiencing Serious Drought and/or Desertification, Particularly in
Africa

note--abbreviated as Desertification
opened for signature--14 October 1994
entered into force--26 December 1996
objective--to combat desertification and mitigate the effects of drought
through national action programs that incorporate long-term strategies
supported by international cooperation and partnership arrangements
parties--(148) Afghanistan, Algeria, Angola, Antigua and Barbuda,
Argentina, Armenia, Austria, Azerbaijan, Bahrain, Bangladesh, Barbados,
Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bolivia, Botswana, Brazil, Burkina Faso, Burma,
Burundi, Cambodia, Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African
Republic, Chad, Chile, China, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the
Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Cuba, Denmark,
Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador,
Equatorial Guinea, Eritrea, Ethiopia, EU, Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon,
The Gambia, Germany, Ghana, Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-
Bissau, Guyana, Haiti, Honduras, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran,
Ireland, Israel, Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya,
Kiribati, Kuwait, Kyrgyzstan, Laos, Lebanon, Lesotho, Liberia, Libya,
Luxembourg, Madagascar, Malawi, Malaysia, Mali, Malta, Marshall
Islands, Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia,
Moldova, Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Niue, Norway, Oman, Pakistan,
Panama, Paraguay, Peru, Portugal, Romania, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, Sao Tome
and Principe, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, South
Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka, Sudan, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria,
Tajikistan, Tanzania, Togo, Tonga, Tunisia, Turkey, Turkmenistan,
Tuvalu, Uganda, United Arab Emirates, UK, Uruguay, Uzbekistan,
Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, Zambia, Zimbabwe
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(9) Australia,
Colombia, Republic of the Congo, Croatia, Georgia, South Korea,
Philippines, US, Vanuatu



United Nations Framework Convention on Climate Change

note--abbreviated as Climate Change
opened for signature--9 May 1992
entered into force--21 March 1994
objective--to achieve stabilization of greenhouse gas concentrations in
the atmosphere at a low enough level to prevent dangerous anthropogenic
interference with the climate system
parties--(177) Albania, Algeria, Antigua and Barbuda, Argentina,
Armenia, Australia, Austria, Azerbaijan, The Bahamas, Bahrain,
Bangladesh, Barbados, Belgium, Belize, Benin, Bhutan, Bolivia,
Botswana, Brazil, Bulgaria, Burkina Faso, Burma, Burundi, Cambodia,
Cameroon, Canada, Cape Verde, Central African Republic, Chad, Chile,
China, Colombia, Comoros, Democratic Republic of the Congo, Republic of
the Congo, Cook Islands, Costa Rica, Cote d'Ivoire, Croatia, Cuba,
Cyprus, Czech Republic, Denmark, Djibouti, Dominica, Dominican
Republic, Ecuador, Egypt, El Salvador, Eritrea, Estonia, Ethiopia, EU,
Fiji, Finland, France, Gabon, The Gambia, Georgia, Germany, Ghana,
Greece, Grenada, Guatemala, Guinea, Guinea-Bissau, Guyana, Haiti,
Honduras, Hungary, Iceland, India, Indonesia, Iran, Ireland, Israel,
Italy, Jamaica, Japan, Jordan, Kazakhstan, Kenya, Kiribati, North
Korea, South Korea, Kuwait, Laos, Latvia, Lebanon, Lesotho,
Liechtenstein, Lithuania, Luxembourg, The Former Yugoslav Republic of
Macedonia, Malawi, Malaysia, Maldives, Mali, Malta, Marshall Islands,
Mauritania, Mauritius, Mexico, Federated States of Micronesia, Moldova,
Monaco, Mongolia, Morocco, Mozambique, Namibia, Nauru, Nepal,
Netherlands, NZ, Nicaragua, Niger, Nigeria, Niue, Norway, Oman,
Pakistan, Panama, Papua New Guinea, Paraguay, Peru, Philippines,
Poland, Portugal, Qatar, Romania, Russia, Rwanda, Saint Kitts and
Nevis, Saint Lucia, Saint Vincent and the Grenadines, Samoa, San
Marino, Saudi Arabia, Senegal, Seychelles, Sierra Leone, Singapore,
Slovakia, Slovenia, Solomon Islands, South Africa, Spain, Sri Lanka,
Sudan, Suriname, Swaziland, Sweden, Switzerland, Syria, Tajikistan,
Tanzania, Thailand, Togo, Tonga, Trinidad and Tobago, Tunisia,
Turkmenistan, Tuvalu, Uganda, Ukraine, UAE, UK, US, Uruguay,
Uzbekistan, Vanuatu, Venezuela, Vietnam, Yemen, former Yugoslavia,
Zambia, Zimbabwe
countries that have signed, but not yet ratified--(7) Afghanistan,
Angola, Belarus, Liberia, Libya, Madagascar, Sao Tome and Principe



Wetlands

see Convention on Wetlands of International Importance Especially As
Waterfowl Habitat (Ramsar)



Whaling

see International Convention for the Regulation of Whaling



=====================================================================



Appendix E: Weights and Measures


Mathematical Notation

Mathematical Power                              Name

10^18 or 1,000,000,000,000,000,000              one quintillion
10^15 or 1,000,000,000,000,000                  one quadrillion
10^12 or 1,000,000,000,000                      one trillion
10^9 or 1,000,000,000                           one billion
10^6 or 1,000,000                               one million
10^3 or 1,000                                   one thousand
10^2 or 100                                     one hundred
10^1 or 10                                      ten
10^0 or 1                                       one
10^-1 or 0.1                                    one tenth
10^-2 or 0.01                                   one hundredth
10^-3 or 0.001                                  one thousandth
10^-6 or 0.000 001                              one millionth
10^-9 or 0.000 000 001                          one billionth
10^-12 or 0.000 000 000 001                     one trillionth
10^-15 or 0.000 000 000 000 001                 one quadrillionth
10^-18 or 0.000 000 000 000 000 001             one quintillionth


Metric Interrelationships

Prefix       Symbol  Length, weight, or capacity      Area      Volume

exa          E       1018                             1036      1054
peta         P       1015                             1030      1045
tera         T       1012                             1024      1036
giga         G       109                              1018      1027
mega         M       106                              1012      1018
hectokilo    hk      105                              1010      1015
myria        ma      104                              108       1012
kilo         k       103                              106       109
hecto        h       102                              104       106
basic unit   --      1 meter, 1 gram, 1 liter         1 meter2  1 meter3
deci         d       10-1                             10-2      10-3
centi        c       10-2                             10-4      10-6
milli        m       10-3                             10-6      10-9
decimilli    dm      10-4                             10-8      10-12
centimilli   cm      10-5                             10-10     10-15
micro        u       10-6                             10-12     10-18
nano         n       10-9                             10-18     10-27
pico         p       10-12                            10-24     10-36
femto        f       10-15                            10-30     10-45
atto         a       10-18                            10-36     10-54


Conversion Factors

To Convert From   To                                  Multiply by

acres             ares                                40.468 564 224
acres             hectares                            0.404 685 642 24
acres             square feet                         43,560
acres             square kilometers                   0.004 046 856 422 4
acres             square meters                       4,046.856 422 4
acres             square miles (statute)              0.001 562 50
acres             square yards                        4,840
ares              square meters                       100
ares              square yards                        119.599
barrels, US beer  gallons                             31
barrels, US beer  liters                              117.347 77
barrels, US       gallons (British)                   34.97
petroleum
barrels, US       gallons (US)                        42
petroleum
barrels, US       liters                              158.987 29
petroleum
barrels, US proof gallons                             40
spirits
barrels, US proof liters                              151.416 47
spirits
bushels (US)      bushels (British)                   0.968 9
bushels (US)      cubic feet                          1.244 456
bushels (US)      cubic inches                        2,150.42
bushels (US)      cubic meters                        0.035 239 07
bushels (US)      cubic yards                         0.046 090 96
bushels (US)      dekaliters                          3.523 907
bushels (US)      dry pints                           64
bushels (US)      dry quarts                          32
bushels (US)      liters                              35.239 070 17
bushels (US)      pecks                               4
cables            fathoms                             120
cables            meters                              219.456
cables            yards                               240
carat             milligrams                          200
centimeters       feet                                0.032 808 40
centimeters       inches                              0.393 700 8
centimeters       meters                              0.01
centimeters       yards                               0.010 936 13
centimeters,      cubic inches                        0.061 023 744
cubic
centimeters,      square feet                         0.001 076 39
square
centimeters,      square inches                       0.155 000 31
square
centimeters,      square meters                       0.000 1
square
centimeters,      square yards                        0.000 119 599
square
chains, square    ares                                4.046 86
surveyor's
chains, square    square feet                         4,356
surveyor's
chains,           feet                                66
surveyor's
chains,           meters                              20.116 8
surveyor's
chains,           rods                                4
surveyor's
cords of wood     cubic feet                          128
cords of wood     cubic meters                        3.624 556
cords of wood     cubic yards                         4.740 7
cups              liquid ounces (US)                  8
cups              liters                              0.236 588 2
degrees Celsius   degrees Fahrenheit                  multiply by 1.8
                                                    and add 32
degrees           degrees Celsius                     subtract 32 and
Fahrenheit                                           divide by 1.8
dekaliters        bushels                             0.283 775 9
dekaliters        cubic feet                          0.353 146 7
dekaliters        cubic inches                        610.237 4
dekaliters        dry pints                           18.161 66
dekaliters        dry quarts                          9.080 829 8
dekaliters        liters                              10
dekaliters        pecks                               1.135 104
drams,            avoirdupois ounces                  0.062 55
avoirdupois
drams,            grains                              27.344
avoirdupois
drams,            grams                               1.771 845 2
avoirdupois
drams, troy       grains                              60
drams, troy       grams                               3.887 934 6
drams, troy       scruples                            3
drams, troy       troy ounces                         0.125
drams, liquid     cubic inches                        0.226
(US)
drams, liquid     liquid drams (British)              1.041
(US)
drams, liquid     liquid ounces                       0.125
(US)
drams, liquid     milliliters                         3.696 69
(US)
drams, liquid     minims                              60
(US)
fathoms           feet                                6
fathoms           meters                              1.828 8
feet              centimeters                         30.48
feet              inches                              12
feet              kilometers                          0.000 304 8
feet              meters                              0.304 8
feet              statute miles                       0.000 189 39
feet              yards                               0.333 333 3
feet, cubic       bushels                             0.803 563 95
feet, cubic       cubic decimeters                    28.316 847
feet, cubic       cubic inches                        1,728
feet, cubic       cubic meters                        0.028 316 846 592
feet, cubic       cubic yards                         0.037 037 04
feet, cubic       dry pints                           51.428 09
feet, cubic       dry quarts                          25.714 05
feet, cubic       gallons                             7.480 519
feet, cubic       gills                               239.376 6
feet, cubic       liquid ounces                       957.506 5
feet, cubic       liquid pints                        59.844 16
feet, cubic       liquid quarts                       29.922 08
feet, cubic       liters                              28.316 846 592
feet, cubic       pecks                               3.214 256
feet, square      acres                               0.000 022 956 8
feet, square      square centimeters                  929.030 4
feet, square      square decimeters                   9.290 304
feet, square      square inches                       144
feet, square      square meters                       0.092 903 04
feet, square      square yards                        0.111 111 1
furlongs          feet                                660
furlongs          inches                              7,920
furlongs          meters                              201.168
furlongs          statute miles                       0.125
furlongs          yards                               220
gallons, liquid   cubic feet                          0.133 680 6
(US)
gallons, liquid   cubic inches                        231
(US)
gallons, liquid   cubic meters                        0.003 785 411 784
(US)
gallons, liquid   cubic yards                         0.004 951 13
(US)
gallons, liquid   gills (US)                          32
(US)
gallons, liquid   liquid gallons (British)            0.832 67
(US)
gallons, liquid   liquid ounces                       128
(US)
gallons, liquid   liquid pints                        8
(US)
gallons, liquid   liquid quarts                       4
(US)
gallons, liquid   liters                              3.785 411 784
(US)
gallons, liquid   milliliters                         3,785.411 784
(US)
gallons, liquid   minims                              61,440
(US)
gills (US)        centiliters                         11.829 4
gills (US)        cubic feet                          0.004 177 517
gills (US)        cubic inches                        7.218 75
gills (US)        gallons                             0.031 25
gills (US)        gills (British)                     0.832 67
gills (US)        liquid ounces                       4
gills (US)        liquid pints                        0.25
gills (US)        liquid quarts                       0.125
gills (US)        liters                              0.118 294 118 25
gills (US)        milliliters                         118.294 118 25
gills (US)        minims                              1,920
grains            avoirdupois drams                   0.036 571 43
grains            avoirdupois ounces                  0.002 285 71
grains            avoirdupois pounds                  0.000 142 86
grains            grams                               0.064 798 91
grains            kilograms                           0.000 064 798 91
grains            milligrams                          64.798 910
grains            pennyweights                        0.042
grains            scruples                            0.05
grains            troy drams                          0.016 6
grains            troy ounces                         0.002 083 33
grains            troy pounds                         0.000 173 61
grams             avoirdupois drams                   0.564 383 39
grams             avoirdupois ounces                  0.035 273 961
grams             avoirdupois pounds                  0.002 204 622 6
grams             grains                              15.432 361
grams             kilograms                           0.001
grams             milligrams                          1,000
grams             troy ounces                         0.032 150 746 6
grams             troy pounds                         0.002 679 23
hands (height of  centimeters                         10.16
horse)
hands (height of  inches                              4
horse)
hectares          acres                               2.471 053 8
hectares          square feet                         107,639.1
hectares          square kilometers                   0.01
hectares          square meters                       10,000
hectares          square miles                        0.003 861 02
hectares          square yards                        11,959.90
hundredweights,   avoirdupois pounds                  112
long
hundredweights,   kilograms                           50.802 345
long
hundredweights,   long tons                           0.05
long
hundredweights,   metric tons                         0.050 802 345
long
hundredweights,   short tons                          0.056
long
hundredweights,   avoirdupois pounds                  100
short
hundredweights,   kilograms                           45.359 237
short
hundredweights,   long tons                           0.044 642 86
short
hundredweights,   metric tons                         0.045 359 237
short
hundredweights,   short tons                          0.05
short
inches            centimeters                         2.54
inches            feet                                0.083 333 33
inches            meters                              0.025 4
inches            millimeters                         25.4
inches            yards                               0.027 777 78
inches, cubic     bushels                             0.000 465 025
inches, cubic     cubic centimeters                   16.387 064
inches, cubic     cubic feet                          0.000 578 703 7
inches, cubic     cubic meters                        0.000 016 387 064
inches, cubic     cubic yards                         0.000 021 433 47
inches, cubic     dry pints                           0.029 761 6
inches, cubic     dry quarts                          0.014 880 8
inches, cubic     gallons                             0.004 329 0
inches, cubic     gills                               0.138 528 1
inches, cubic     liquid ounces                       0.554 112 6
inches, cubic     liquid pints                        0.034 632 03
inches, cubic     liquid quarts                       0.017 316 02
inches, cubic     liters                              0.016 387 064
inches, cubic     milliliters                         16.387 064
inches, cubic     minims (US)                         265.974 0
inches, cubic     pecks                               0.001 860 10
inches, square    square centimeters                  6.451 600
inches, square    square feet                         0.006 944 44
inches, square    square meters                       0.000 645 16
inches, square    square yards                        0.000 771 605
kilograms         avoirdupois drams                   564.383 4
kilograms         avoirdupois ounces                  35.273 962
kilograms         avoirdupois pounds                  2.204 622 622
kilograms         grains                              15,432.36
kilograms         grams                               1,000
kilograms         long tons                           0.000 984 2
kilograms         metric tons                         0.001
kilograms         short hundredweights                0.022 046 23
kilograms         short tons                          0.001 102 31
kilograms         troy ounces                         32.150 75
kilograms         troy pounds                         2.679 229
kilometers        meters                              1,000
kilometers        statute miles                       0.621 371 192
kilometers,       acres                               247.105 38
square
kilometers,       hectares                            100
square
kilometers,       square meters                       1,000,000
square
kilometers,       statute miles                       0.386 102 16
square
knots (nautical   kilometers/hour                     1.852
mi/hr)
knots (nautical   statute miles/hour                  1.151
mi/hr)
leagues, nautical kilometers                          5.556
leagues, nautical nautical miles                      3
leagues, statute  kilometers                          4.828 032
leagues, statute  statute miles                       3
links, square     square centimeters                  404.686
surveyor's
links, square     square inches                       62.726 4
surveyor's
links, surveyor's centimeters                         20.116 8
links, surveyor's chains                              0.01
links, surveyor's inches                              7.92
liters            bushels                             0.028 377 59
liters            cubic feet                          0.035 314 67
liters            cubic inches                        61.023 74
liters            cubic meters                        0.001
liters            cubic yards                         0.001 307 95
liters            dekaliters                          0.1
liters            dry pints                           1.816 166
liters            dry quarts                          0.908 082 98
liters            gallons                             0.264 172 052
liters            gills (US)                          8.453 506
liters            liquid ounces                       33.814 02
liters            liquid pints                        2.113 376
liters            liquid quarts                       1.056 688 2
liters            milliliters                         1,000
liters            pecks                               0.113 510 4
meters            centimeters                         100
meters            feet                                3.280 839 895
meters            inches                              39.370 079
meters            kilometers                          0.001
meters            millimeters                         1,000
meters            statute miles                       0.000 621 371
meters            yards                               1.093 613 298
meters, cubic     bushels                             28.377 59
meters, cubic     cubic feet                          35.314 666 7
meters, cubic     cubic inches                        61,023.744
meters, cubic     cubic yards                         1.307 950 619
meters, cubic     gallons                             264.172 05
meters, cubic     liters                              1,000
meters, cubic     pecks                               113.510 4
meters, square    acres                               0.000 247 105 38
meters, square    hectares                            0.000 1
meters, square    square centimeters                  10,000
meters, square    square feet                         10.763 910 4
meters, square    square inches                       1,550.003 1
meters, square    square yards                        1.195 990 046
microns           meters                              0.000 001
microns           inches                              0.000 039 4
mils              inches                              0.001
mils              millimeters                         0.025 4
miles, nautical   kilometers                          1.852 0
miles, nautical   statute miles                       1.150 779 4
miles, statute    centimeters                         160,934.4
miles, statute    feet                                5,280
miles, statute    furlongs                            8
miles, statute    inches                              63,360
miles, statute    kilometers                          1.609 344
miles, statute    meters                              1,609.344
miles, statute    rods                                320
miles, statute    yards                               1,760
miles, square     square kilometers                   3.429 904
nautical
miles, square     square statute miles                1.325
nautical
miles, square     acres                               640
statute
miles, square     hectares                            258.998 811 033 6
statute
miles, square     sections                            1
statute
miles, square     square kilometers                   2.589 988 110 336
statute
miles, square     square nautical miles               0.755 miles
statute
miles, square     square rods                         102,400
statute
milligrams        grains                              0.015 432 358 35
milliliters       cubic inches                        0.061 023 744
milliliters       gallons                             0.000 264 17
milliliters       gills (US)                          0.008 453 5
milliliters       liquid ounces                       0.033 814 02
milliliters       liquid pints                        0.002 113 4
milliliters       liquid quarts                       0.001 056 7
milliliters       liters                              0.001
milliliters       minims                              16.230 73
millimeters       inches                              0.039 370 078 7
minims (US)       cubic inches                        0.003 759 77
minims (US)       gills (US)                          0.000 520 83
minims (US)       liquid ounces                       0.002 083 33
minims (US)       milliliters                         0.061 611 52
minims (US)       minims (British)                    1.041
ounces,           avoirdupois drams                   16
avoirdupois
ounces,           avoirdupois pounds                  0.062 5
avoirdupois
ounces,           grains                              437.5
avoirdupois
ounces,           grams                               28.349 523 125
avoirdupois
ounces,           kilograms                           0.028 349 523 125
avoirdupois
ounces,           troy ounces                         0.911 458 3
avoirdupois
ounces,           troy pounds                         0.075 954 86
avoirdupois
ounces, liquid    cubic feet                          0.001 044 38
(US)
ounces, liquid    centiliters                         2.957 35
(US)
ounces, liquid    cubic inches                        1.804 687 5
(US)
ounces, liquid    gallons                             0.007 812 5
(US)
ounces, liquid    gills (US)                          0.25
(US)
ounces, liquid    liquid drams                        8
(US)
ounces, liquid    liquid ounces (British)             1.041
(US)
ounces, liquid    liquid pints                        0.062 5
(US)
ounces, liquid    liquid quarts                       0.031 25
(US)
ounces, liquid    liters                              0.029 573 53
(US)
ounces, liquid    milliliters                         29.573 529 6
(US)
ounces, liquid    minims                              480
(US)
ounces, troy      avoirdupois drams                   17.554 29
ounces, troy      avoirdupois ounces                  1.097 143
ounces, troy      avoirdupois pounds                  0.068 571 43
ounces, troy      grains                              480
ounces, troy      grams                               31.103 476 8
ounces, troy      pennyweights                        20
ounces, troy      troy drams                          8
ounces, troy      troy pounds                         0.083 333 3
paces (US)        centimeters                         76.2
paces (US)        inches                              30
pecks (US)        bushels                             0.25
pecks (US)        cubic feet                          0.311 114
pecks (US)        cubic inches                        537.605
pecks (US)        cubic meters                        0.008 809 77
pecks (US)        cubic yards                         0.011 522 74
pecks (US)        dekaliters                          0.880 976 75
pecks (US)        dry pints                           16
pecks (US)        dry quarts                          8
pecks (US)        liters                              8.809 767 5
pecks (US)        pecks (British)                     0.968 9
pennyweights      grains                              24
pennyweights      grams                               1.555 173 84
pennyweights      troy ounces                         0.05
pints, dry (US)   bushels                             0.015 625
pints, dry (US)   cubic feet                          0.019 444 63
pints, dry (US)   cubic inches                        33.600 312 5
pints, dry (US)   dekaliters                          0.055 061 05
pints, dry (US)   dry pints (British)                 0.968 9
pints, dry (US)   dry quarts                          0.5
pints, dry (US)   liters                              0.550 610 47
pints, liquid     cubic feet                          0.016 710 07
(US)
pints, liquid     cubic inches                        28.875
(US)
pints, liquid     deciliters                          4.731 76
(US)
pints, liquid     gallons                             0.125
(US)
pints, liquid     gills (US)                          4
(US)
pints, liquid     liquid ounces                       16
(US)
pints, liquid     liquid pints (British)              0.832 67
(US)
pints, liquid     liquid quarts                       0.5
(US)
pints, liquid     liters                              0.473 176 473
(US)
pints, liquid     milliliters                         473.176 473
(US)
pints, liquid     minims                              7,680
(US)
points            inches                              0.013 837
(typographical)
points            millimeters                         0.351 459 8
(typographical)
pounds,           avoirdupois drams                   256
avoirdupois
pounds,           avoirdupois ounces                  16
avoirdupois
pounds,           grains                              7,000
avoirdupois
pounds,           grams                               453.592 37
avoirdupois
pounds,           kilograms                           0.453 592 37
avoirdupois
pounds,           long tons                           0.000 446 428 6
avoirdupois
pounds,           metric tons                         0.000 453 592 37
avoirdupois
pounds,           quintals                            0.004 535 92
avoirdupois
pounds,           short tons                          0.000 5
avoirdupois
pounds,           troy ounces                         14.583 33
avoirdupois
pounds,           troy pounds                         1.215 278
avoirdupois
pounds, troy      avoirdupois drams                   210.651 4
pounds, troy      avoirdupois ounces                  13.165 71
pounds, troy      avoirdupois pounds                  0.822 857 1
pounds, troy      grains                              5,760
pounds, troy      grams                               373.241 721 6
pounds, troy      kilograms                           0.373 241 721 6
pounds, troy      pennyweights                        240
pounds, troy      troy ounces                         12
quarts, dry (US)  bushels                             0.031 25
quarts, dry (US)  cubic feet                          0.038 889 25
quarts, dry (US)  cubic inches                        67.200 625
quarts, dry (US)  dekaliters                          0.110 122 1
quarts, dry (US)  dry pints                           2
quarts, dry (US)  dry quarts (British)                0.968 9
quarts, dry (US)  liters                              1.101 221
quarts, dry (US)  pecks                               0.125
quarts, dry (US)  pints, dry (US)                     2
quarts, liquid    cubic feet                          0.033 420 14
(US)
quarts, liquid    cubic inches                        57.75
(US)
quarts, liquid    deciliters                          9.463 53
(US)
quarts, liquid    gallons                             0.25
(US)
quarts, liquid    gills (US)                          8
(US)
quarts, liquid    liquid ounces                       32
(US)
quarts, liquid    liquid pints (US)                   2
(US)
quarts, liquid    liquid quarts (British)             0.832 67
(US)
quarts, liquid    liters                              0.946 352 946
(US)
quarts, liquid    milliliters                         946.352 946
(US)
quarts, liquid    minims                              15,360
(US)
quintals          avoirdupois pounds                  220.462 26
quintals          kilograms                           100
quintals          metric tons                         0.1
rods              feet                                16.5
rods              meters                              5.029 2
rods              yards                               5.5
rods, square      acres                               0.006 25
rods, square      square meters                       25.292 85
rods, square      square yards                        30.25
scruples          grains                              20
scruples          grams                               1.295 978 2
scruples          troy drams                          0.333
sections (US)     square kilometers                   2.589 988 1
sections (US)     square statute miles                1
spans             centimeters                         22.86
spans             inches                              9
steres            cubic meters                        1
steres            cubic yards                         1.307 95
tablespoons       milliliters                         14.786 76
tablespoons       teaspoons                           3
teaspoons         milliliters                         4.928 922
teaspoons         tablespoons                         0.333 333
ton-miles, long   metric ton-kilometers               1.635 169
ton-miles, short  metric ton-kilometers               1.459 972
tons, gross       cubic feet of permanently enclosed  100
register          space
tons, gross       cubic meters of permanently         2.831 684 7
register          enclosed space
tons, long        avoirdupois ounces                  35,840
(deadweight)
tons, long        avoirdupois pounds                  2,240
(deadweight)
tons, long        kilograms                           1,016.046 909 8
(deadweight)
tons, long        long hundredweights                 20
(deadweight)
tons, long        metric tons                         1.016 046 908 8
(deadweight)
tons, long        short hundredweights                22.4
(deadweight)
tons, long        short tons                          1.12
(deadweight)
tons, metric      avoirdupois pounds                  2,204.623
tons, metric      kilograms                           1,000
tons, metric      long hundredweights                 19.684 130 3
tons, metric      long tons                           0.984 206 5
tons, metric      quintals                            10
tons, metric      short hundredweights                22.046 23
tons, metric      short tons                          1.102 311 3
tons, metric      troy ounces                         32,150.75
tons, net         cubic feet of permanently enclosed  100
register          space for cargo and passengers
tons, net         cubic meters of permanently         2.831 684 7
register          enclosed space for cargo and
                 passengers
tons, shipping    cubic feet of permanently enclosed  42
                 cargo space
tons, shipping    cubic meters of permanently         1.189 307 574
                 enclosed cargo space
tons, short       avoirdupois pounds                  2,000
tons, short       kilograms                           907.184 74
tons, short       long hundredweights                 17.857 14
tons, short       long tons                           0.892 857 1
tons, short       metric tons                         0.907 184 74
tons, short       short hundredweights                20
townships (US)    sections                            36
townships (US)    square kilometers                   93.239 572
townships (US)    square statute miles                36
miles, square     acres                               640
statute
miles, square     hectares                            258.998 811 033 6
statute
miles, square     square feet                         27,878,400
statute
miles, square     square meters                       2,589,988.110 336
statute
miles, square     square yards                        3,097,600
statute
yards             centimeters                         91.44
yards             feet                                3
yards             inches                              36
yards             meters                              0.914 4
yards             miles                               0.000 568 18
yards, cubic      bushels                             21.696 227
yards, cubic      cubic feet                          27
yards, cubic      cubic inches                        46,656
yards, cubic      cubic meters                        0.764 554 857 984
yards, cubic      gallons                             201.974 0
yards, cubic      liters                              764.554 857 984
yards, cubic      pecks                               86.784 91
yards, square     acres                               0.000 206 611 6
yards, square     hectares                            0.000 083 612 736
yards, square     square centimeters                  8,361.273 6
yards, square     square feet                         9
yards, square     square inches                       1,296
yards, square     square meters                       0.836 127 36
yards, square     square miles                        0.000 000 322 830
                                                    6


Note: At this time, only three countries--Burma, Liberia, and the
US--have not adopted the International System of Units (SI, or metric
system) as their official system of weights and measures. Although use
of the metric system has been sanctioned by law in the US since 1866,
it has been slow in displacing the American adaptation of the British
Imperial System known as the US Customary System. The US is the only
industrialized nation that does not mainly use the metric system in
its commercial and standards activities, but there is increasing
acceptance in science, medicine, government, and many sectors of
industry.



=====================================================================



Appendix F: Cross-Reference List of Country Data Codes


FIPS 10-4: Countries, Dependencies, Areas of Special
Sovereignty, and Their Principal Administrative Divisions
(FIPS PUB 10-4) is maintained by the Office of the
Geographer and Global Issues (Department of State) and
published by the National Institute of Standards and
Technology (Department of Commerce). These two-character
alphabetic codes are included in the text of the Factbook in
the Data code entry under the Government category. FIPS 10-4
codes are intended for general use throughout the US
Government, especially in activities associated with the
mission of the Department of State and national defense
programs.

ISO 3166: Codes for the Representation of Names of Countries
(ISO 3166) is prepared by the International Organization for
Standardization. ISO 3166 includes two- and three-character
alphabetic codes and three-digit numeric codes that may be
needed for activities involving exchange of data with
international organizations that have adopted that standard.
Except for the numeric codes, ISO 3166 codes have been
adopted in the US as FIPS 104-1: American National Standard
Codes for the Representation of Names of Countries,
Dependencies, and Areas of Special Sovereignty for
Information Interchange.

Internet: This is a provisional compilation that generally
agrees with the ISO 3166 two-character alphabetic codes.


Entity        FIPS ISO  ISO  ISO  Interne Comment
             10-4 316  316  316  t
                 6    6    6
Afghanistan   AF   AF   AFG  004  AF
Albania       AL   AL   ALB  008  AL
Algeria       AG   DZ   DZA  012  DZ
American      AQ   AS   ASM  016  AS
Samoa
Andorra       AN   AD   AND  020  AD
Angola        AO   AO   AGO  024  AO
Anguilla      AV   AI   AIA  660  AI
Antarctica    AY   AQ   ATA  010  AQ      ISO defines as the
                                     territory south of 60
                                     degrees south latitude
Antigua and   AC   AG   ATG  028  AG
Barbuda
Argentina     AR   AR   ARG  032  AR
Armenia       AM   AM   ARM  051  AM
Aruba         AA   AW   ABW  533  AW
Ashmore and   AT   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with
Cartier                               Australia
Australia     AS   AU   AUS  036  AU      ISO includes Ashmore
                                     and Cartier
                                     Islands,Coral Sea
                                     Islands
Austria       AU   AT   AUT  040  AT
Azerbaijan    AJ   AZ   AZE  031  AZ
The Bahamas   BF   BS   BHS  044  BS
Bahrain       BA   BH   BHR  048  BH
Baker Island  FQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Bangladesh    BG   BD   BGD  050  BD
Barbados      BB   BB   BRB  052  BB
Bassas da     BS   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
India                                 Miscellaneous (French)
                                     Indian Ocean Islands
Belarus       BO   BY   BLR  112  BY
Belgium       BE   BE   BEL  056  BE
Belize        BH   BZ   BLZ  084  BZ
Benin         BN   BJ   BEN  204  BJ
Bermuda       BD   BM   BMU  060  BM
Bhutan        BT   BT   BTN  064  BT
Bolivia       BL   BO   BOL  068  BO
Bosnia and    BK   BA   BIH  070  BA
Herzegovina
Botswana      BC   BW   BWA  072  BW
Bouvet Island BV   BV   BVT  074  BV
Brazil        BR   BR   BRA  076  BR
British       IO   IO   IOT  086  IO
Indian Ocean
Territory
British       VI   VG   VGB  092  VG
Virgin
Islands
Brunei        BX   BN   BRN  096  BN
Bulgaria      BU   BG   BGR  100  BG
Burkina Faso  UV   BF   BFA  854  BF
Burma         BM   MM   MMR  104  MM      ISO uses the name
                                     Myanmar
Burundi       BY   BI   BDI  108  BI
Cambodia      CB   KH   KHM  116  KH
Cameroon      CM   CM   CMR  120  CM
Canada        CA   CA   CAN  124  CA
Cape Verde    CV   CV   CPV  132  CV
Cayman        CJ   KY   CYM  136  KY
Islands
Central       CT   CF   CAF  140  CF
African
Republic
Chad          CD   TD   TCD  148  TD
Chile         CI   CL   CHL  152  CL
China         CH   CN   CHN  156  CN      see also Taiwan
Christmas     KT   CX   CXR  162  CX
Island
Clipperton    IP   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with
Island                                French Polynesia
Cocos         CK   CC   CCK  166  CC
(Keeling)
Islands
Colombia      CO   CO   COL  170  CO
Comoros       CN   KM   COM  174  KM
Congo,        CG   ZR   ZAR  180  ZR      formerly Zaire
Democratic
Republic of
the
Congo,        CF   CG   COG  178  CG
Republic of
the
Cook Islands  CW   CK   COK  184  CK
Coral Sea     CR   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with
Islands                               Australia
Costa Rica    CS   CR   CRI  188  CR
Cote d'Ivoire IV   CI   CIV  384  CI
Croatia       HR   HR   HRV  191  HR
Cuba          CU   CU   CUB  192  CU
Cyprus        CY   CY   CYP  196  CY
Czech         EZ   CZ   CZE  203  CZ
Republic
Denmark       DA   DK   DNK  208  DK
Djibouti      DJ   DJ   DJI  262  DJ
Dominica      DO   DM   DMA  212  DM
Dominican     DR   DO   DOM  214  DO
Republic
East Timor    --   TP   TMP  626  TP      FIPS includes with
                                     Indonesia
Ecuador       EC   EC   ECU  218  EC
Egypt         EG   EG   EGY  818  EG
El Salvador   ES   SV   SLV  222  SV
Equatorial    EK   GQ   GNQ  226  GQ
Guinea
Eritrea       ER   ER   ERI  232  ER
Estonia       EN   EE   EST  233  EE
Ethiopia      ET   ET   ETH  231  ET
Europa Island EU   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     Miscellaneous (French)
                                     Indian Ocean Islands
Falkland      FA   FK   FLK  238  FK
Islands
(Islas
Malvinas)
Faroe Islands FO   FO   FRO  234  FO
Fiji          FJ   FJ   FJI  242  FJ
Finland       FI   FI   FIN  246  FI
France        FR   FR   FRA  250  FR
France,       --   FX   FXX  249  FX      ISO limits to the
Metropolitan                          European part of
                                     France, excluding
                                     French Guiana, French
                                     Polynesia, French
                                     Southern and Antarctic
                                     Lands, Guadeloupe,
                                     Martinique, Mayotte,
                                     New Caledonia, Reunion,
                                     Saint Pierre and
                                     Miquelon, Wallis and
                                     Futuna
French Guiana FG   GF   GUF  254  GF
French        FP   PF   PYF  258  PF      ISO includes Clipperton
Polynesia                             Island
French        FS   TF   ATF  260  --      FIPS 10-4 does not
Southern and                          include the French-
Antarctic                             claimed portion of
Lands                                 Antarctica (Terre
                                     Adelie)
Gabon         GB   GA   GAB  266  GA
The Gambia    GA   GM   GMB  270  GM
Gaza Strip    GZ   --   --   --   --
Georgia       GG   GE   GEO  268  GE
Germany       GM   DE   DEU  276  DE
Ghana         GH   GH   GHA  288  GH
Gibraltar     GI   GI   GIB  292  GI
Glorioso      GO   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
Islands                               Miscellaneous (French)
                                     Indian Ocean Islands
Greece        GR   GR   GRC  300  GR
Greenland     GL   GL   GRL  304  GL
Grenada       GJ   GD   GRD  308  GD
Guadeloupe    GP   GP   GLP  312  GP
Guam          GQ   GU   GUM  316  GU
Guatemala     GT   GT   GTM  320  GT
Guernsey      GK   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     United Kingdom
Guinea        GV   GN   GIN  324  GN
Guinea-Bissau PU   GW   GNB  624  GW
Guyana        GY   GY   GUY  328  GY
Haiti         HA   HT   HTI  332  HT
Heard Island  HM   HM   HMD  334  HM
and McDonald
Islands
Holy See      VT   VA   VAT  336  VA
(Vatican
City)
Honduras      HO   HN   HND  340  HN
Hong Kong     HK   HK   HKG  344  HK
Howland       HQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
Island                                US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Hungary       HU   HU   HUN  348  HU
Iceland       IC   IS   ISL  352  IS
India         IN   IN   IND  356  IN
Indonesia     ID   ID   IDN  360  ID
Iran          IR   IR   IRN  364  IR
Iraq          IZ   IQ   IRQ  368  IQ
Ireland       EI   IE   IRL  372  IE
Israel        IS   IL   ISR  376  IL
Italy         IT   IT   ITA  380  IT
Jamaica       JM   JM   JAM  388  JM
Jan Mayen     JN   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with
                                     Svalbard
Japan         JA   JP   JPN  392  JP
Jarvis Island DQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Jersey        JE   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     United Kingdom
Johnston      JQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
Atoll                                 US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Jordan        JO   JO   JOR  400  JO
Juan de Nova  JU   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
Island                                Miscellaneous (French)
                                     Indian Ocean Islands
Kazakhstan    KZ   KZ   KAZ  398  KZ
Kenya         KE   KE   KEN  404  KE
Kingman Reef  KQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Kiribati      KR   KI   KIR  296  KI
Korea, North  KN   KP   PRK  408  KP
Korea, South  KS   KR   KOR  410  KR
Kuwait        KU   KW   KWT  414  KW
Kyrgyzstan    KG   KG   KGZ  417  KG
Laos          LA   LA   LAO  418  LA
Latvia        LG   LV   LVA  428  LV
Lebanon       LE   LB   LBN  422  LB
Lesotho       LT   LS   LSO  426  LS
Liberia       LI   LR   LBR  430  LR
Libya         LY   LY   LBY  434  LY
Liechtenstein LS   LI   LIE  438  LI
Lithuania     LH   LT   LTU  440  LT
Luxembourg    LU   LU   LUX  442  LU
Macau         MC   MO   MAC  446  MO
Macedonia,    MK   MK   MKD  807  MK
The Former
Yugoslav
Republic of
Madagascar    MA   MG   MDG  450  MG
Malawi        MI   MW   MWI  454  MW
Malaysia      MY   MY   MYS  458  MY
Maldives      MV   MV   MDV  462  MV
Mali          ML   ML   MLI  466  ML
Malta         MT   MT   MLT  470  MT
Man, Isle of  IM   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     United Kingdom
Marshall      RM   MH   MHL  584  MH
Islands
Martinique    MB   MQ   MTQ  474  MQ
Mauritania    MR   MR   MRT  478  MR
Mauritius     MP   MU   MUS  480  MU
Mayotte       MF   YT   MYT  175  YT
Mexico        MX   MX   MEX  484  MX
Micronesia,   FM   FSM  583  FM
Federated
States of
Midway        MQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
Islands                               US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Miscellaneous --   --   --   --           ISO includes Bassas da
(French)                              India, Europa Island,
                                     Glorioso Islands, Juan
                                     de Nova Island,
                                     Tromelin Island
Moldova       MD   MD   MDA  498  MD
Monaco        MN   MC   MCO  492  MC
Mongolia      MG   MN   MNG  496  MN
Montenegro*   MW   --   --   --   --      see footnote at end of
                                     table
Montserrat    MH   MS   MSR  500  MS
Morocco       MO   MA   MAR  504  MA
Mozambique    MZ   MZ   MOZ  508  MZ
Myanmar       --   --   --   --   --      see Burma
Namibia       WA   NA   NAM  516  NA
Nauru         NR   NR   NRU  520  NR
Navassa       BQ   --   --   --   --
Island
Nepal         NP   NP   NPL  524  NP
Netherlands   NL   NL   NLD  528  NL
Netherlands   NT   AN   ANT  530  AN
Antilles
New Caledonia NC   NC   NCL  540  NC
New Zealand   NZ   NZ   NZL  554  NZ
Nicaragua     NU   NI   NIC  558  NI
Niger         NG   NE   NER  562  NE
Nigeria       NI   NG   NGA  566  NG
Niue          NE   NU   NIU  570  NU
Norfolk       NF   NF   NFK  574  NF
Island
Northern      CQ   MP   MNP  580  MP
Mariana
Islands
Norway        NO   NO   NOR  578  NO
Oman          MU   OM   OMN  512  OM
Pakistan      PK   PK   PAK  586  PK
Palau         PS   PW   PLW  585  PW
Palmyra Atoll LQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Panama        PM   PA   PAN  591  PA
Papua New     PP   PG   PNG  598  PG
Guinea
Paracel       PF   --   --   --   --
Islands
Paraguay      PA   PY   PRY  600  PY
Peru          PE   PE   PER  604  PE
Philippines   RP   PH   PHL  608  PH
Pitcairn      PC   PN   PCN  612  PN
Islands
Poland        PL   PL   POL  616  PL
Portugal      PO   PT   PRT  620  PT
Puerto Rico   RQ   PR   PRI  630  PR
Qatar         QA   QA   QAT  634  QA
Reunion       RE   RE   REU  638  RE
Romania       RO   RO   ROM  642  RO
Russia        RS   RU   RUS  643  RU
Rwanda        RW   RW   RWA  646  RW
Saint Helena  SH   SH   SHN  654  SH
Saint Kitts   SC   KN   KNA  659  KN
and Nevis
Saint Lucia   ST   LC   LCA  662  LC
Saint Pierre  SB   PM   SPM  666  PM
and Miquelon
Saint Vincent VC   VC   VCT  670  VC
and the
Grenadines
Samoa         WS   WS   WSM  882  WS      --
San Marino    SM   SM   SMR  674  SM
Sao Tome and  TP   ST   STP  678  ST
Principe
Saudi Arabia  SA   SA   SAU  682  SA
Senegal       SG   SN   SEN  686  SN
Serbia*       SR   --   --   --   --      see footnote at end of
                                     table
Serbia and    --   --   --   --   --      see footnote at end of
Montenegro*                           table
Seychelles    SE   SC   SYC  690  SC
Sierra Leone  SL   SL   SLE  694  SL
Singapore     SN   SG   SGP  702  SG
Slovakia      LO   SK   SVK  703  SK
Slovenia      SI   SI   SVN  705  SI
Solomon       BP   SB   SLB  090  SB
Islands
Somalia       SO   SO   SOM  706  SO
South Africa  SF   ZA   ZAF  710  ZA
South Georgia SX   GS   SGS  239  GS
and the South
Sandwich
Islands
Spain         SP   ES   ESP  724  ES
Spratly       PG   --   --   --   --
Islands
Sri Lanka     CE   LK   LKA  144  LK
Sudan         SU   SD   SDN  736  SD
Suriname      NS   SR   SUR  740  SR
Svalbard      SV   SJ   SJM  744  SJ      ISO includes Jan Mayen
Swaziland     WZ   SZ   SWZ  748  SZ
Sweden        SW   SE   SWE  752  SE
Switzerland   SZ   CH   CHE  756  CH
Syria         SY   SY   SYR  760  SY
Taiwan        TW   TW   TWN  158  TW
Tajikistan    TI   TJ   TJK  762  TJ
Tanzania      TZ   TZ   TZA  834  TZ
Thailand      TH   TH   THA  764  TH
Togo          TO   TG   TGO  768  TG
Tokelau       TL   TK   TKL  772  TK
Tonga         TN   TO   TON  776  TO
Trinidad and  TD   TT   TTO  780  TT
Tobago
Tromelin      TE   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
Island                                Miscellaneous (French)
                                     Indian Ocean Islands
Tunisia       TS   TN   TUN  788  TN
Turkey        TU   TR   TUR  792  TR
Turkmenistan  TX   TM   TKM  795  TM
Turks and     TK   TC   TCA  796  TC
Caicos
Islands
Tuvalu        TV   TV   TUV  798  TV
Uganda        UG   UG   UGA  800  UG
Ukraine       UP   UA   UKR  804  UA
United Arab   TC   AE   ARE  784  AE
Emirates
United        UK   GB   GBR  826  UK/GB   ISO includes Guernsey,
Kingdom                               Isle of Man, Jersey
United States US   US   USA  840  US
United States --   UM   UMI  581  UM      ISO includes Baker
Minor                                 Island, Howland Island,
Outlying                              Jarvis Island, Johnston
Islands                               Atoll, Kingman Reef,
                                     Midway Islands, Palmyra
                                     Atoll, Wake Island
Uruguay       UY   UY   URY  858  UY
Uzbekistan    UZ   UZ   UZB  860  UZ
Vanuatu       NH   VU   VUT  548  VU
Venezuela     VE   VE   VEN  862  UE
Vietnam       VM   VN   VNM  704  VN
Virgin        VQ   VI   VIR  850  VI
Islands
Virgin        --   --   --   --   --      see British Virgin
Islands (UK)                          Islands
Virgin        --   --   --   --   --      see Virgin Islands
Islands (US)
Wake Atoll    WQ   --   --   --   --      ISO includes with the
                                     US Minor Outlying
                                     Islands
Wallis and    WF   WF   WLF  876  WF
Futuna
West Bank     WE   --   --   --   --
Western       WI   EH   ESH  732  EH
Sahara
Western Samoa --   --   --   --   --      see Samoa
World         --   --   --   --   --      the Factbook uses the W
                                     data code from DIAM 65-
                                     -18 Geopolitical Data
                                     Elements and Related
                                     Features, Data Standard
                                     No. 3, December 1994,
                                     published by the
                                     Defense Intelligence
                                     Agency
Yemen         YM   YE   YEM  887  YE
Yugoslavia*   --   YU   YUG  891  YU      see footnote at end of
                                     table
Zaire         --   --   --   --   --      see Democratic Republic
                                     of the Congo
Zambia        ZA   ZM   ZWB  894  ZM
Zimbabwe      ZI   ZW   ZWE  716  ZW


Serbia and Montenegro have asserted the formation of a joint
independent state,but this entity has not been formally
recognized as a state by the US; the US view is that the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has
dissolved and that none of the successor republics
represents its continuation.





Appendix F: Cross-Reference List of Country Data Codes


FIPS 10-4: Countries, Dependencies, Areas of Special Sovereignty, and
Their Principal Administrative Divisions (FIPS PUB 10-4) is maintained
by the Office of the Geographer and Global Issues (Department of State)
and published by the National Institute of Standards and Technology
(Department of Commerce). These two-character alphabetic codes are
included in the text of the Factbook in the Data code entry under the
Government category. FIPS 10-4 codes are intended for general use
throughout the US Government, especially in activities associated with
the mission of the Department of State and national defense programs.

ISO 3166: Codes for the Representation of Names of Countries (ISO 3166)
is prepared by the International Organization for Standardization. ISO
3166 includes two- and three-character alphabetic codes and three-digit
numeric codes that may be needed for activities involving exchange of
data with international organizations that have adopted that standard.
Except for the numeric codes, ISO 3166 codes have been adopted in the
US as FIPS 104-1: American National Standard Codes for the
Representation of Names of Countries, Dependencies, and Areas of
Special Sovereignty for Information Interchange.

Internet: This is a provisional compilation that generally agrees with
the ISO 3166 two-character alphabetic codes.



Entity        FIPS ISO  ISO   ISO   Interne  Comment
             10-4 3166 3166  3166  t
Afghanistan   AF   AF   AFG   004   AF
Albania       AL   AL   ALB   008   AL
Algeria       AG   DZ   DZA   012   DZ
American      AQ   AS   ASM   016   AS
Samoa
Andorra       AN   AD   AND   020   AD
Angola        AO   AO   AGO   024   AO
Anguilla      AV   AI   AIA   660   AI
Antarctica    AY   AQ   ATA   010   AQ       ISO defines as the territory
                                         south of 60 degrees south
                                         latitude
Antigua and   AC   AG   ATG   028   AG
Barbuda
Argentina     AR   AR   ARG   032   AR
Armenia       AM   AM   ARM   051   AM
Aruba         AA   AW   ABW   533   AW
Ashmore and   AT   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with Australia
Cartier
Australia     AS   AU   AUS   036   AU       ISO includes Ashmore and
                                         Cartier Islands,Coral Sea
                                         Islands
Austria       AU   AT   AUT   040   AT
Azerbaijan    AJ   AZ   AZE   031   AZ
The Bahamas   BF   BS   BHS   044   BS
Bahrain       BA   BH   BHR   048   BH
Baker Island  FQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
                                         Minor Outlying Islands
Bangladesh    BG   BD   BGD   050   BD
Barbados      BB   BB   BRB   052   BB
Bassas da     BS   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the
India                                     Miscellaneous (French)
                                         Indian Ocean Islands
Belarus       BO   BY   BLR   112   BY
Belgium       BE   BE   BEL   056   BE
Belize        BH   BZ   BLZ   084   BZ
Benin         BN   BJ   BEN   204   BJ
Bermuda       BD   BM   BMU   060   BM
Bhutan        BT   BT   BTN   064   BT
Bolivia       BL   BO   BOL   068   BO
Bosnia and    BK   BA   BIH   070   BA
Herzegovina
Botswana      BC   BW   BWA   072   BW
Bouvet Island BV   BV   BVT   074   BV
Brazil        BR   BR   BRA   076   BR
British       IO   IO   IOT   086   IO
Indian Ocean
Territory
British       VI   VG   VGB   092   VG
Virgin
Islands
Brunei        BX   BN   BRN   096   BN
Bulgaria      BU   BG   BGR   100   BG
Burkina Faso  UV   BF   BFA   854   BF
Burma         BM   MM   MMR   104   MM       ISO uses the name Myanmar
Burundi       BY   BI   BDI   108   BI
Cambodia      CB   KH   KHM   116   KH
Cameroon      CM   CM   CMR   120   CM
Canada        CA   CA   CAN   124   CA
Cape Verde    CV   CV   CPV   132   CV
Cayman        CJ   KY   CYM   136   KY
Islands
Central       CT   CF   CAF   140   CF
African
Republic
Chad          CD   TD   TCD   148   TD
Chile         CI   CL   CHL   152   CL
China         CH   CN   CHN   156   CN       see also Taiwan
Christmas     KT   CX   CXR   162   CX
Island
Clipperton    IP   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with French
Island                                    Polynesia
Cocos         CK   CC   CCK   166   CC
(Keeling)
Islands
Colombia      CO   CO   COL   170   CO
Comoros       CN   KM   COM   174   KM
Congo,        CG   ZR   ZAR   180   ZR       formerly Zaire
Democratic
Republic of
the
Congo,        CF   CG   COG   178   CG
Republic of
the
Cook Islands  CW   CK   COK   184   CK
Coral Sea     CR   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with Australia
Islands
Costa Rica    CS   CR   CRI   188   CR
Cote d'Ivoire IV   CI   CIV   384   CI
Croatia       HR   HR   HRV   191   HR
Cuba          CU   CU   CUB   192   CU
Cyprus        CY   CY   CYP   196   CY
Czech         EZ   CZ   CZE   203   CZ
Republic
Denmark       DA   DK   DNK   208   DK
Djibouti      DJ   DJ   DJI   262   DJ
Dominica      DO   DM   DMA   212   DM
Dominican     DR   DO   DOM   214   DO
Republic
East Timor    --   TP   TMP   626   TP       FIPS includes with Indonesia
Ecuador       EC   EC   ECU   218   EC
Egypt         EG   EG   EGY   818   EG
El Salvador   ES   SV   SLV   222   SV
Equatorial    EK   GQ   GNQ   226   GQ
Guinea
Eritrea       ER   ER   ERI   232   ER
Estonia       EN   EE   EST   233   EE
Ethiopia      ET   ET   ETH   231   ET
Europa Island EU   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the
                                         Miscellaneous (French)
                                         Indian Ocean Islands
Falkland      FA   FK   FLK   238   FK
Islands
(Islas
Malvinas)
Faroe Islands FO   FO   FRO   234   FO
Fiji          FJ   FJ   FJI   242   FJ
Finland       FI   FI   FIN   246   FI
France        FR   FR   FRA   250   FR
France,       --   FX   FXX   249   FX       ISO limits to the European
Metropolitan                              part of France, excluding
                                         French Guiana, French
                                         Polynesia, French Southern
                                         and Antarctic Lands,
                                         Guadeloupe, Martinique,
                                         Mayotte, New Caledonia,
                                         Reunion, Saint Pierre and
                                         Miquelon, Wallis and Futuna
French Guiana FG   GF   GUF   254   GF
French        FP   PF   PYF   258   PF       ISO includes Clipperton
Polynesia                                 Island
French        FS   TF   ATF   260   --       FIPS 10-4 does not include
Southern and                              the French-claimed portion
Antarctic                                 of Antarctica (Terre Adelie)
Lands
Gabon         GB   GA   GAB   266   GA
The Gambia    GA   GM   GMB   270   GM
Gaza Strip    GZ   --   --    --    --
Georgia       GG   GE   GEO   268   GE
Germany       GM   DE   DEU   276   DE
Ghana         GH   GH   GHA   288   GH
Gibraltar     GI   GI   GIB   292   GI
Glorioso      GO   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the
Islands                                   Miscellaneous (French)
                                         Indian Ocean Islands
Greece        GR   GR   GRC   300   GR
Greenland     GL   GL   GRL   304   GL
Grenada       GJ   GD   GRD   308   GD
Guadeloupe    GP   GP   GLP   312   GP
Guam          GQ   GU   GUM   316   GU
Guatemala     GT   GT   GTM   320   GT
Guernsey      GK   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the United
                                         Kingdom
Guinea        GV   GN   GIN   324   GN
Guinea-Bissau PU   GW   GNB   624   GW
Guyana        GY   GY   GUY   328   GY
Haiti         HA   HT   HTI   332   HT
Heard Island  HM   HM   HMD   334   HM
and McDonald
Islands
Holy See      VT   VA   VAT   336   VA
(Vatican
City)
Honduras      HO   HN   HND   340   HN
Hong Kong     HK   HK   HKG   344   HK
Howland       HQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
Island                                    Minor Outlying Islands
Hungary       HU   HU   HUN   348   HU
Iceland       IC   IS   ISL   352   IS
India         IN   IN   IND   356   IN
Indonesia     ID   ID   IDN   360   ID
Iran          IR   IR   IRN   364   IR
Iraq          IZ   IQ   IRQ   368   IQ
Ireland       EI   IE   IRL   372   IE
Israel        IS   IL   ISR   376   IL
Italy         IT   IT   ITA   380   IT
Jamaica       JM   JM   JAM   388   JM
Jan Mayen     JN   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with Svalbard
Japan         JA   JP   JPN   392   JP
Jarvis Island DQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
                                         Minor Outlying Islands
Jersey        JE   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the United
                                         Kingdom
Johnston      JQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
Atoll                                     Minor Outlying Islands
Jordan        JO   JO   JOR   400   JO
Juan de Nova  JU   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the
Island                                    Miscellaneous (French)
                                         Indian Ocean Islands
Kazakhstan    KZ   KZ   KAZ   398   KZ
Kenya         KE   KE   KEN   404   KE
Kingman Reef  KQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
                                         Minor Outlying Islands
Kiribati      KR   KI   KIR   296   KI
Korea, North  KN   KP   PRK   408   KP
Korea, South  KS   KR   KOR   410   KR
Kuwait        KU   KW   KWT   414   KW
Kyrgyzstan    KG   KG   KGZ   417   KG
Laos          LA   LA   LAO   418   LA
Latvia        LG   LV   LVA   428   LV
Lebanon       LE   LB   LBN   422   LB
Lesotho       LT   LS   LSO   426   LS
Liberia       LI   LR   LBR   430   LR
Libya         LY   LY   LBY   434   LY
Liechtenstein LS   LI   LIE   438   LI
Lithuania     LH   LT   LTU   440   LT
Luxembourg    LU   LU   LUX   442   LU
Macau         MC   MO   MAC   446   MO
Macedonia,    MK   MK   MKD   807   MK
The Former
Yugoslav
Republic of
Madagascar    MA   MG   MDG   450   MG
Malawi        MI   MW   MWI   454   MW
Malaysia      MY   MY   MYS   458   MY
Maldives      MV   MV   MDV   462   MV
Mali          ML   ML   MLI   466   ML
Malta         MT   MT   MLT   470   MT
Man, Isle of  IM   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the United
                                         Kingdom
Marshall      RM   MH   MHL   584   MH
Islands
Martinique    MB   MQ   MTQ   474   MQ
Mauritania    MR   MR   MRT   478   MR
Mauritius     MP   MU   MUS   480   MU
Mayotte       MF   YT   MYT   175   YT
Mexico        MX   MX   MEX   484   MX
Micronesia,   FM   FSM  583   FM
Federated
States of
Midway        MQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
Islands                                   Minor Outlying Islands
Miscellaneous --   --   --    --             ISO includes Bassas da
(French)                                  India, Europa Island,
                                         Glorioso Islands, Juan de
                                         Nova Island, Tromelin Island
Moldova       MD   MD   MDA   498   MD
Monaco        MN   MC   MCO   492   MC
Mongolia      MG   MN   MNG   496   MN
Montenegro*   MW   --   --    --    --       see footnote at end of table
Montserrat    MH   MS   MSR   500   MS
Morocco       MO   MA   MAR   504   MA
Mozambique    MZ   MZ   MOZ   508   MZ
Myanmar       --   --   --    --    --       see Burma
Namibia       WA   NA   NAM   516   NA
Nauru         NR   NR   NRU   520   NR
Navassa       BQ   --   --    --    --
Island
Nepal         NP   NP   NPL   524   NP
Netherlands   NL   NL   NLD   528   NL
Netherlands   NT   AN   ANT   530   AN
Antilles
New Caledonia NC   NC   NCL   540   NC
New Zealand   NZ   NZ   NZL   554   NZ
Nicaragua     NU   NI   NIC   558   NI
Niger         NG   NE   NER   562   NE
Nigeria       NI   NG   NGA   566   NG
Niue          NE   NU   NIU   570   NU
Norfolk       NF   NF   NFK   574   NF
Island
Northern      CQ   MP   MNP   580   MP
Mariana
Islands
Norway        NO   NO   NOR   578   NO
Oman          MU   OM   OMN   512   OM
Pakistan      PK   PK   PAK   586   PK
Palau         PS   PW   PLW   585   PW
Palmyra Atoll LQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
                                         Minor Outlying Islands
Panama        PM   PA   PAN   591   PA
Papua New     PP   PG   PNG   598   PG
Guinea
Paracel       PF   --   --    --    --
Islands
Paraguay      PA   PY   PRY   600   PY
Peru          PE   PE   PER   604   PE
Philippines   RP   PH   PHL   608   PH
Pitcairn      PC   PN   PCN   612   PN
Islands
Poland        PL   PL   POL   616   PL
Portugal      PO   PT   PRT   620   PT
Puerto Rico   RQ   PR   PRI   630   PR
Qatar         QA   QA   QAT   634   QA
Reunion       RE   RE   REU   638   RE
Romania       RO   RO   ROM   642   RO
Russia        RS   RU   RUS   643   RU
Rwanda        RW   RW   RWA   646   RW
Saint Helena  SH   SH   SHN   654   SH
Saint Kitts   SC   KN   KNA   659   KN
and Nevis
Saint Lucia   ST   LC   LCA   662   LC
Saint Pierre  SB   PM   SPM   666   PM
and Miquelon
Saint Vincent VC   VC   VCT   670   VC
and the
Grenadines
Samoa         WS   WS   WSM   882   WS       --
San Marino    SM   SM   SMR   674   SM
Sao Tome and  TP   ST   STP   678   ST
Principe
Saudi Arabia  SA   SA   SAU   682   SA
Senegal       SG   SN   SEN   686   SN
Serbia*       SR   --   --    --    --       see footnote at end of table
Serbia and    --   --   --    --    --       see footnote at end of table
Montenegro*
Seychelles    SE   SC   SYC   690   SC
Sierra Leone  SL   SL   SLE   694   SL
Singapore     SN   SG   SGP   702   SG
Slovakia      LO   SK   SVK   703   SK
Slovenia      SI   SI   SVN   705   SI
Solomon       BP   SB   SLB   090   SB
Islands
Somalia       SO   SO   SOM   706   SO
South Africa  SF   ZA   ZAF   710   ZA
South Georgia SX   GS   SGS   239   GS
and the South
Sandwich
Islands
Spain         SP   ES   ESP   724   ES
Spratly       PG   --   --    --    --
Islands
Sri Lanka     CE   LK   LKA   144   LK
Sudan         SU   SD   SDN   736   SD
Suriname      NS   SR   SUR   740   SR
Svalbard      SV   SJ   SJM   744   SJ       ISO includes Jan Mayen
Swaziland     WZ   SZ   SWZ   748   SZ
Sweden        SW   SE   SWE   752   SE
Switzerland   SZ   CH   CHE   756   CH
Syria         SY   SY   SYR   760   SY
Taiwan        TW   TW   TWN   158   TW
Tajikistan    TI   TJ   TJK   762   TJ
Tanzania      TZ   TZ   TZA   834   TZ
Thailand      TH   TH   THA   764   TH
Togo          TO   TG   TGO   768   TG
Tokelau       TL   TK   TKL   772   TK
Tonga         TN   TO   TON   776   TO
Trinidad and  TD   TT   TTO   780   TT
Tobago
Tromelin      TE   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the
Island                                    Miscellaneous (French)
                                         Indian Ocean Islands
Tunisia       TS   TN   TUN   788   TN
Turkey        TU   TR   TUR   792   TR
Turkmenistan  TX   TM   TKM   795   TM
Turks and     TK   TC   TCA   796   TC
Caicos
Islands
Tuvalu        TV   TV   TUV   798   TV
Uganda        UG   UG   UGA   800   UG
Ukraine       UP   UA   UKR   804   UA
United Arab   TC   AE   ARE   784   AE
Emirates
United        UK   GB   GBR   826   UK/GB    ISO includes Guernsey, Isle
Kingdom                                   of Man, Jersey
United States US   US   USA   840   US
United States --   UM   UMI   581   UM       ISO includes Baker Island,
Minor                                     Howland Island, Jarvis
Outlying                                  Island, Johnston Atoll,
Islands                                   Kingman Reef, Midway
                                         Islands, Palmyra Atoll, Wake
                                         Island
Uruguay       UY   UY   URY   858   UY
Uzbekistan    UZ   UZ   UZB   860   UZ
Vanuatu       NH   VU   VUT   548   VU
Venezuela     VE   VE   VEN   862   UE
Vietnam       VM   VN   VNM   704   VN
Virgin        VQ   VI   VIR   850   VI
Islands
Virgin        --   --   --    --    --       see British Virgin Islands
Islands (UK)
Virgin        --   --   --    --    --       see Virgin Islands
Islands (US)
Wake Atoll    WQ   --   --    --    --       ISO includes with the US
                                         Minor Outlying Islands
Wallis and    WF   WF   WLF   876   WF
Futuna
West Bank     WE   --   --    --    --
Western       WI   EH   ESH   732   EH
Sahara
Western Samoa --   --   --    --    --       see Samoa
World         --   --   --    --    --       the Factbook uses the W data
                                         code from DIAM 65--18
                                         Geopolitical Data Elements
                                         and Related Features, Data
                                         Standard No. 3, December
                                         1994, published by the
                                         Defense Intelligence Agency
Yemen         YM   YE   YEM   887   YE
Yugoslavia*   --   YU   YUG   891   YU       see footnote at end of table
Zaire         --   --   --    --    --       see Democratic Republic of
                                         the Congo
Zambia        ZA   ZM   ZWB   894   ZM
Zimbabwe      ZI   ZW   ZWE   716   ZW


Serbia and Montenegro have asserted the formation of a joint
independent state, but this entity has not been formally
recognized as a state by the US; the US view is that the
Socialist Federal Republic of Yugoslavia (SFRY) has
dissolved and that none of the successor republics
represents its continuation.




Appendix G: Cross-Reference List of Hydrographic Codes


IHO 23-4th: Limits of Oceans and Seas, Special Publication 23, Draft
4th Edition 1986, published by the International Hydrographic Bureau
of the International Hydrographic Organization

IHO 23-3rd: Limits of Oceans and Seas, Special Publication 23, 3rd
Edition 1953, published by the International Hydrographic Organization

ACIC M 49-1: Chart of Limits of Seas and Oceans, revised January 1958,
published by the Aeronautical Chart and Information Center (ACIC),
United States Air Force; note--ACIC is now part of the National
Imagery and Mapping Agency (NIMA)

DIAM 65-18: Geopolitical Data Elements and Related Features, Data
Standard No. 4, Defense Intelligence Agency Manual 65-18, December
1994, published by the Defense Intelligence Agency

The US Government has not yet adopted a standard for hydrographic
codes similar to the Federal Information Processing Standards (FIPS)
10-4 country codes. The names and limits of the following oceans and
seas are not always directly comparable because of differences in the
customers, needs, and requirements of the individual organizations.
Even the number of principal water bodies varies from organization to
organization. Factbook users, for example, find the Atlantic Ocean and
Pacific Ocean entries useful, but none of the following standards
include those oceans in their entirety. Nor is there any provision for
combining codes or overcodes to aggregate water bodies.


Principal Oceans and Seas of
the World With Hydrographic
Codes by Institution

                              IHO        IHO        ACIC        DIAM
                              23-4th     23-3rd*    M 49-1      65-18

Arctic Ocean                  9          17         A           5A
Atlantic Ocean                --         --         --          --
North Atlantic Ocean          1          23         B           1A
South Atlantic Ocean          4          32         C           2A
Baltic Sea                    2          1          B26         7B
Indian Ocean                  5          45         F           6A
Mediterranean Sea             3.1        28         B11         --
Eastern Mediterranean         3.1.2      28 B       --          8E
Western Mediterranean         3.1.1      28 A       --          8W
Pacific Ocean                 --         --         --          --
North Pacific Ocean           7          57         D           3A
South Pacific Ocean           8          61         E           4A
South China and Eastern       6          49 and 48  D18 plus    3U plus
Archipelagic Seas                                 others      others


ARCTIC OCEAN                  9          17         A           5A
East Siberian Sea             9.1        11         A6          5S
Laptev Sea                    9.2        10         A5          5P
Kara Sea                      9.3        9          A4          5K
Barents Sea                   9.4        7          A2          5B
White Sea                     9.5        8          A3          5W
North Greenland Sea           9.6        --         --          --
Norwegian Sea                 9.7        6          B30         5N
Iceland Sea                   9.8        --         --          --
Davis Strait                  9.9        15         B2          1V
Hudson Strait                 9.10       16 A       A15         1U
Hudson Bay                    9.11       16         A10         1H
Baffin Bay                    9.12       14 A       A12         1P
Lincoln Sea                   9.13       17 A       A13         5L
Northwest Passages (Northwest 9.14       14         A9          5T
Passage, Northwestern
Passages)
Beaufort Sea                  9.15       13         A8          5U
Chukchi Sea                   9.16       12         A7          5C
James Bay                     --         --         A11         --
Kane Basin                    --         --         A14         --

ATLANTIC OCEAN (see North     --         --         --          --
Atlantic Ocean and South
Atlantic Ocean)

BALTIC SEA                    2          1          B26         7B
Gulf of Bothnia               2.1        1 (a)      B29         7T
Gulf of Finland               2.2        1 (b)      B28         7F
Gulf of Riga                  2.3        1 (c)      B27         7H
The Sound                     2.4        2          --          --
The Great Belt                2.5        2          --          --
The Little Belt               2.6        2          --          --
Kattegat                      2.7        2          B25         7K

INDIAN OCEAN                  5          45         F           6A
Mozambique Channel            5.1        45 A       F1          6Z
Gulf of Suez                  5.2        35         F5          6W
Gulf of Aqaba                 5.3        36         --          6Q
Red Sea                       5.4        37         F4          6E
Gulf of Aden                  5.5        38         F3          6D
Persian Gulf (Gulf of Iran)   5.6        41         F7          6P
Gulf of Oman                  5.7        40         F6          6M
Arabian Sea                   5.8        39         F2          6R
Laccadive Sea (Ladshadweep    5.9        42         F9          6L
Sea)
Gulf of Mannar                5.10       --         F8          --
Palk Strait and Palk Bay      5.11       --         --          --
Bay of Bengal                 5.12       43         F10         6B
Andaman Sea (Burma Sea)       5.13       44         F11         6N
Strait of Malacca (Malacca    5.14       46 (a)     F12         6C
Strait)
Great Australian Bight        5.15       62         F21         6G
Suez Canal                    --         --         --          6U

MEDITERRANEAN REGION          3          --         --          --
Mediterranean Sea             3.1        28         B11         --
Mediterranean Sea, Western    3.1.1      28 A       --          8W
Basin
Strait of Gibraltar           3.1.1.1    28 (a)     B7          8S
Alboran Sea                   3.1.1.2    28 (b)     --          8Y
Balearic Sea (Balear Sea,     3.1.1.3    28 (c)     B9          8J
Iberian Sea)
Ligurian Sea (Ligure Sea)     3.1.1.4    28 (d)     B10         8L
Tyrrhenian Sea (Tirreno Sea)  3.1.1.5    28 (e)     B12         8T
Mediterranean Sea, Eastern    3.1.2      28 B       --          8E
Basin
Adriatic Sea                  3.1.2.1    28 (g)     B14         8D
Strait of Sicily (Strait of   3.1.2.2    --         --          --
Sicilia)
Ionian Sea                    3.1.2.3    28 (f)     B13         8N
Aegean Sea                    3.1.2.4    28 (h)     B15         8G
Sea of Marmara                3.2        29         B16         8M
Black Sea                     3.3        30         B17         8B
Sea of Azov                   3.4        31         B18         8Z
Gulf of Lion (Gulf of Lions)  --         --         B8          8X
Aral Sea                      --         --         --          8R
Bosporus                      --         --         --          8P
Caspian Sea                   --         --         --          8C
Dardanelles                   --         --         --          8U

NORTH ATLANTIC OCEAN          1          23         B           1A
Skagerrak                     1.1        3          B24         1S
North Sea                     1.2        4          B23         1N
Inner Seas off the West Coast 1.3        18         --          1K
of Scotland
Irish Sea and Saint Georges   1.4        19         B22         1R, 1Q
Channel
Bristol Channel               1.5        20         B21         1C
Celtic Sea                    1.6        21 A       --          --
English Channel               1.7        21         B20         1E
Bay of Biscay                 1.8        22         B19         1B
Canarias Sea                  1.9        --         --          --
Gulf of Guinea                1.10       34         C4          1G
Caribbean Sea                 1.11       27         B6          1X
Gulf of Mexico                1.12       26         B5          1M
Bay of Fundy                  1.13       25         B4          1F
Gulf of Saint Lawrence        1.14       24         B3          1T
Labrador Sea                  1.15       15 A       --          1L
Greenland Sea                 1.16       5          A1          5G
Denmark Strait                --         --         B1          1D
Lake Erie                     --         --         --          9E
Lake Huron                    --         --         --          9H
Lake Michigan                 --         --         --          9M
Lake Ontario                  --         --         --          9N
Lake Superior                 --         --         --          9S
Panama Canal                  --         --         --          1J
Saint Lawrence Seaway         --         --         --          9L

NORTH PACIFIC OCEAN           7          57         D           3A
Philippine Sea                7.1        56         D26         3P
Taiwan Strait (Formosa        7.2        --         D17         3F
Strait)
East China Sea (Tung Hai)     7.3        50         D13         3E
Yellow Sea (Huang Hai, Hwang  7.4        51         D14         3Y
Hai)
Bo Hai (Bo Sea, Gulf of       7.5        --         D16         3X
Chihli)
Liaodong Wan (Liaodong Gulf)  7.6        --         --          --
Inland Sea of Japan (Seto     7.7        53         --          3N
Naikai)
Sea of Japan (Japan Sea)      7.8        52         D11         3J
Gulf of Tartary               7.9        --         D10         --
Sea of Okhotsk                7.10       54         D8          3Q
Bering Sea                    7.11       55         D6          5D
Anadyrskiy Zaliv (Anadyrskiy  7.12       --         --          5Y
Gulf)
Gulf of Alaska                7.13       58         D4          5F
Coastal Waters of Southeast   7.14       59         D3          5E
Alaska and British Columbia
Gulf of California            7.15       60         D2          3L
Gulf of Panama                7.16       --         D1          --
Amurskiy Liman                --         --         D27         --
Bering Strait                 --         --         D7          5R
Bristol Bay                   --         --         D5          --
Korea Bay                     --         --         D15         3R
Korea Strait                  --         --         D12         --
Sakhalinskiy Zaliv            --         --         D28         3B
Zaliv Shelikhova (Zaliv       --         --         D9          3K
Shelekhova)
Luzon Strait                  --         --         --          3I
Tatar Strait                  --         --         --          3D

PACIFIC OCEAN (see North      --         --         --          --
Pacific Ocean and South
Pacific Ocean)

SOUTH ATLANTIC OCEAN          4          32         C           2A
Rio de la Plata               4.1        33         C1          2R
Drake Passage                 --         --         C5          2D
Golfo San Matias              --         --         C2          2M
Golfo San Jorge               --         --         C3          2J
Scotia Sea                    --         --         C6          2S
Weddell Sea                   --         --         C7          2W

SOUTH CHINA AND EASTERN       6          49 and 48  D18 plus    3U plus
ARCHIPELAGIC SEAS                                 others      others
South China Sea (Nan Hai)     6.1        49         D18         3U
Gulf of Tonkin                6.2        --         D19         3G
Gulf of Thailand (Gulf of     6.3        47         D20         3T
Siam)
Natuna Sea                    6.4        --         --          --
Singapore Strait              6.5        46 (b)     --          3Z
Sunda Strait                  6.6        --         --          --
Java Sea (Jawa Sea)           6.7        48 (n)     F13         4J
Makassar Strait (Makasar      6.8        48 (m)     E1          4M
Strait)
Bali Sea                      6.9        48 (l)     F14         4L
Flores Sea                    6.10       48 (j)     F16         4F
Sumba Strait                  6.11       --         --          --
Savu Sea (Sawu Sea)           6.12       48 (o)     F15         6S
Timor Sea                     6.13       48 (i)     F19         6T
Joseph Bonaparte Gulf         6.14       --         F20         --
Gulf of Carpentaria           6.15       --         E4          4P
Arafura Sea                   6.16       48 (h)     E3          4U
Aru Sea                       6.17       --         --          --
Banda Sea                     6.18       48 (g)     E2          4B
Teluk Bone (Gulf of Bone,     6.19       48 (k)     F17         4E
Gulf of Boni)
Ceram Sea (Seram Sea)         6.20       48 (f)     D25         4Q
Gulf of Berau                 6.21       --         --          --
Halmahera Sea                 6.22       48 (e)     D24         3H
Molucca Sea (Molukka Sea,     6.23       48 (c)     D23         3M
Maluku Sea)
Teluk Tomini (Gulf of Tomini) 6.24       48 (d)     F18         3V
Sulawesi Sea                  6.25       --         --          --
Mindanao Sea                  6.26       --         --          --
Sulu Sea                      6.27       48 (a)     D21         3S
Celebes Sea                   --         48 (b)     D22         3C

SOUTH PACIFIC OCEAN           8          61         E           4A
Bismarck Sea                  8.1        66         E6          4K
Solomon Sea                   8.2        65         E7          4S
Torres Strait                 8.3        --         E5          --
Coastal Waters of Great       8.4        --         --          --
Barrier Reefs
Coral Sea                     8.5        64         E9          4C
Tasman Sea                    8.6        63         E10         4T
Bass Strait                   8.7        62 A       F22         6F
Amundsen Sea                  --         --         E12         4D
Bellingshausen Sea            --         --         E13         4G
Cook Strait                   --         --         E8          --
Ross Sea                      --         --         E11         4R


* The letters after the numbers are subdivisions, not footnotes.



=====================================================================



Appendix H: Cross-Reference List of Geographic Names


This list indicates where various geographic names--including
the location of all United States Foreign Service Posts,
alternate names of countries, former names, and political or
geographical portions of larger entities--can be found in The
World Factbook. Spellings are normally those approved by the
US Board on Geographic Names (BGN). Additional information
is included in brackets.




   Name                     Entry in The     Latitude  Longitude
                            World Factbook   (deg min)(deg min)


A  Abidjan [US Embassy]     Cote d'Ivoire     5 19 N   4 02 W
   Abkhazia [region]        Georgia           43 00 N  41 00 E
   Abu Dhabi [US Embassy]   United Arab       24 28 N  54 22 E
                            Emirates
   Abu Musa [island]        Iran              25 52 N  55 03 E
   Abuja [US Embassy Branch Nigeria           9 12 N   7 11 E
   Office]
   Abyssinia                Ethiopia          8 00 N   38 00 E
   Acapulco                 Mexico            16 51 N  99 55 W
   Accra [US Embassy]       Ghana             5 33 N   0 13 W
   Adamstown                Pitcairn Islands  25 04 S  130 05 W
   Adana [US Consulate]     Turkey            37 01 N  35 18 E
   Addis Ababa [US Embassy] Ethiopia          9 02 N   38 42 E
   Adelie Land (Terre       Antarctica        66 30 S  139 00 E
   Adelie) [claimed by
   France]
   Aden                     Yemen             12 46 N  45 01 E
   Aden, Gulf of            Indian Ocean      12 30 N  48 00 E
   Admiralty Island         United States     57 44 N  134 20 W
                            (Alaska)
   Admiralty Islands        Papua New Guinea  2 10 S   147 00 E
   Adriatic Sea             Atlantic Ocean    42 30 N  16 00 E
   Aegean Islands           Greece            38 00 N  25 00 E
   Aegean Sea               Atlantic Ocean    38 30 N  25 00 E
   Afars and Issas, French  Djibouti          11 30 N  43 00 E
   Territory of the
   (F.T.A.I.)
   Agalega Islands          Mauritius         10 25 S  56 40 E
   Agana (see Hagatna)      Guam              13 28 N  144 45 E
   Ajaccio                  France (Corsica)  41 55 N  8 44 E
   Akmola (see Astana)      Kazakhstan        51 10 N  71 30 E
   Aland Islands            Finland           60 15 N  20 00 E
   Alaska                   United States     65 00 N  153 00 W
   Alaska, Gulf of          Pacific Ocean     58 00 N  145 00 W
   Aldabra Islands (Groupe  Seychelles        9 25 S   46 22 E
   d'Aldabra)
   Alderney [island]        Guernsey          49 43 N  2 12 W
   Aleutian Islands         United States     52 00 N  176 00 W
                            (Alaska)
   Alexander Archipelago    United States     57 00 N  134 00 W
                            (Alaska)
   Alexander Island         Antarctica        71 00 S  70 00 W
   Alexandria               Egypt             31 12 N  29 54 E
   Algiers [US Embassy]     Algeria           36 47 N  2 03 E
   Alhucemas, Penon de      Spain             35 13 N  3 53 W
   Alma-Ata (see Almaty)    Kazakhstan        43 15 N  76 57 E
   Almaty [US Embassy]      Kazakhstan        43 15 N  76 57 E
   Alofi                    Niue              19 01 S  169 55 E
   Alphonse Island          Seychelles        7 01 S   52 45 E
   Amami Strait             Pacific Ocean     28 40 N  129 30 E
   Amindivi Islands         India             11 30 N  72 30 E
   Amirante Isles (Les      Seychelles        6 00 S   53 10 E
   Amirantes)
   Amman [US Embassy]       Jordan            31 57 N  35 56 E
   Amsterdam [US Consulate  Netherlands       52 22 N  4 54 E
   General]
   Amsterdam Island (Ile    French Southern   37 52 S  77 32 E
   Amsterdam)               and Antarctic
                            Lands
   Amundsen Sea             Pacific Ocean     72 30 S  112 00 W
   Amur River               China, Russia     52 56 N  141 10 E
   Anatolia [region]        Turkey            39 00 N  35 00 E
   Andaman Islands          India             12 00 N  92 45 E
   Andaman Sea              Indian Ocean      10 00 N  95 00 E
   Andorra la Vella         Andorra           42 30 N  1 30 E
   Andros [island]          Greece            37 45 N  24 42 E
   Andros Island            The Bahamas       24 26 N  77 57 W
   Anegada Passage          Atlantic Ocean    18 30 N  63 40 W
   Angkor Wat [ruins]       Cambodia          13 26 N  103 50 E
   Anglo-Egyptian Sudan     Sudan             15 00 N  30 00 E
   Anjouan [island]         Comoros           12 15 S  44 25 E
   Ankara [US Embassy]      Turkey            39 56 N  32 52 E
   Annobon [island]         Equatorial        1 25 S   5 36 E
                            Guinea
   Antananarivo [US         Madagascar        18 52 S  47 30 E
   Embassy]
   Antigua [island]         Antigua and       14 34 N  90 44 W
                            Barbuda
   Antipodes Islands        New Zealand       49 41 S  178 43 E
   Antwerp [European        Belgium           51 13 N  4 25 E
   Logistical Support
   Office]
   Aozou Strip              Chad              22 00 N  18 00 E
   Apia [US Embassy]        Samoa             13 50 S  171 44 N
   Aqaba, Gulf of           Indian Ocean      29 00 N  34 30 E
   Aqmola (see Astana)      Kazakhstan        51 10 N  71 30 E
   Arab, Shatt al [river]   Iran, Iraq        29 57 N  48 34 E
   Arabian Sea              Indian Ocean      15 00 N  65 00 E
   Arafura Sea              Pacific Ocean     9 00 S   133 00 E
   Aral Sea                 Kazakhstan,       45 00 N  60 00 E
                            Uzbekistan
   Argun River              China, Russia     53 20 N  121 28 E
   Ascension Island         Saint Helena      7 57 S   14 22 W
   Ashgabat [US Embassy]    Kozakhstan        51 00 N  71 30 E
   Ashkhabad (see Ashgabat) Turkmenistan      37 57 N  58 23 E
   Asmara [US Embassy]      Eritrea           15 20 N  38 53 E
   Asmera (see Asmara)      Eritrea           15 20 N  38 53 E
   Assumption Island        Seychelles        9 46 S   46 34 E
   Astana (Akmola)          Kazakhstan        51 10 N  71 30 E
   Asuncion [US Embassy]    Paraguay          25 16 S  57 40 W
   Asuncion Island          Northern Mariana  19 40 N  145 24 E
                            Islands
   Atacama [region]         Chile             24 30 S  69 15 W
   Athens [US Embassy]      Greece            37 59 N  23 44 E
   Attu Island              United States     52 55 N  172 57 E
   Auckland [US Consulate   New Zealand       36 52 S  174 46 E
   General]
   Auckland Islands         New Zealand       51 00 S  166 30 E
   Australes, Iles (Iles    French Polynesia  23 20 S  151 00 W
   Tubuai)
   Avarua                   Cook Islands      21 12 S  159 46 W
   Axel Heiberg Island      Canada            79 30 N  90 00 W
   Azad Kashmir             Pakistan          34 30 N  74 00 E
   Azores [islands]         Portugal          38 30 N  28 00 W
   Azov, Sea of             Atlantic Ocean    49 00 N  36 00 E


B  Bab el Mandeb [strait]   Indian Ocean      12 40 N  43 20 E
   Babuyan Channel          Pacific Ocean     18 44 N  121 40 E
   Babuyan Islands          Philippines       19 10 N  121 40 E
   Baffin Bay               Arctic Ocean      73 00 N  66 00 W
   Baffin Island            Canada            68 00 N  70 00 W
   Baghdad [US Embassy      Iraq              33 21 N  44 25 E
   temporarily suspended;
   US Interests Section
   located in Poland's
   embassy in Baghdad]
   Baki (see Baku)          Azerbaijan        40 23 N  49 51 E
   Baku [US Embassy]        Azerbaijan        40 23 N  49 51 E
   Baky (see Baku)          Azerbaijan        40 23 N  49 51 E
   Balabac Strait           Pacific Ocean     7 35 N   117 00 E
   Balearic Islands         Spain             39 30 N  3 00 E
   Balearic Sea (Iberian    Atlantic Ocean    40 30 N  2 00 E
   Sea)
   Bali [island]            Indonesia         8 20 S   115 00 E
   Bali Sea                 Indian Ocean      7 45 S   115 30 E
   Balintang Channel        Pacific Ocean     19 49 N  121 40 E
   Balintang Islands        Philippines       19 55 N  122 10 E
   Balkan Peninsula         Albania, Bosnia   42 00 N  23 00 E
                            and Herzegovina,
                            Bulgaria,
                            Croatia, Greece,
                            Romania, Serbia
                            and Montenegro,
                            Slovenia, The
                            Former Yugoslav
                            Republic of
                            Macedonia,
                            Turkey (European
                            part)
   Balleny Islands          Antarctica        67 00 S  163 00 E
   Balochistan [region]     Pakistan          28 00 N  63 00 E
   Baltic Sea               Atlantic Ocean    57 00 N  19 00 E
   Bamako [US Embassy]      Mali              12 39 N  8 00 W
   Banaba (Ocean Island)    Kiribati          0 52 S   169 35 E
   Bandar Seri Begawan [US  Brunei            4 52 S   114 55 E
   Embassy]
   Banda Sea                Pacific Ocean     5 00 S   128 00 E
   Bangkok [US Embassy]     Thailand          13 45 N  100 31 E
   Bangui [US Embassy]      Central African   4 22 N   18 35 E
                            Republic
   Banjul [US Embassy]      The Gambia        13 28 N  16 39 W
   Banks Island             Australia         10 12 S  142 16 E
   Banks Island             Canada            75 15 N  121 30 W
   Banks Islands (Iles      Vanuatu           14 00 S  167 30 E
   Banks)
   Barbuda [island]         Antigua and       17 38 N  61 48 W
                            Barbuda
   Barcelona [US Consulate  Spain             41 23 N  2 11 E
   General]
   Barents Sea              Arctic Ocean      74 00 N  36 00 E
   Barranquilla             Colombia          10 59 N  74 48 W
   Bashi Channel            Pacific Ocean     22 00 N  121 00 E
   Basilan Strait           Pacific Ocean     6 49 N   122 05 E
   Basque Provinces         Spain             43 00 N  2 30 W
   Bass Strait              Pacific Ocean     39 20 S  145 30 E
   Basse-Terre              Guadeloupe        16 00 N  61 44 W
   Basseterre               Saint Kitts and   17 18 N  62 43 W
                            Nevis
   Bastia                   France (Corsica)  42 42 N  9 27 E
   Basutoland               Lesotho           29 30 S  28 30 E
   Batan Islands            Philippines       20 30 N  121 50 E
   Bavaria (Bayern)         Germany           48 30 N  11 30 E
   Beagle Channel           Atlantic Ocean    54 53 S  68 10 W
   Bear Island (see         Svalbard          74 26 N  19 5 E
   Bjornoya)
   Beaufort Sea             Arctic Ocean      73 00 N  140 00 W
   Bechuanaland             Botswana          22 00 S  24 00 E
   Beijing [US Embassy]     China             39 56 N  116 24 E
   Beirut [US Embassy]      Lebanon           33 53 N  35 30 E
   Belau (Palau Islands)    Palau             7 30 N   134 30 E
   Belem [US Consular       Brazil            1 27 S   48 29 W
   Agency]
   Belep Islands (Iles      New Caledonia     19 45 S  163 40 E
   Belep)
   Belfast [US Consulate    United Kingdom    54 35 N  5 55 W
   General]
   Belgian Congo            Democratic        0 00 N   25 00 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Belgrade                 Serbia and        44 50 N  20 30 E
                            Montenegro
   Belize City [US Embassy] Belize            17 30 N  88 12 W
   Belle Isle, Strait of    Atlantic Ocean    51 35 N  56 30 W
   Bellingshausen Sea       Pacific Ocean     71 00 S  85 00 W
   Belmopan                 Belize            17 15 N  88 46 W
   Belorussia               Belarus           53 00 N  28 00 E
   Bengal, Bay of           Indian Ocean      15 00 N  90 00 E
   Bering Sea               Pacific Ocean     60 00 N  175 00 W
   Bering Island            Russia            55 00 N  166 30 E
   Bering Strait            Pacific Ocean     65 30 N  169 00 W
   Berkner Island           Antarctica        79 30 S  49 30 W
   Berlin [US Branch        Germany           52 31 N  13 24 E
   Office]
   Berlin, East             Germany           52 30 N  13 33 E
   Berlin, West             Germany           52 30 N  12 20 E
   Bern [US Embassy]        Switzerland       46 57 N  7 26 E
   Bessarabia [region]      Romania,          47 00 N  28 30 E
                            Moldova, Ukraine
   Bhopal                   India             23 16 N  77 24 E
   Biafra [region]          Nigeria           5 30 N   7 30 E
   Big Diomede Island       Russia            65 46 N  169 06 W
   Bijagos, Arquipelago dos Guinea-Bissau     11 25 N  16 20 W
   Bikini Atoll             Marshall Islands  11 35 N  165 23 E
   Bilbao                   Spain             43 15 N  2 58 W
   Bioko [island]           Equatorial        3 30 N   8 42 E
                            Guinea
   Biscay, Bay of           Atlantic Ocean    44 00 N  4 00 W
   Bishkek [US Embassy]     Kyrgyzstan        42 54 N  74 36 E
   Bishop Rock              United Kingdom    49 52 N  6 27 W
   Bismarck Archipelago     Papua New Guinea  5 00 S   150 00 E
   Bismarck Sea             Pacific Ocean     4 00 S   148 00 E
   Bissau [US Embassy]      Guinea-Bissau     11 51 N  15 35 W
   Bjornoya (Bear Island)   Svalbard          74 26 N  19 5 E
   Black Forest             Germany           48 00 N  8 15 E
   Black Rock               South Georgia     53 39 S  41 48 W
                            and the South
                            Sandwich Islands
   Black Sea                Atlantic Ocean    43 00 N  35 00 E
   Bloemfontein             South Africa      29 12 S  26 07 E
   Boa Vista [island]       Cape Verde        16 05 N  22 50 W
   Bogota [US Embassy]      Colombia          4 36 N   74 05 W
   Bohemia [region]         Czech Republic    50 00 N  14 30 E
   Bombay (see Mumbai)      India             18 58 N  72 50 E
   Bonaire [island]         Netherlands       12 10 N  68 15 W
                            Antilles
   Bonifacio, Strait of     Atlantic Ocean    41 01 N  14 00 E
   Bonin Islands            Japan             27 00 N  140 10 E
   Bonn [US Embassy]        Germany           50 44 N  7 05 E
   Bophuthatswana           South Africa      26 30 S  25 30 E
   Bora-Bora [island]       French Polynesia  16 30 S  151 45 W
   Bordeaux                 France            44 50 N  0 34 W
   Borneo [island]          Brunei,           0 30 N   114 00 E
                            Indonesia,
                            Malaysia
   Bornholm [island]        Denmark           55 10 N  15 00 E
   Bosnia                   Bosnia and        44 00 N  18 00 E
                            Herzegovina
   Bosporus [strait]        Atlantic Ocean    41 00 N  29 00 E
   Bothnia, Gulf of         Atlantic Ocean    63 00 N  20 00 E
   Bougainville [island]    Papua New Guinea  6 00 S   155 00 E
   Bougainville Strait      Pacific Ocean     6 40 S   156 10 E
   Bounty Islands           New Zealand       47 43 S  174 00 E
   Brasilia [US Embassy]    Brazil            15 47 S  47 55 W
   Bratislava [US Embassy]  Slovakia          48 09 N  17 07 E
   Brazzaville [US Embassy] Republic of the   4 16 S   15 17 E
                            Congo
   Bridgetown [US Embassy]  Barbados          13 06 N  59 37 W
   Brisbane                 Australia         27 28 S  153 02 E
   Britain (see Great       United Kingdom    54 00 N  2 00 W
   Britain)
   British East Africa      Kenya, Tanzania,  1 00 N   38 00 E
                            Uganda
   British Guiana           Guyana            5 00 N   59 00 W
   British Honduras         Belize            17 15 N  88 45 W
   British Solomon Islands  Solomon Islands   8 00 S   159 00 E
   British Somaliland       Somalia           10 00 N  49 00 E
   Brussels [US Embassy, US Belgium           50 50 N  4 20 E
   Mission to European
   Union (USEU), US Mission
   to the North Atlantic
   Treaty Organization
   (USNATO)]
   Bubiyan [island]         Kuwait            29 47 N  48 10 E
   Bucharest [US Embassy]   Romania           44 26 N  26 06 E
   Budapest [US Embassy]    Hungary           47 30 N  19 05 E
   Buenos Aires [US         Argentina         34 36 S  58 27 W
   Embassy]
   Bujumbura [US Embassy]   Burundi           3 23 S   29 22 E
   Burnt Pine               Norfolk Island    29 02 S  167 56 E
   Byelorussia              Belarus           53 00 N  28 00 E


C  Cabinda [province]       Angola            5 33 S   12 12 E
   Cabot Strait             Atlantic Ocean    47 20 N  59 30 W
   Caicos Islands           Turks and Caicos  21 56 N  71 58 W
                            Islands
   Cairo [US Embassy]       Egypt             30 03 N  31 15 E
   Calcutta [US Consulate   India             22 32 N  88 22 E
   General]
   Calgary [US Consulate    Canada            51 03 N  114 05 W
   General]
   California, Gulf of      Pacific Ocean     28 00 N  112 00 W
   Campbell Island          New Zealand       52 33 S  169 09 E
   Canal Zone               Panama            9 00 N   79 45 W
   Canary Islands           Spain             28 00 N  15 30 W
   Canberra [US Embassy]    Australia         35 17 S  149 08 E
   Canton (Guangzhou)       China             23 06 N  113 16 E
   Canton Island (Kanton    Kiribati          2 49 S   171 40 W
   Island)
   Cape Town [US Consulate  South Africa      33 55 S  18 22 E
   General]
   Caracas [US Embassy]     Venezuela         10 30 N  66 56 W
   Cargados Carajos Shoals  Mauritius         16 25 S  59 38 E
   Caroline Islands         Federated States  7 30 N   148 00 E
                            of Micronesia,
                            Palau
   Caribbean Sea            Atlantic Ocean    15 00 N  73 00 W
   Carpentaria, Gulf of     Pacific Ocean     14 00 S  139 00 E
   Casablanca [US Consulate Morocco           33 39 N  7 35 W
   General]
   Castries                 Saint Lucia       14 01 N  61 00 W
   Catalonia [region]       Spain             42 00 N  2 00 E
   Cato Island              Australia         23 15 S  155 32 E
   Caucasus [region]        Russia            42 00 N  45 00 E
   Cayenne                  French Guiana     4 56 N   52 20 W
   Cebu [US Consular        Philippines       10 18 N  123 54 E
   Agency]
   Celebes [island]         Indonesia         2 00 S   121 00 E
   Celebes Sea              Pacific Ocean     3 00 N   122 00 E
   Celtic Sea               Atlantic Ocean    51 00 N  6 30 W
   Central African Empire   Central African   7 00 N   21 00 E
                            Republic
   Ceuta                    Spain             35 53 N  5 19 W
   Ceylon                   Sri Lanka         7 00 N   81 00 E
   Chafarinas, Islas        Spain             35 12 N  2 26 W
   Chagos Archipelago (Oil  British Indian    6 00 S   71 30 E
   Islands)                 Ocean Territory
   Channel Islands          Guernsey, Jersey  49 20 N  2 20 W
   Charlotte Amalie         Virgin Islands    18 21 N  64 56 W
   Chatham Islands          New Zealand       44 00 S  176 30 W
   Chechnya (Chechnia)      Russia            43 15 N  45 40 E
   Cheju-do [island]        Korea, South      33 20 N  126 30 E
   Cheju Strait             Pacific Ocean     34 00 N  126 30 E
   Chengdu [US Consulate    China             39 39 N  104 04 E
   General]
   Chennai (Madras) [US     India             13 04 N  80 16 E
   Consulate General]
   Chesterfield Islands     New Caledonia     19 52 S  158 15 E
   (Iles Chesterfield)
   Chiang Mai [US Consulate Thailand          18 47 N  98 59 E
   General]
   Chihli, Gulf of (see Bo  Pacific Ocean     38 30 N  120 00 E
   Hai)
   China, People's Republic China             35 00 N  105 00 E
   of
   China, Republic of       Taiwan            23 30 N  105 00 E
   Chisinau [US Embassy]    Moldova           47 00 N  28 50 E
   Choiseul [island]        Solomon Islands   7 05 S   121 00 E
   Christmas Island [Indian Australia         10 25 S  105 39 E
   Ocean]
   Christmas Island         Kiribati          1 52 N   157 20 W
   (Kiritimati) [Pacific
   Ocean]
   Chukchi Sea              Arctic Ocean      69 00 N  171 00 W
   Ciskei                   South Africa      33 00 S  27 00 E
   Ciudad Juarez [US        Mexico            31 44 N  106 29 W
   Consulate General]
   Cluj-Napoca [US Branch   Romania           46 47 N  23 36 E
   Office]
   Cochin China [region]    Vietnam           11 00 N  107 00 E
   Coco, Isla del           Costa Rica        5 32 N   87 04 W
   Cocos Islands            Cocos (Keeling)   12 30 S  96 50 E
                            Islands
   Colombo [US Embassy]     Sri Lanka         6 56 N   79 51 E
   Colon, Archipielago de   Ecuador           0 00 N   90 30 W
   (Galapagos Islands)
   Commander Islands        Russia            55 00 N  167 00 E
   (Komandorskiye Ostrova)
   Conakry [US Embassy]     Guinea            9 31 N   13 43 W
   Congo (Leopoldville)     Democratic        15 00 S  30 00 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Con Son [Islands]        Vietnam           8 43 N   106 36 E
   Cook Strait              Pacific Ocean     41 15 S  174 30 E
   Copenhagen [US Embassy]  Denmark           55 40 N  12 35 E
   Coral Sea                Pacific Ocean     15 00 S  150 00 E
   Corfu [island]           Greece            39 40 N  19 45 E
   Corinth                  Greece            37 56 N  22 56 E
   Corn Islands (Islas del  Nicaragua         12 15 N  83 00 W
   Maiz)
   Corocoro Island          Guyana,           3 38 N   66 50 W
                            Venezuela
   Corsica (Corse) [island] France            42 00 N  9 00 E
   Corsico [island]         Equatorial        0 55 N   9 19 E
                            Guinea
   Cosmoledo Group (Atoll   Seychelles        9 43 S   47 35 E
   de Cosmoledo)
   Cotonou [US Embassy]     Benin             6 21 N   2 26 E
   Courantyne River         Guyana, Suriname  5 57 N   57 06 W
   Crete [island]           Greece            35 15 N  24 45 E
   Crimea [region]          Ukraine           45 00 N  34 00 E
   Crimean Peninsula        Ukraine           45 00 N  34 00 E
   Crooked Island Passage   Atlantic Ocean    22 55 N  74 35 W
   Crozet Islands (Iles     French Southern   46 30 S  51 00 E
   Crozet)                  and Antarctic
                            Lands
   Curacao [US Consulate    Netherlands       12 11 N  69 00 W
   General]                 Antilles
   Cyclades [islands]       Greece            37 00 N  25 10 E
   Czechoslovakia           Czech Republic,   49 00 N  18 00 E
                            Slovakia


D  Dahomey                  Benin             9 30 N   2 15 E
   Daito Islands            Japan             43 00 N  17 00 E
   Dakar [US Embassy]       Senegal           14 40 N  17 26 W
   Dalmatia [region]        Croatia           43 00 N  17 00 E
   Daman (Damao)            India             20 10 N  73 00 E
   Damascus [US Embassy]    Syria             33 30 N  36 18 E
   Danger Islands (see      Cook Islands      10 53 S  165 49 W
   Pukapuka Atoll)
   Danish Straits           Atlantic Ocean    58 00 N  11 00 E
   Danish West Indies       Virgin Islands    18 20 N  64 50 W
   Danzig (Gdansk)          Poland            54 23 N  18 40 E
   Dao Bach Long Vi         Vietnam           20 08 N  107 44 E
   [island]
   Dardanelles [strait]     Atlantic Ocean    40 15 N  26 25 E
   Dar es Salaam [US        Tanzania          6 48 S   39 17 E
   Embassy]
   Davis Strait             Atlantic Ocean    67 00 N  57 00 W
   Dead Sea                 Israel, Jordan,   32 30 N  35 30 E
                            West Bank
   Deception Island         Antarctica        62 56 S  60 34 W
   Denmark Strait           Atlantic Ocean    67 00 N  24 00 W
   D'Entrecasteaux Islands  Papua New Guinea  9 30 S   150 40 E
   Desolation Islands       French Southern   49 30 S  69 30 E
   (Isles Kerguelen)        and Antarctic
                            Lands
   Devils Island (Ile du    French Guiana     5 17 N   52 35 W
   Diable)
   Devon Island             Canada            76 00 N  87 00 W
   Dhahran [US Consulate    Saudi Arabia      26 18 N  50 08 E
   General]
   Dhaka [US Embassy]       Bangladesh        23 43 N  90 25 E
   Dhofar [region]          Oman              17 00 N  54 10 E
   Diego Garcia [island]    British Indian    7 20 S   72 25 E
                            Ocean Territory
   Diego Ramirez [islands]  Chile             56 30 S  68 43 W
   Diomede Islands          Russia [Big       65 47 N  169 00 W
                            Diomede], United
                            States [Little
                            Diomede]
   Diu                      India             20 42 N  70 59 E
   Djibouti [US Embassy]    Djibouti          11 30 N  43 15 E
   Dnieper [river]          Belarus, Russia,  46 30 N  32 18 E
   (Dnyapro, Dnepr, Dnipro) Ukraine
   Dniester [river]         Moldova, Ukraine  46 18 N  30 17 E
   (Nistru, Dnister)
   Dodecanese [islands]     Greece            36 00 N  27 05 E
   Dodoma                   Tanzania          6 11 S   35 45 E
   Doha [US Embassy]        Qatar             25 17 N  51 32 E
   Donets Basin             Russia, Ukraine   48 15 N  38 30 E
   Douala                   Cameroon          4 03 N   9 42 E
   Douglas                  Man, Isle of      54 09 N  4 28 W
   Dover, Strait of         Atlantic Ocean    51 00 N  1 30 E
   Drake Passage            Atlantic Ocean    60 00 S  60 00 W
   Dubai [US Consulate      United Arab       25 18 N  55 18 E
   General]                 Emirates
   Dubayy (see Dubai)       United Arab       25 18 N  55 18 E
                            Emirates
   Dublin [US Embassy]      Ireland           53 20 N  6 15 W
   Durban [US Consulate     South Africa      29 55 S  30 56 E
   General]
   Dushanbe [US Embassy]    Tajikistan        38 35 N  68 48 E
   Dutch Antilles           Netherlands       52 05 N  4 18 E
                            Antilles
   Dutch East Indies        Indonesia         5 00 S   120 00 E
   Dutch Guiana             Suriname          4 00 N   56 00 W
   Dutch West Indies        Netherlands       52 05 N  4 18 E
                            Antilles
   Dzungarian Gate          China,            45 25 N  82 25 E
                            Kazakhstan


E  East China Sea           Pacific Ocean     30 00 N  126 00 E
   East Frisian Islands     Germany           53 44 N  7 25 E
   East Germany (German     Germany           52 00 N  13 00 E
   Democratic Republic)
   East Korea Strait        Pacific Ocean     34 00 N  129 00 E
   (Eastern Channel or
   Tsushima Strait)
   East Pakistan            Bangladesh        24 00 N  90 00 E
   East Siberian Sea        Arctic Ocean      74 00 N  166 00 E
   East Timor (Portuguese   Indonesia         9 00 S   126 00 E
   Timor)
   Easter Island (Isla de   Chile             27 07 S  109 22 W
   Pascua)
   Eastern Channel (East    Pacific Ocean     34 00 N  129 00 E
   Korea Strait or Tsushima
   Strait)
   Eastern Samoa            American Samoa    14 20 S  170 00 W
   Edinburgh [US Consulate  United Kingdom    55 57 N  3 13 W
   General]
   Eire                     Ireland           53 00 N  8 00 W
   Elba [island]            Italy             42 46 N  10 17 E
   Ellef Ringnes Island     Canada            78 00 N  103 00 W
   Ellesmere Island         Canada            81 00 N  80 00 W
   Ellice Islands           Tuvalu            8 00 S   178 00 E
   Elobey, Islas de         Equatorial        0 59 N   9 33 E
                            Guinea
   Enderbury Island         Kiribati          3 08 S   171 5 W
   Enewetak Atoll (Eniwetok Marshall Islands  11 30 N  162 15 E
   Atoll)
   England [region]         United Kingdom    52 30 N  1 30 W
   English Channel          Atlantic Ocean    50 20 N  1 00 W
   Eniwetok Atoll (see      Marshall Islands  11 30 N  162 15 E
   Enewetak Atoll)
   Eolie, Isole             Italy             38 30 N  15 00 E
   Epirus, Northern         Albania, Greece   40 00 N  20 30 E
   Espana                   Spain             40 00 N  4 00 W
   Essequibo [region]       Guyana            6 59 N   58 23 W
   [claimed by Venezuela]
   Etorofu (Iturup)         Russia [de        44 55 N  147 40 E
   [island]                 facto]


F  Farquhar Group (Atoll de Seychelles        10 10 S  51 10 E
   Farquhar)
   Fernando de Noronha      Brazil            3 51 S   32 25 W
   Fernando Po [island]     Equatorial        3 30 N   8 42 E
   (see Bioko)              Guinea
   Finland, Gulf of         Atlantic Ocean    60 00 N  27 00 E
   Florence [US Consulate   Italy             43 46 N  11 15 E
   General]
   Florida, Straits of      Atlantic Ocean    25 00 N  79 45 W
   former Soviet Union      Armenia,
   (FSU)                    Azerbaijan,
                            Belarus,
                            Estonia,
                            Georgia,
                            Kazakhstan,
                            Kyrgyzstan,
                            Latvia,
                            Lithuania,
                            Moldova, Russia,
                            Tajikistan,
                            Turkmenistan,
                            Ukraine,
                            Uzbekistan
   Formosa [island]         Taiwan            23 30 N  121 00 E
   Formosa Strait (see      Pacific Ocean     24 00 N  119 00 E
   Taiwan Strait)
   Fortaleza [US Consular   Brazil            3 43 S   38 30 W
   Agency]
   Fort-de-France           Martinique        14 36 N  61 05 W
   Frankfurt am Main [US    Germany           50 07 N  8 40 E
   Consulate General]
   Franz Josef Land         Russia            81 00 N  55 00 E
   [islands]
   Freetown [US Embassy]    Sierra Leone      8 30 N   13 15 W
   French Cameroon          Cameroon          6 00 N   12 00 E
   French Guinea            Guinea            11 00 N  10 00 W
   French Indochina         Cambodia, Laos,   15 00 N  107 00 E
                            Vietnam
   French Morocco           Morocco           32 00 N  5 00 W
   French Somaliland        Djibouti          11 30 N  43 00 W
   French Sudan             Mali              17 00 N  4 00 W
   French Territory of the  Djibouti          11 30 N  43 00 E
   Afars and Issas
   (F.T.A.I.)
   French Togo              Togo              8 00 N   1 10 E
   French West Indies       Guadeloupe,       16 30 N  62 00 W
                            Martinique
   Friendly Islands         Tonga             20 00 S  175 00 W
   Frisian Islands          Denmark,          53 35 N  6 40 E
                            Germany,
                            Netherlands
   Frunze (see Bishkek)     Kyrgyzstan        42 54 N  74 36 E
   Fukuoka [US Consulate]   Japan             33 35 N  130 24 E
   Funafuti                 Tuvalu            8 30 S   179 12 E
   Fundy, Bay of            Atlantic Ocean    45 00 N  66 00 W
   Futuna Islands (Hoorn    Wallis and        14 19 S  178 05 W
   Islands/Iles de Horne)   Futuna


G  Gaborone [US Embassy]    Botswana          24 45 S  25 55 E
   Galapagos Islands        Ecuador           0 00 N   90 30 W
   (Archipielago de Colon)
   Galilee [region]         Israel            32 54 N  35 20 E
   Galleons Passage         Atlantic Ocean    11 00 N  60 55 W
   Gambier Islands (Iles    French Polynesia  23 09 S  134 58 W
   Gambier)
   Gaspar Strait            Pacific Ocean     3 00 S   107 00 E
   Geneva [US Consular      Switzerland       46 12 N  6 10 E
   Agency, US Mission to
   European Office of the
   UN and Other
   International
   Organizations]
   Genoa                    Italy             44 25 N  8 57 E
   George Town              Malaysia          5 26 N   100 16 E
   George Town              The Bahamas       23 30 N  75 46 W
   George Town              Cayman Islands    19 20 N  81 23 W
   Georgetown               The Gambia        13 30 N  14 47 W
   Georgetown [US Embassy]  Guyana            6 48 N   58 10 W
   German Democratic        Germany           52 00 N  13 00 E
   Republic (East Germany)
   German Southwest Africa  Namibia           22 00 S  17 00 E
   Germany, Federal         Germany           51 00 N  9 00 E
   Republic of
   Gibraltar                Gibraltar         36 11 N  5 22 W
   Gibraltar, Strait of     Atlantic Ocean    35 57 N  5 36 W
   Gidi Pass                Egypt             30 13 N  33 09 E
   Gilbert Islands          Kiribati          1 25 N   173 00 E
   Goa [state]              India             14 20 N  74 00 E
   Godthab (Nuuk)           Greenland         64 11 N  51 44 W
   Gold Coast               Ghana             8 00 N   2 00 W
   Golan Heights [region]   Syria             33 00 N  35 45 E
   Good Hope, Cape of       South Africa      34 24 S  18 30 E
   Goteborg                 Sweden            57 43 N  11 58 E
   Gotland [island]         Sweden            57 30 N  18 33 E
   Gough Island             Saint Helena      40 10 S  9 45 W
   Grand Banks              Atlantic Ocean    47 06 N  55 48 W
   Grand Cayman [island]    Cayman Islands    19 20 N  81 20 W
   Grand Turk               Turks and Caicos  21 28 N  71 08 W
                            Islands
   Great Australian Bight   Indian Ocean      35 00 S  130 00 E
   Great Belt (Store Baelt) Atlantic Ocean    55 30 N  11 00 E
   Great Bitter Lake        Egypt             30 20 N  32 23 E
   Great Britain [island]   United Kingdom    54 00 N  2 00 W
   Great Channel            Indian Ocean      6 25 N   94 20 E
   Greater Sunda Islands    Brunei,           2 00 S   110 00 E
                            Indonesia,
                            Malaysia
   Green Islands            Papua New Guinea  4 30 S   154 10 E
   Greenland Sea            Arctic Ocean      79 00 N  5 00 W
   Grenadines, Northern     Saint Vincent     13 15 N  61 12 W
                            and the
                            Grenadines
   Grenadines, Southern     Grenada           12 07 N  61 40 W
   Grytviken                South Georgia     54 15 S  36 45 W
                            and the South
                            Sandwich Islands
   Guadalajara [US          Mexico            20 40 N  103 20 W
   Consulate General]
   Guadalcanal [island]     Solomon Islands   9 32 S   160 12 E
   Guadalupe, Isla de       Mexico            29 11 N  118 17 W
   Guangzhou [US Consulate  China             23 06 N  113 16 E
   General]
   Guantanamo Bay [US Naval Cuba              20 00 N  75 08 W
   Base]
   Guatemala [US Embassy]   Guatemala         14 38 N  90 31 W
   Guinea, Gulf of          Atlantic Ocean    3 00 N   2 30 E
   Guayaquil [US Consulate  Ecuador           2 13 S   79 54 W
   General]


H  Ha'apai Group            Tonga             19 42 S  174 29 W
   Habomai Islands          Russia [de        43 30 N  146 10 E
                            facto]
   Hadhramaut [region]      Yemen             15 00 N  50 00 E
   Hagatna (Agana)          Guam              13 28 N  144 45 E
   Hague, The [US Embassy]  Netherlands       52 05 N  4 18 E
   Haifa                    Israel            32 50 N  35 00 E
   Haiphong                 Vietnam           20 52 N  106 41 E
   Hainan Dao [island]      China             19 00 N  109 30 E
   Halifax [US Consulate    Canada            44 39 N  63 36 W
   General]
   Halmahera [island]       Indonesia         1 00 N   128 00 E
   Hamburg [US Consulate    Germany           53 33 N  9 59 E
   General]
   Hamilton [US Consulate   Bermuda           32 17 N  64 46 W
   General]
   Hanoi [US Embassy]       Vietnam           21 02 N  105 51 E
   Harare [US Embassy]      Zimbabwe          17 50 S  31 03 E
   Hatay [province]         Turkey            36 30 N  36 15 E
   Havana [US post not      Cuba              23 08 N  82 22 W
   maintained;
   representation by US
   Interests Section
   (USINT) of the Swiss
   Embassy]
   Hawaii                   United States     20 00 N  157 45 W
   Heard Island             Heard Island and  53 06 S  73 30 E
                            McDonald Islands
   Hejaz [region]           Saudi Arabia      24 30 N  38 30 E
   Helsinki [US Embassy]    Finland           60 10 N  24 58 E
   Hermosillo [US           Mexico            29 04 N  110 58 W
   Consulate]
   Herzegovina              Bosnia and        44 00 N  18 00 E
                            Herzegovina
   Hispaniola [island]      Dominican         18 45 N  71 00 W
                            Republic, Haiti
   Ho Chi Minh City         Vietnam           10 45 N  106 40 E
   Hokkaido [island]        Japan             44 00 N  143 00 E
   Holland                  Netherlands       52 30 N  5 45 E
   Hong Kong [US Consulate  Hong Kong         22 15 N  114 10 E
   General]
   Honiara                  Solomon Islands   9 26 S   159 57 E
   Honshu [island]          Japan             36 00 N  138 00 E
   Hormuz, Strait of        Indian Ocean      26 34 N  56 15 E
   Horn, Cape (Cabo de      Chile             55 59 S  67 16 W
   Hornos)
   Horne, Iles de           Wallis and        14 19 S  178 05 W
                            Futuna
   Horn of Africa           Djibouti,         8 00 N   48 00 E
                            Eritrea,
                            Ethiopia,
                            Somalia
   Hudson Bay               Arctic Ocean      60 00 N  86 00 W
   Hudson Strait            Arctic Ocean      62 00 N  71 00 W
   Hunter Island            New Caledonia,    22 24 S  172 06 E
                            Vanuatu


I  Iberian Peninsula        Portugal, Spain   40 00 N  5 00 W
   Inaccessible Island      Saint Helena      37 17 S  12 40 W
   Indochina                Cambodia, Laos,   15 00 N  107 00 E
                            Vietnam
   Inland Sea               Japan             34 20 N  133 30 E
   Inner Mongolia (Nei      China             42 00 N  113 00 E
   Mongol)
   Ionian Islands           Greece            38 30 N  20 30 E
   Ionian Sea               Atlantic Ocean    38 30 N  18 00 E
   Irian Jaya [province]    Indonesia         5 00 S   138 00 E
   Irish Sea                Atlantic Ocean    53 30 N  5 20 W
   Iron Gate                Romania, Serbia   44 41 N  22 31 E
                            and Montenegro
   Islamabad [US Embassy]   Pakistan          33 42 N  73 10 E
   Islas Malvinas           Falkland Islands  51 45 S  59 00 W
                            (Islas Malvinas)
   Istanbul [US Consulate   Turkey            41 01 N  28 58 E
   General]
   Istrian Peninsula        Croatia,          45 00 N  14 00 E
                            Slovenia
   Italian East Africa      Eritrea,          8 00 N   38 00 E
                            Ethiopia,
                            Somalia
   Italian Somaliland       Somalia           10 00 N  49 00 E
   Iturup (see Etorofu)     Russia [de        44 55 N  147 40 E
                            facto]
   Ivory Coast              Cote d'Ivoire     8 00 N   5 00 W
   Iwo Jima [island]        Japan             24 47 N  141 20 E


J  Jakarta [US Embassy]     Indonesia         6 10 S   106 48 E
   Jamestown                Saint Helena      15 56 S  5 44 W
   Jammu                    India             32 42 N  74 52 E
   Jammu and Kashmir        India, Pakistan   34 00 N  76 00 E
   [region]
   Japan, Sea of            Pacific Ocean     40 00 N  135 00 E
   Jars, Plain of           Laos              19 27 N  103 10 E
   Java [island]            Indonesia         7 30 S   110 00 E
   Java Sea                 Pacific Ocean     5 00 S   110 00 E
   Jeddah (see Jiddah)      Saudi Arabia      21 30 N  39 12 E
   Jerusalem [US Consulate  Israel, West      31 47 N  35 14 E
   General]                 Bank
   Jiddah [US Consulate     Saudi Arabia      21 30 N  39 12 E
   General]
   Johannesburg [US         South Africa      26 15 S  28 00 E
   Consulate General]
   Juan de Fuca, Strait of  Pacific Ocean     48 18 N  124 00 W
   Juan Fernandez, Isla de  Chile             33 00 S  80 00 W
   Jubal, Strait of         Indian Ocean      27 40 N  33 55 E
   Judaea [region]          Israel, West      31 35 N  35 00 E
                            Bank
   Jutland [region]         Denmark           56 00 N  9 15 E
   Juventud, Isla de la     Cuba              21 40 N  82 50 W
   (Isle of Youth)


K  Kabul [US Embassy now    Afghanistan       34 31 N  69 12 E
   closed]
   Kaduna                   Nigeria           10 33 N  7 27 E
   Kailas Range             China, India      30 00 N  82 00 E
   Kalimantan [region]      Indonesia         0 00 N   115 00 E
   Kamaran [island]         Yemen             15 21 N  42 34 E
   Kamchatka Peninsula      Russia            56 00 N  160 00 E
   (Poluostrov Kamchatka)
   Kampala [US Embassy]     Uganda            0 19 N   32 25 E
   Kampuchea                Cambodia          13 00 N  105 00 E
   Kanton Island            Kiribati          2 49 S   171 40 W
   Karachi [US Consulate    Pakistan          24 52 N  67 03 E
   General]
   Kara Sea                 Arctic Ocean      76 00 N  80 00 E
   Karakoram Pass           China, India      35 30 N  77 50 E
   Karelian Isthmus         Russia            60 25 N  30 00 E
   Karimata Strait          Pacific Ocean     2 05 S   108 40 E
   Kashmir [region]         India, Pakistan   34 00 N  76 00 E
   Katanga [region]         Democratic        10 00 S  26 00 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Kathmandu [US Embassy]   Nepal             27 43 N  85 19 E
   Kattegat [strait]        Atlantic Ocean    57 00 N  11 00 E
   Kauai Channel            Pacific Ocean     21 45 N  158 50 W
   Keeling Islands          Cocos (Keeling)   12 30 S  96 50 E
                            Islands
   Kerguelen, Iles          French Southern   49 30 S  69 30 E
                            and Antarctic
                            Lands
   Kermadec Islands         New Zealand       29 50 S  178 15 W
   Kerulen River            China, Mongolia   48 48 N  117 00 E
   Khabarovsk               Russia            48 27 N  135 06 E
   Khanka, Lake             China, Russia     45 00 N  132 24 E
   Khartoum [US Embassy]    Sudan             15 36 N  32 32 E
   Khmer Republic           Cambodia          13 00 N  105 00 E
   Khuriya Muriya Islands   Oman              17 30 N  56 00 E
   (Kuria Muria Islands)
   Khyber Pass              Afghanistan,      34 05 N  71 10 E
                            Pakistan
   Kiel Canal (Nord-Ostsee  Atlantic Ocean    53 53 N  9 08 E
   Kanal)
   Kiev [US Embassy]        Ukraine           50 26 N  30 31 E
   Kigali [US Embassy]      Rwanda            1 57 S   30 04 E
   Kingston [US Embassy]    Jamaica           18 00 N  76 48 W
   Kingston                 Norfolk Island    29 03 S  167 58 E
   Kingstown                Saint Vincent     13 09 N  61 14 W
                            and the
                            Grenadines
   Kinshasa [US Embassy]    Democratic        4 18 S   15 18 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Kirghiziya               Kyrgyzstan        41 00 N  75 00 E
   Kiritimati (Christmas    Kiribati          1 52 N   157 20 W
   Island)
   Kishinev (see Chisinau)  Moldova           47 00 N  28 50 E
   Kithira Strait           Atlantic Ocean    36 00 N  23 00 E
   Kobe                     Japan             34 41 N  135 10 E
   Kodiak Island            United States     57 49 N  152 23 W
   Kola Peninsula (Kol'skiy Russia            67 20 N  37 00 E
   Poluostrov)
   Kolonia [US Embassy]     Federated States  6 58 N   158 13 E
                            of Micronesia
   Korea Bay                Pacific Ocean     39 00 N  124 00 E
   Korea, Democratic        North Korea       40 00 N  127 00 E
   People's Republic of
   Korea, Republic of       South Korea       37 00 N  127 30 E
   Korea Strait             Pacific Ocean     34 00 N  129 00 E
   Koror [US Embassy]       Palau             7 20 N   134 29 E
   Kosovo [region]          Serbia and        42 30 N  21 00 E
                            Montenegro
   Kowloon                  Hong Kong         22 18 N  114 10 E
   Kra, Isthmus of          Burma, Thailand   10 20 N  99 00 E
   Krakatoa [volcano]       Indonesia         6 07 S   105 24 E
   Krakow [US Consulate     Poland            50 03 N  19 58 E
   General]
   Kuala Lumpur [US         Malaysia          3 10 N   101 42 E
   Embassy]
   Kunashiri (Kunashir)     Russia [de        44 20 N  146 00 E
   [island]                 facto]
   Kunlun Mountains         China             36 00 N  84 00 E
   Kuril Islands            Russia [de        46 10 N  152 00 E
                            facto]
   Kuwait [US Embassy]      Kuwait            29 20 N  47 59 E
   Kuznetsk Basin           Russia            54 00 N  86 00 E
   Kwajalein Atoll          Marshall Islands  9 05 N   167 20 E
   Kyushu [island]          Japan             33 00 N  131 00 E
   Kyyiv (see Kiev)         Ukraine           50 26 N  30 31 E


L  Labrador                 Canada            54 00 N  62 00 W
   Laccadive Islands        India             10 00 N  73 00 E
   Laccadive Sea            Indian Ocean      7 00 N   76 00 E
   Lagos [US Embassy]       Nigeria           6 27 N   3 24 E
   Lahore [US Consulate     Pakistan          31 35 N  74 18 E
   General]
   Lakshadweep (Laccadive   India             10 00 N  73 00 E
   Islands)
   La Paz [US Embassy]      Bolivia           16 30 S  68 09 W
   La Perouse Strait        Pacific Ocean     45 45 N  142 00 E
   Laptev Sea               Arctic Ocean      76 00 N  126 00 E
   Las Palmas               Spain             28 06 N  15 24 W
   Lau Group                Fiji              18 20 S  178 30 E
   Lefkosa (see Nicosia)    Cyprus            35 10 N  33 22 E
   Leipzig [US Consulate    Germany           51 19 N  12 20 E
   General]
   Lemnos [island]          Greece            39 54 N  25 21 E
   Leningrad (see Saint     Russia            59 55 N  30 15 E
   Petersburg)
   Lesser Sunda Islands     Indonesia         9 00 S   120 00 E
   Lesvos [island]          Greece            39 15 N  26 15 E
   Leyte [island]           Philippines       10 50 N  124 50 E
   Liancourt Rocks [claimed South Korea       37 15 N  131 50 E
   by Japan]
   Libreville [US Embassy]  Gabon             0 23 N   9 27 E
   Ligurian Sea             Atlantic Ocean    43 30 N  9 00 E
   Lilongwe [US Embassy]    Malawi            13 59 S  33 44 E
   Lima [US Embassy]        Peru              12 03 S  77 03 W
   Lincoln Sea              Arctic Ocean      83 00 N  56 00 W
   Line Islands             Jarvis Island,    0 05 N   157 00 W
                            Kingman Reef,
                            Kiribati,
                            Palmyra Atoll
   Lisbon [US Embassy]      Portugal          38 43 N  9 08 W
   Ljubljana [US Embassy]   Slovenia          46 03 N  14 31 E
   Lobamba                  Swaziland         26 27 S  31 12 E
   Lombok Strait            Indian Ocean      8 30 S   115 50 E
   Lome [US Embassy]        Togo              6 08 N   1 13 E
   London [US Embassy]      United Kingdom    51 30 N  0 10 W
   Longyearbyen             Svalbard          78 13 N  15 33 E
   Lord Howe Island         Australia         31 30 S  159 00 E
   Louisiade Archipelago    Papua New Guinea  11 00 S  153 00 E
   Loyalty Islands (Iles    New Caledonia     21 00 S  167 00 E
   Loyaute)
   Luanda [US Embassy]      Angola            8 48 S   13 14 E
   Lubumbashi               Democratic        11 40 S  27 28 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Lusaka [US Embassy]      Zambia            15 25 S  28 17 E
   Luxembourg [US Embassy]  Luxembourg        49 45 N  6 10 E
   Luzon [island]           Philippines       16 00 N  121 00 E
   Luzon Strait             Pacific Ocean     20 30 N  121 00 E
   Lyakhov Islands          Russia            73 45 N  138 00 E


M  Macao                    Macau             22 10 N  113 33 E
   Macedonia                The Former        41 50 N  22 00 E
                            Yugoslav
                            Republic of
                            Macedonia
   Macquarie Island         Australia         30 07 S  147 24 E
   Maddalena, Isola         Italy             41 13 N  09 24 E
   Madeira Islands          Portugal          32 40 N  16 45 W
   Madras [see Chennai]     India             13 04 N  80 16 E
   Madrid [US Embassy]      Spain             40 24 N  3 41 W
   Magellan, Strait of      Atlantic Ocean    54 00 S  71 00 W
   Maghreb                  Algeria, Libya,   30 00 N  5 00 E
                            Mauritania,
                            Morocco, Tunisia
   Mahe Island              Seychelles        4 41 S   55 30 E
   Maiz, Islas del (Corn    Nicaragua         12 15 N  83 00 W
   Islands)
   Majorca Island (Isla de  Spain             39 30 N  3 00 E
   Mallorca)
   Majuro [US Embassy]      Marshall Islands  7 05 N   171 08 E
   Makassar Strait          Pacific Ocean     2 00 S   117 30 E
   Malabo                   Equatorial        3 45 N   8 47 E
                            Guinea
   Malacca, Strait of       Indian Ocean      2 30 N   101 20 E
   Malagasy Republic        Madagascar        20 00 S  47 00 E
   Male                     Maldives          4 10 N   73 31 E
   Mallorca (Majorca)       Spain             39 30 N  3 00 E
   Malpelo, Isla de         Colombia          4 00 N   90 30 W
   Malta Channel            Atlantic Ocean    56 44 N  26 53 E
   Malvinas, Islas          Falkland Islands  51 45 S  59 00 W
                            (Islas Malvinas)
   Mamoutzou                Mayotte           12 47 S  45 14 E
   Managua [US Embassy]     Nicaragua         12 09 N  86 17 W
   Manama [US Embassy]      Bahrain           26 13 N  50 35 E
   Manaus [US Consular      Brazil            3 08 S   60 01 W
   Agency]
   Manchukuo                China             44 00 N  124 00 E
   Manchuria                China             44 00 N  124 00 E
   Manila [US Embassy]      Philippines       14 35 N  121 00 E
   Manipa Strait            Pacific Ocean     3 20 S   127 23 E
   Mannar, Gulf of          Indian Ocean      8 30 N   79 00 E
   Manua Islands            American Samoa    14 13 S  169 35 W
   Maputo [US Embassy]      Mozambique        25 58 S  32 35 E
   Marcus Island (Minami-   Japan             24 16 N  154 00 E
   tori-shima)
   Mariana Islands          Guam, Northern    16 00 N  145 30 E
                            Mariana Islands
   Marion Island            South Africa      46 51 S  37 52 E
   Marmara, Sea of          Atlantic Ocean    40 40 N  28 15 E
   Marquesas Islands (Iles  French Polynesia  9 00 S   139 30 W
   Marquises)
   Marseille [US Consulate  France            43 18 N  5 24 E
   General]
   Martin Vaz, Ilhas        Brazil            20 30 S  28 51 W
   Mas a Tierra (Robinson   Chile             33 38 S  78 52 W
   Crusoe Island)
   Mascarene Islands        Mauritius,        21 00 S  57 00 E
                            Reunion
   Maseru [US Embassy]      Lesotho           29 28 S  27 30 E
   Matamoros [US Consulate] Mexico            25 53 N  97 30 W
   Mata-Utu                 Wallis and        13 57 S  171 56 W
                            Futuna
   Matsu [island]           Taiwan            26 13 N  119 56 E
   Matthew Island           New Caledonia,    22 20 S  171 20 E
                            Vanuatu
   Mazatlan                 Mexico            23 13 N  106 25 W
   Mbabane [US Embassy]     Swaziland         26 18 S  31 06 E
   McDonald Islands         Heard Island and  53 06 S  73 30 E
                            McDonald Islands
   Mecca                    Saudi Arabia      21 27 N  39 49 E
   Medan [US Consulate      Indonesia         3 35 N   98 40 E
   General]
   Mediterranean Sea        Atlantic Ocean    36 00 N  15 00 E
   Melbourne [US Consulate  Australia         37 49 S  144 58 E
   General]
   Melilla                  Spain             35 19 N  2 58 W
   Merida [US Consulate]    Mexico            20 58 N  89 37 W
   Mesopotamia              Iraq              33 00 N  44 00 E
   Messina, Strait of       Atlantic Ocean    38 15 N  15 35 E
   Mexico [US Embassy]      Mexico            19 24 N  99 09 W
   Mexico, Gulf of          Atlantic Ocean    25 00 N  90 00 W
   Milan [US Consulate      Italy             45 28 N  9 12 E
   General]
   Minami-tori-shima        Japan             24 16 N  154 00 E
   (Marcus Island)
   Mindanao [island]        Philippines       8 00 N   125 00 E
   Mindoro [island]         Philippines       12 50 N  121 05 E
   Mindoro Strait           Pacific Ocean     12 20 N  120 40 E
   Minicoy Island           India             8 17 N   73 02 E
   Minsk [US Embassy]       Belarus           53 54 N  27 34 E
   Minorca Island (Isla de  Spain             40 00 N  4 00 E
   Menorca)
   Mitla Pass               Egypt             30 02 N  32 54 E
   Mogadishu                Somalia           2 04 N   45 22 E
   Moldavia [region]        Moldova, Romania  47 00 N  29 00 E
   Moluccas (Spice Islands) Indonesia         2 00 S   28 00 E
   Mombasa                  Kenya             4 03 S   39 40 E
   Mona Passage             Atlantic Ocean    18 30 N  67 45 W
   Monaco                   Monaco            43 44 N  7 25 E
   Monrovia [US Embassy]    Liberia           6 18 N   10 47 W
   Montenegro               Serbia and        42 30 N  19 00 E
                            Montenegro
   Monterrey                Mexico            25 40 N  100 19 W
   Montevideo [US Embassy]  Uruguay           34 53 S  56 11 W
   Montreal [US Consulate   Canada            45 31 N  73 34 W
   General, US Mission to
   the International Civil
   Aviation Organization
   (ICAO)]
   Moravia [region]         Czech Republic    49 30 N  17 00 E
   Moravian Gate            Czech Republic    49 35 N  17 50 E
   Moroni                   Comoros           11 41 S  43 16 E
   Mortlock Islands (Nomoi  Federated States  5 30 N   153 40 E
   Islands)                 of Micronesia
   Moscow [US Embassy]      Russia            55 45 N  37 35 E
   Mount Pinatubo           Philippines       15 08 N  120 21 E
   Mozambique Channel       Indian Ocean      19 00 S  41 00 E
   Mumbai [US Consulate     India             18 58 N  72 50 E
   General]
   Munich [US Consulate     Germany           48 09 N  11 35 E
   General]
   Musandam Peninsula       Oman, United      26 18 N  56 24 E
                            Arab Emirates
   Muscat [US Embassy]      Oman              23 37 N  58 35 E
   Muscat and Oman          Oman              21 00 N  57 00 E
   Myanma, Myanmar          Burma             22 00 N  98 00 E


N  Nagorno-Karabakh         Azerbaijan        40 00 N  46 40 E
   [region]
   Nagoya [US Consulate]    Japan             35 10 N  136 55 E
   Naha [US Consulate       Japan             26 13 N  127 40 E
   General]
   Nairobi [US Embassy]     Kenya             1 17 S   36 49 E
   Nampo-shoto [islands]    Japan             30 00 N  140 00 E
   Naples [US Consulate     Italy             40 50 N  14 15 E
   General]
   Nassau [US Embassy]      The Bahamas       25 05 N  77 21 W
   Natuna Besar Islands     Indonesia         3 30 N   102 30 E
   Naxcivan [region]        Azerbaijan        39 20 N  45 20 E
   N'Djamena [US Embassy]   Chad              12 07 N  15 03 E
   Negev [region]           Israel            30 30 N  34 55 E
   Negros [island]          Philippines       10 00 N  123 00 E
   Netherlands East Indies  Indonesia         5 00 S   120 00 E
   Netherlands Guiana       Suriname          4 00 N   56 00 W
   Nevis [island]           Saint Kitts and   17 09 N  62 35 W
                            Nevis
   New Britain [island]     Papua New Guinea  6 00 S   150 00 E
   New Delhi [US Embassy]   India             28 36 N  77 12 E
   New Guinea               Indonesia, Papua  5 00 S   140 00 E
                            New Guinea
   New Hebrides             Vanuatu           16 00 S  167 00 E
   New Siberian Islands     Russia            75 00 N  142 00 E
   New Territories          Hong Kong         22 24 N  114 10 E
   New York, New York [US   United States     40 43 N  74 01 W
   Mission to the United
   Nations (USUN)]
   Newfoundland [island]    Canada            52 00 N  56 00 W
   Niamey [US Embassy]      Niger             13 31 N  2 07 E
   Nicobar Islands          India             8 00 N   93 30 E
   Nicosia [US Embassy]     Cyprus            35 10 N  33 22 E
   Nightingale Island       Saint Helena      37 25 S  12 30 W
   Nomoi Islands (Mortlock  Federated States  5 30 N   153 40 E
   Islands)                 of Micronesia
   North Atlantic Ocean     Atlantic Ocean    30 00 N  45 00 W
   North Channel            Atlantic Ocean    55 10 N  5 40 W
   North Frisian Islands    Denmark, Germany  54 50 N  8 12 E
   North Island             New Zealand       39 00 S  176 00 E
   North Korea              North Korea       40 00 N  127 00 E
   North Pacific Ocean      Pacific Ocean     30 00 N  165 00 W
   North Sea                Atlantic Ocean    56 00 N  4 00 E
   North Vietnam            Vietnam           23 00 N  106 00 E
   North Yemen (Yemen Arab  Yemen             15 00 N  44 00 E
   Republic)
   Northeast Providence     Atlantic Ocean    25 40 N  77 09 W
   Channel
   Northern Epirus          Albania, Greece   40 00 N  20 30 E
   Northern Grenadines      Saint Vincent     12 45 N  61 15 W
                            and the
                            Grenadines
   Northern Ireland         United Kingdom    54 40 N  6 45 W
   Northern Rhodesia        Zambia            15 00 S  30 00 E
   Northwest Passages       Arctic Ocean      74 40 N  100 00 W
   Norwegian Sea            Atlantic Ocean    66 00 N  6 00 E
   Nouakchott [US Embassy]  Mauritania        18 06 N  15 57 W
   Noumea                   New Caledonia     22 16 S  166 27 E
   Novaya Zemlya [islands]  Russia            74 00 N  57 00 E
   Nubia                    Sudan             20 30 N  33 00 E
   Nuku'alofa               Tonga             21 08 S  175 12 W
   Nuevo Laredo [US         Mexico            27 30 N  99 31 W
   Consulate]
   Nuuk (Godthab)           Greenland         64 11 N  51 44 W
   Nyasaland                Malawi            13 30 S  34 00 E


O  Oahu                     United States     21 30 N  158 00 W
   Ocean Island (Banaba)    Kiribati          0 52 S   169 35 E
   Ocean Island (Kure       United States     28 25 N  178 20 W
   Island)
   Ogaden [region]          Ethiopia,         7 00 N   46 00 E
                            Somalia
   Oil Islands (Chagos      British Indian    6 00 S   71 30 E
   Archipelago)             Ocean Territory
   Okhotsk, Sea of          Pacific Ocean     53 00 N  150 00 E
   Okinawa [island group]   Japan             26 30 N  128 00 E
   Oman, Gulf of            Indian Ocean      24 30 N  58 30 E
   Ombai Strait             Pacific Ocean     8 30 S   125 00 E
   Oran                     Algeria           35 43 N  0 43 W
   Oranjestad               Aruba             12 33 N  70 06 W
   Oresund (The Sound)      Atlantic Ocean    55 50 N  12 40 E
   Orkney Islands           United Kingdom    59 00 N  3 00 W
   Osaka-Kobe [US Consulate Japan             34 40 N  135 30 E
   General]
   Oslo [US Embassy]        Norway            59 55 N  10 45 E
   Osumi Strait (Van Diemen Pacific Ocean     31 00 N  131 00 E
   Strait)
   Otranto, Strait of       Atlantic Ocean    40 00 N  19 00 E
   Ottawa [US Embassy]      Canada            45 20 N  73 58 W
   Ouagadougou [US Embassy] Burkina Faso      12 22 N  1 31 W
   Outer Mongolia           Mongolia          46 00 N  105 00 E


P  Pacific Islands, Trust   Marshall          10 00 N  155 00 E
   Territory of the         Islands,
                            Federated States
                            of Micronesia,
                            Northern Mariana
                            Islands, Palau
   Pagan [island]           Northern Mariana  18 8 N   145 47 E
                            Islands
   Pago Pago                American Samoa    14 16 S  170 42 W
   Palawan [island]         Philippines       9 30 N   118 30 E
   Palermo                  Italy             38 07 N  13 21 E
   Palestine                Israel, West      32 00 N  35 15 E
                            Bank
   Palikir                  Federated States  6 55 N   158 08 E
                            of Micronesia
   Palk Strait              Indian Ocean      10 00 N  79 45 E
   Pamirs [mountains]       China,            38 00 N  73 00 E
                            Tajikistan
   Pampas [region]          Argentina         35 00 N  63 00 W
   Panama [US Embassy]      Panama            8 58 N   79 32 W
   Panama Canal             Panama            9 00 N   79 45 W
   Panama, Gulf of          Pacific Ocean     8 00 N   79 30 W
   Panay [island]           Philippines       11 15 N  122 30 E
   Pantelleria, Isola di    Italy             36 47 N  12 00 E
   Papeete                  French Polynesia  17 32 S  149 34 W
   Paramaribo [US Embassy]  Suriname          5 50 N   55 10 W
   Parece Vela [island]     Japan             20 20 N  136 00 E
   Paris [US Embassy, US    France            48 52 N  2 20 E
   Mission to the
   Organization for
   Economic Cooperation and
   Development (OECD), US
   Observer Mission to the
   UN Educational,
   Scientific, and Cultural
   Organization (UNESCO)]
   Pascua, Isla de (Easter  Chile             27 07 S  109 22 W
   Island)
   Passion, Ile de la       Clipperton        10 17 N  109 13 W
                            Island
   Pashtunistan [region]    Afghanistan,      32 00 N  69 00 E
                            Pakistan
   Peking (see Beijing)     China             39 56 N  116 24 E
   Pelagian Islands (Isole  Italy             35 40 N  12 40 E
   Pelagie)
   Peleliu (Beliliou)       Palau             7 01 N   134 15 E
   [island]
   Pemba Island             Tanzania          7 31 S   39 25 E
   Penang Island            Malaysia          5 23 N   100 15 E
   Pentland Firth           Atlantic Ocean    58 44 N  3 13 W
   Perim [island]           Yemen             12 39 N  43 25 E
   Perouse Strait, La       Pacific Ocean     44 45 N  142 00 E
   Persia                   Iran              32 00 N  53 00 E
   Persian Gulf             Indian Ocean      27 00 N  51 00 E
   Perth [US Consulate      Australia         31 56 S  115 50 E
   General]
   Pescadores [islands]     Taiwan            23 30 N  119 30 E
   Peshawar [US Consulate]  Pakistan          34 01 N  71 33 E
   Peter I Island           Antarctica        68 48 S  90 35 W
   Philip Island            Norfolk Island    29 08 S  167 57 E
   Philippine Sea           Pacific Ocean     20 00 N  134 00 E
   Phnom Penh [US Embassy]  Cambodia          11 33 N  104 55 E
   Phoenix Islands          Kiribati          3 30 S   172 00 W
   Pines, Isle of (Isla de  Cuba              21 40 N  82 50 W
   la Juventud)
   Pleasant Island          Nauru             0 32 S   166 55 E
   Plymouth                 Montserrat        16 44 N  62 14 W
   Ponape (Pohnpei)         Federated States  6 55 N   158 15 E
   [island]                 of Micronesia
   Ponta Delgada [US        Portugal          37 44 N  25 40 W
   Consulate]
   Port-au-Prince [US       Haiti             18 32 N  72 20 W
   Embassy]
   Port Louis [US Embassy]  Mauritius         20 10 S  57 30 E
   Port Moresby [US         Papua New Guinea  9 30 S   147 10 E
   Embassy]
   Porto Alegre [US         Brazil            30 04 S  51 11 W
   Consulate]
   Port-of-Spain [US        Trinidad and      10 39 N  61 31 W
   Embassy]                 Tobago
   Porto-Novo               Benin             6 29 N   2 37 E
   Portuguese East Africa   Mozambique        18 15 S  35 00 E
   Portuguese Guinea        Guinea-Bissau     12 00 N  15 00 W
   Portuguese Timor (East   Indonesia         9 00 S   126 00 E
   Timor)
   Port-Vila                Vanuatu           17 44 S  168 19 E
   Poznan                   Poland            52 25 N  16 55 E
   Prague [US Embassy]      Czech Republic    40 55 N  21 00 E
   Praia [US Embassy]       Cape Verde        14 55 N  23 31 W
   Pretoria [US Embassy]    South Africa      25 45 S  28 10 E
   Prevlaka peninsula       Croatia           42 24 N  18 31 E
   Pribilof Islands         United States     57 00 N  170 00 W
   Prince Edward Island     Canada            46 20 N  63 20 W
   Prince Edward Islands    South Africa      46 35 S  38 00 E
   Prince Patrick Island    Canada            76 30 N  119 00 W
   Principe [island]        Sao Tome and      1 38 N   7 25 E
                            Principe
   Prussia [region]         Germany, Poland,  53 00 N  14 00 E
                            Russia
   Pukapuka Atoll           Cook Islands      10 53 S  165 49 W
   Pusan [US Consulate]     South Korea       35 06 N  129 03 E
   P'yongyang               North Korea       39 01 N  125 45 E


Q  Quebec [US Consulate     Canada            52 00 N  72 00 W
   General]
   Queen Charlotte Islands  Canada            53 00 N  132 00 W
   Queen Elizabeth Islands  Canada            78 00 N  95 00 W
   Queen Maud Land [claimed Antarctica        73 30 S  12 00 E
   by Norway]
   Quemoy [island]          Taiwan            24 27 N  118 23 E
   Quito [US Embassy]       Ecuador           0 13 S   78 30 W


R  Rabat [US Embassy]       Morocco           34 02 N  6 51 W
   Ralik Chain              Marshall Islands  8 00 N   167 00 E
   Rangoon [US Embassy]     Burma             16 47 N  96 10 E
   Ratak Chain              Marshall Islands  9 00 N   171 00 E
   Recife [US Consulate]    Brazil            8 03 S   34 54 W
   Redonda [island]         Antigua and       16 55 N  62 19 W
                            Barbuda
   Red Sea                  Indian Ocean      20 00 N  38 00 E
   Revillagigedo Island     United States     55 35 N  131 06 W
   Revillagigedo Islands    Mexico            19 00 N  112 45 W
   Reykjavik [US Embassy]   Iceland           19 00 N  111 30 W
   Rhodes [island]          Greece            36 10 N  28 00 E
   Rhodesia                 Zimbabwe          20 00 S  30 00 E
   Rhodesia, Northern       Zambia            15 00 S  30 00 E
   Rhodesia, Southern       Zimbabwe          20 00 S  30 00 E
   Riga [US Embassy]        Latvia            56 57 N  24 06 E
   Rio de Janeiro [US       Brazil            22 54 S  43 14 W
   Consulate General]
   Rio de Oro               Western Sahara    23 45 N  15 45 W
   Rio Muni                 Equatorial        1 30 N   10 00 E
                            Guinea
   Riyadh [US Embassy]      Saudi Arabia      24 38 N  46 43 E
   Road Town                British Virgin    18 27 N  64 37 W
                            Islands
   Robinson Crusoe Island   Chile             33 38 S  78 52 W
   (Mas a Tierra)
   Rocas, Atol das          Brazil            3 51 S   33 49 W
   Rockall [island]         United Kingdom    57 35 N  13 48 W
   Rodrigues [island]       Mauritius         19 42 S  63 25 E
   Rome [US Embassy, US     Italy             41 54 N  12 29 E
   Mission to the UN
   Agencies for Food and
   Agriculture (FODAG)]
   Roncador Cay             Colombia          13 32 N  80 03 W
   Roosevelt Island         Antarctica        79 30 S  162 00 W
   Roseau                   Dominica          15 18 N  61 24 W
   Ross Dependency [claimed Antarctica        80 00 S  180 00 E
   by New Zealand]
   Ross Island              Antarctica        81 30 S  175 00 W
   Ross Sea                 Antarctica        76 00 S  175 00 W
   Rota [island]            Northern Mariana  14 10 N  145 12 E
                            Islands
   Rotuma [island]          Fiji              12 30 S  177 30 E
   Ryukyu Islands           Japan             26 30 N  128 00 E


S  Saba [island]            Netherlands       17 38 N  63 10 W
                            Antilles
   Sabah [state]            Malaysia          5 20 N   117 10 E
   Sable Island             Canada            43 55 N  59 50 W
   Safety Islands (Iles du  French Guiana     5 20 N   52 37 W
   Salut)
   Sahel                    Burkina Faso,     15 00 N  8 00 W
                            Cape Verde,
                            Chad, The
                            Gambia, Guinea-
                            Bissau, Mali,
                            Mauritania,
                            Niger, Senegal
   Saigon (see Ho Chi Minh  Vietnam           10 45 N  106 40 E
   City)
   Saint Brandon (Cargados  Mauritius         16 25 S  59 38 E
   Carajos Shoals)
   Saint Christopher        Saint Kitts and   17 20 N  62 45 W
   [island]                 Nevis
   Saint Christopher and    Saint Kitts and   17 20 N  62 45 W
   Nevis                    Nevis
   Saint-Denis              Reunion           20 52 S  55 28 E
   Saint George's [US       Grenada           12 03 N  61 45 W
   Embassy]
   Saint George's Channel   Atlantic Ocean    52 00 N  6 00 W
   Saint Helier             Jersey            49 12 N  2 37 W
   Saint John's             Antigua and       17 06 N  61 51 W
                            Barbuda
   Saint Lawrence, Gulf of  Atlantic Ocean    48 00 N  62 00 W
   Saint Lawrence Island    United States     49 30 N  67 00 W
   Saint Lawrence Seaway    Atlantic Ocean    49 15 N  67 00 W
   Saint Martin [island]    Guadeloupe        18 04 N  63 04 W
   Saint Martin (Sint       Netherlands       18 04 N  63 04 W
   Maarten)                 Antilles
   Saint Paul Island        Canada            47 12 N  60 09 W
   Saint Paul Island        United States     57 11 N  170 16 W
   Saint Paul Island (Ile   French Southern   38 43 S  77 29 E
   Saint-Paul)              and Antarctic
                            Lands
   Saint Peter and Saint    Brazil            0 23 N   29 23 W
   Paul Rocks (Penedos de
   Sao Pedro e Sao Paulo)
   Saint Peter Port         Guernsey          49 27 N  2 32 W
   Saint Petersburg [US     Russia            59 55 N  30 15 E
   Consulate General]
   Saint-Pierre             Saint Pierre and  46 46 N  56 11 W
                            Miquelon
   Saint Thomas [island]    Virgin Islands    18 21 N  64 55 W
   Saint Vincent Passage    Atlantic Ocean    13 30 N  61 00 W
   Saipan [island]          Northern Mariana  15 12 N  145 45 E
                            Islands
   Sakishima Islands        Japan             24 30 N  124 00 E
   Sakhalin Island (Ostrov  Russia            51 00 N  143 00 E
   Sakhalin)
   Sala y Gomez, Isla       Chile             26 28 S  105 00 W
   Salisbury (see Harare)   Zimbabwe          17 50 S  105 00 W
   Salvador de Bahia [US    Brazil            12 59 S  38 31 W
   Consular Agency]
   Salzburg                 Austria           47 48 N  13 02 E
   Samar [island]           Philippines       12 00 N  125 00 E
   Samaria [region]         West Bank         32 15 N  35 10 E
   Samoa Islands            American Samoa,   14 00 S  171 00 W
                            Samoa
   Samos [island]           Greece            37 48 N  26 44 E
   Sanaa [US Embassy]       Yemen             15 21 N  44 12 E
   San Ambrosio, Isla       Chile             26 21 S  79 52 W
   San Andres y             Colombia          13 00 N  81 30 W
   Providencia,
   Archipielago
   San Bernardino Strait    Pacific Ocean     12 32 N  124 10 E
   San Felix, Isla          Chile             26 17 S  80 05 W
   San Jose [US Embassy]    Costa Rica        9 56 N   84 05 W
   San Juan                 Puerto Rico       18 28 N  66 07 W
   San Marino               San Marino        43 56 N  12 25 E
   San Salvador [US         El Salvador       13 42 N  89 12 W
   Embassy]
   Santa Cruz               Bolivia           17 48 S  63 10 W
   Santa Cruz Islands       Solomon Islands   11 00 S  166 15 E
   Santiago [US Embassy]    Chile             33 27 S  70 40 W
   Santo Antao [island]     Cape Verde        17 05 N  25 10 W
   Santo Domingo [US        Dominican         18 28 N  69 54 W
   Embassy]                 Republic
   Sao Paulo [US Consulate  Brazil            23 32 S  46 37 W
   General]
   Sao Pedro e Sao Paulo,   Brazil            0 23 N   29 23 W
   Penedos de [rocks]
   Sao Tiago [island]       Cape Verde        15 05 N  23 40 W
   Sao Tome [island]        Sao Tome and      0 12 N   6 39 E
                            Principe
   Sapporo [US Consulate    Japan             43 03 N  141 21 E
   General]
   Sapudi Strait            Pacific Ocean     7 05 S   114 10 E
   Sarajevo [US Embassy]    Bosnia and        43 52 N  18 25 E
                            Herzegovina
   Sarawak [state]          Malaysia          2 30 N   113 30 E
   Sardinia [island]        Italy             40 00 N  9 00 E
   Sargasso Sea             Atlantic Ocean    30 00 N  55 00 W
   Sark [island]            Guernsey          49 26 N  2 21 W
   Saxony [region]          Germany           51 00 N  13 00 E
   Schleswig-Holstein       Germany           54 31 N  9 33 E
   [region]
   Scopus, Mount            Israel, West      31 48 N  35 14 E
                            Bank
   Scotia Sea               Atlantic Ocean    56 00 S  40 00 W
   Scotland [region]        United Kingdom    57 00 N  4 00 W
   Scott Island             Antarctica        67 24 S  179 55 W
   Senyavin Islands         Federated States  6 55 N   158 00 E
                            of Micronesia
   Seoul [US Embassy]       South Korea       37 34 N  127 00 E
   Serbia                   Serbia and        43 00 N  21 00 E
                            Montenegro
   Serrana Bank             Colombia          14 25 N  80 16 W
   Serranilla Bank          Colombia          15 51 N  79 46 W
   Settlement, The          Christmas Island  18 44 N  64 19 W
   Severnaya Zemlya         Russia            79 30 N  98 00 E
   (Northland) [island
   group]
   Shaba [region]           Democratic        8 00 S   27 00 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Shag Island              Heard Island and  53 00 S  72 30 E
                            McDonald Islands
   Shag Rocks               South Georgia     53 33 S  42 02 W
                            and the South
                            Sandwich Islands
   Shanghai [US Consulate   China             31 14 N  121 28 E
   General]
   Shenyang [US Consulate   China             41 48 N  123 27 E
   General]
   Shetland Islands         United Kingdom    60 30 N  1 30 W
   Shikoku [island]         Japan             33 45 N  133 30 E
   Shikotan [island]        Russia [de        43 47 N  146 45 E
                            facto]
   Siam                     Thailand          15 00 N  100 00 E
   Siberia [region]         Russia            60 00 N  100 00 E
   Sibutu Passage           Pacific Ocean     4 50 N   119 35 E
   Sicily [island]          Italy             37 30 N  14 00 E
   Sicily, Strait of        Atlantic Ocean    37 20 N  11 20 E
   Sidra, Gulf of           Atlantic Ocean    31 30 N  18 00 E
   Sikkim [state]           India             27 50 N  88 30 E
   Sinai Peninsula          Egypt             29 30 N  34 00 E
   Singapore [US Embassy]   Singapore         1 17 N   103 51 E
   Singapore Strait         Pacific Ocean     1 15 N   104 00 E
   Sinkiang (Xinjiang)      China             42 00 N  86 00 E
   Sint Eustatius [island]  Netherlands       17 29 N  62 58 W
                            Antilles
   Sint Maarten [island]    Netherlands       18 04 N  63 04 W
                            Antilles
   Skagerrak [strait]       Atlantic Ocean    57 45 N  9 00 E
   Skopje [US Embassy]      The Former        41 59 N  21 26 E
                            Yugoslav
                            Republic of
                            Macedonia
   Society Islands (Iles de French Polynesia  17 00 S  150 00 W
   la Societe)
   Socotra [island]         Yemen             12 30 N  54 00 E
   Sofia [US Embassy]       Bulgaria          42 41 N  23 19 E
   Solomon Islands,         Papua New Guinea  6 00 S   155 00 E
   northern
   Solomon Islands,         Solomon Islands   8 00 S   159 00 E
   southern
   Solomon Sea              Pacific Ocean     8 00 S   153 00 E
   Songkhla                 Thailand          7 12 N   100 36 E
   Sound, The (Oresund)     Atlantic Ocean    55 50 N  12 40 E
   South Atlantic Ocean     Atlantic Ocean    30 00 S  15 00 W
   South China Sea          Pacific Ocean     10 00 N  113 00 E
   South Georgia [island]   South Georgia     54 15 S  36 45 W
                            and the South
                            Sandwich Islands
   South Island             New Zealand       43 00 S  171 00 E
   South Korea              South Korea       37 00 N  127 30 E
   South Orkney Islands     Antarctica        61 00 S  45 00 W
   South Ossetia [region]   Georgia           42 20 N  44 00 E
   South Pacific Ocean      Pacific Ocean     30 00 S  130 00 W
   South Sandwich Islands   South Georgia     57 45 S  26 30 W
                            and the South
                            Sandwich Islands
   South Shetland Islands   Antarctica        62 00 S  59 00 W
   South Tyrol [region]     Italy             46 30 N  10 30 E
   South Vietnam            Vietnam           12 00 N  108 00 E
   South Yemen (People's    Yemen             14 00 N  48 00 E
   Democratic Republic of
   Yemen)
   South-West Africa        Namibia           22 00 S  17 00 E
   Southern Grenadines      Grenada           12 20 N  61 30 W
   Southern Rhodesia        Zimbabwe          20 00 S  30 00 E
   Soviet Union             Armenia,
                            Azerbaijan,
                            Belarus,
                            Estonia,
                            Georgia,
                            Kazakhstan,
                            Kyrgyzstan,
                            Latvia,
                            Lithuania,
                            Moldova, Russia,
                            Tajikistan,
                            Turkmenistan,
                            Ukraine,
                            Uzbekistan
   Spanish Guinea           Equatorial        2 00 N   10 00 E
                            Guinea
   Spanish Morocco          Morocco           32 00 N  7 00 W
   Spanish North Africa     Spain (Ceuta,     35 15 N  4 00 W
                            Islas
                            Chafarinas,
                            Melilla, Penon
                            de Alhucemas,
                            Penon de Velez
                            de la Gomera)
   Spanish Sahara           Western Sahara    24 30 N  13 00 W
   Spice Islands (Moluccas) Indonesia         2 00 S   28 00 E
   Spitsbergen [island]     Svalbard          78 00 N  20 00 E
   Stanley                  Falkland Islands  51 42 S  57 41 W
                            (Islas Malvinas)
   Stockholm [US Embassy]   Sweden            59 20 N  18 03 E
   Strasbourg [US Consulate France            48 35 N  7 45 E
   General]
   Stuttgart                Germany           48 46 N  9 11 E
   Sucre                    Bolivia           19 02 S  65 17 W
   Suez Canal               Egypt             29 55 N  32 33 E
   Suez, Gulf of            Indian Ocean      28 10 N  33 27 E
   Sulu Archipelago         Philippines       6 00 N   121 00 E
   Sulu Sea                 Pacific Ocean     8 00 N   120 00 E
   Sumatra [island]         Indonesia         0 00 N   102 00 E
   Sumba [island]           Indonesia         10 00 S  120 00 E
   Sunda Islands (Soenda    Indonesia,        2 00 S   110 00 E
   Isles)                   Malaysia
   Sunda Strait             Indian Ocean      6 00 S   105 45 E
   Surabaya [US Consulate   Indonesia         7 15 S   112 45 E
   General]
   Surigao Strait           Pacific Ocean     10 15 N  125 23 E
   Surinam                  Suriname          4 00 N   56 00 W
   Suva [US Embassy]        Fiji              18 08 S  178 25 E
   Sverdlovsk (see          Russia            56 50 N  60 39 E
   Yekaterinburg)
   Swains Island            American Samoa    11 3 S   171 15 W
   Swan Islands             Honduras          17 25 S  83 56 W
   Sydney [US Consulate     Australia         33 52 S  151 13 E
   General]


T  Tahiti [island]          French Polynesia  17 37 S  149 27 W
   Taipei                   Taiwan            25 03 N  121 30 E
   Taiwan Strait            Pacific Ocean     24 00 N  119 00 E
   Tallinn [US Embassy]     Estonia           59 25 N  24 45 E
   Tanganyika               Tanzania          6 00 S   35 00 E
   Tangier                  Morocco           35 48 N  5 45 W
   Tarawa [island]          Kiribati          1 25 N   173 00 E
   Tatar Strait             Pacific Ocean     50 00 N  141 00 E
   Tashkent [US Embassy]    Uzbekistan        41 20 N  69 18 E
   Tasmania [island]        Australia         43 00 S  147 00 E
   Tasman Sea               Pacific Ocean     4 30 S   168 00 E
   Taymyr Peninsula         Russia            76 00 N  104 00 E
   (Poluostrov Taymyr)
   T'bilisi [US Embassy]    Georgia           41 43 N  44 49 E
   Tegucigalpa [US Embassy] Honduras          14 06 N  87 13 W
   Tehran [US post not      Iran              35 40 N  51 26 E
   maintained;
   representation by Swiss
   Embassy]
   Tel Aviv [US Embassy]    Israel            32 05 N  34 48 E
   Terre Adelie (Adelie     Antarctica        66 30 S  139 00 E
   Land) [claimed by
   France]
   Thailand, Gulf of        Pacific Ocean     10 00 N  101 00 E
   Thessaloniki [US         Greece            40 38 N  22 56 E
   Consulate General]
   Thimphu                  Bhutan            27 28 N  89 39 E
   Thuringia [region]       Germany           51 00 N  11 00 E
   Thurston Island          Antarctica        72 20 S  99 00 W
   Tiberias, Lake           Israel            32 48 N  35 35 E
   Tibet (Xizang)           China             32 00 N  90 00 E
   Tibilisi (see T'bilisi)  Georgia           41 43 N  44 49 E
   Tien Shan [mountains]    China,            42 00 N  80 00 E
                            Kyrgyzstan
   Tierra del Fuego         Argentina, Chile  54 00 S  69 00 W
   Tijuana [US Consulate    Mexico            32 32 N  117 01 W
   General]
   Timor [island]           Indonesia         9 00 S   125 00 E
   Timor Sea                Pacific Ocean     11 00 S  128 00 E
   Tinian [island]          Northern Mariana  15 00 N  145 38 E
                            Islands
   Tiran, Strait of         Indian Ocean      28 00 N  34 27 E
   Tirane [US Embassy]      Albania           41 20 N  19 50 E
   Tirol [region]           Austria, Italy    47 00 N  11 00 E
   Tobago [island]          Trinidad and      11 15 N  60 40 W
                            Tobago
   Tokyo [US Embassy]       Japan             35 42 N  139 46 E
   Tonkin, Gulf of          Pacific Ocean     20 00 N  108 00 E
   Toronto [US Consulate    Canada            43 39 N  79 23 W
   General]
   Torres Strait            Pacific Ocean     10 25 S  142 10 E
   Torshavn                 Faroe Islands     62 01 N  6 46 W
   Toshkent (see Tashkent)  Uzbekistan        41 20 N  69 18 E
   Transjordan              Jordan            31 00 N  36 00 E
   Transkei                 South Africa      32 15 S  28 15 E
   Transylvania [region]    Romania           46 30 N  24 00 E
   Trindade, Ilha de        Brazil            20 31 S  29 20 W
   Tripoli                  Lebanon           34 26 N  35 51 E
   Tripoli [US post not     Libya             32 54 N  13 11 E
   maintained;
   representation by
   Belgian Embassy]
   Tristan da Cunha Group   Saint Helena      37 04 S  12 19 W
   Trobriand Islands        Papua New Guinea  8 38 S   151 04 E
   Trucial Coast            United Arab       24 00 N  54 00 E
                            Emirates
   Trucial Oman             United Arab       24 00 N  54 00 E
                            Emirates
   Trucial States           United Arab       24 00 N  54 00 E
                            Emirates
   Truk Islands             Federated States  7 25 N   151 47 E
                            of Micronesia
   Tsugaru Strait           Pacific Ocean     41 35 N  141 00 E
   Tuamotu Islands (Iles    French Polynesia  19 00 S  142 00 W
   Tuamotu)
   Tubuai Islands (Iles     French Polynesia  23 00 S  150 00 W
   Tubuai)
   Tunb al Kubra [island]   Iran              26 14 N  55 19 E
   Tunb as Sughra [island]  Iran              26 14 N  55 09 E
   Tunis [US Embassy]       Tunisia           36 48 N  10 11 E
   Turin                    Italy             45 04 N  7 40 E
   Turkish Straits          Atlantic Ocean    40 40 N  28 00 E
   Turkmeniya               Turkmenistan      40 00 N  60 00 E
   Turks Island Passage     Atlantic Ocean    21 40 N  71 00 W
   Tuscany [region]         Italy             43 25 N  11 00 E
   Tutuila [island]         American Samoa    14 18 S  170 42 W
   Tyrol, South [region]    Italy             46 30 N  10 30 E
   Tyrrhenian Sea           Atlantic Ocean    40 00 N  12 00 E


U  Udorn (Udon Thani) [US   Thailand          17 26 N  102 46 E
   Consulate]
   Ulaanbaatar [US Embassy] Mongolia          47 55 N  106 53 E
   Ullung-do [island]       South Korea       37 29 N  130 52 E
   Unimak Pass [strait]     Pacific Ocean     54 20 N  164 50 W
   Union of Soviet          Armenia,
   Socialist Republics      Azerbaijan,
   (USSR)                   Belarus,
                            Estonia,
                            Georgia,
                            Kazakhstan,
                            Kyrgyzstan,
                            Latvia,
                            Lithuania,
                            Moldova, Russia,
                            Tajikistan,
                            Turkmenistan,
                            Ukraine,
                            Uzbekistan
   United Arab Republic     Egypt, Syria
   (UAR)
   Upper Volta              Burkina Faso      13 00 N  2 00 W
   Ural Mountains           Kazakhstan,       60 00 N  60 00 E
                            Russia
   Ussuri River             China, Russia     48 28 N  135 02 E


V  Vaduz                    Liechtenstein     47 09 N  9 31 E
   Vakhan (Wakhan Corridor) Afghanistan       37 00 N  73 00 E
   Valletta [US Embassy]    Malta             35 54 N  14 31 E
   Valley, The              Anguilla          18 13 N  63 04 W
   Vancouver [US Consulate  Canada            49 16 N  123 07 W
   General]
   Vancouver Island         Canada            49 45 N  126 00 W
   Van Diemen Strait (Osumi Pacific Ocean     31 00 N  131 00 E
   Strait)
   Vatican City [US         Holy See          41 54 N  12 27 E
   Embassy]
   Velez de la Gomera,      Spain             35 11 N  4 18 W
   Penon de
   Venda                    South Africa      23 00 S  31 00 E
   Verde Island Passage     Pacific Ocean     13 34 N  120 51 E
   Victoria                 Hong Kong         22 17 N  114 09 E
   Victoria                 Seychelles        4 38 S   55 27 E
   Vienna [US Embassy, US   Austria           48 12 N  16 22 E
   Mission to International
   Organizations in Vienna
   (UNVIE)]
   Vientiane [US Embassy]   Laos              17 58 N  102 36 E
   Vilnius [US Embassy]     Lithuania         54 41 N  25 19 E
   Viti Levu [island]       Fiji              18 00 S  178 00 E
   Vladivostok [US          Russia            43 10 N  131 56 E
   Consulate General]
   Volcano Islands          Japan             25 00 N  141 00 E
   Vostok Island            Kiribati          10 06 S  152 23 W
   Vrangelya, Ostrov        Russia            71 14 N  179 36 W
   (Wrangel Island)


W  Wake Island              Wake Atoll        19 17 N  166 36 E
   Wakhan Corridor (see     Afghanistan       37 00 N  73 00 E
   Vakhan)
   Wales [region]           United Kingdom    52 30 N  3 30 W
   Wallis Islands           Wallis and        13 17 S  176 10 W
                            Futuna
   Walvis Bay               Namibia           22 59 S  14 31 E
   Warsaw [US Embassy]      Poland            52 15 N  21 00 E
   Washington, DC [US       United States     38 53 N  77 02 W
   Mission to the
   Organization of American
   States (OAS)]
   Weddell Sea              Atlantic Ocean    72 00 S  45 00 W
   Wellington [US Embassy]  New Zealand       41 28 S  174 51 E
   West Frisian Islands     Netherlands       53 26 N  5 30 E
   West Germany (Federal    Germany           53 22 N  5 20 E
   Republic of Germany)
   West Island              Cocos (Keeling)   12 10 S  96 55 E
                            Islands
   West Korea Strait        Pacific Ocean     34 40 N  129 00 E
   (Western Channel)
   West Pakistan            Pakistan          30 00 N  70 00 E
   West Siberian Plain      Russia            60 00 N  75 00 E
   Western Channel (West    Pacific Ocean     34 40 N  129 00 E
   Korea Strait)
   Western Samoa            Samoa             13 35 S  172 20 W
   Wetar Strait             Pacific Ocean     8 20 S   126 30 E
   White Sea                Arctic Ocean      65 30 N  38 00 E
   Willemstad               Netherlands       12 06 N  68 56 W
                            Antilles
   Windhoek [US Embassy]    Namibia           22 34 S  17 06 E
   Windward Passage         Atlantic Ocean    20 00 N  73 50 W
   Wrangel Island (Ostrov   Russia            71 14 N  179 36 W
   Vrangelya)


Y  Yalu River               China, North      39 55 N  124 20 E
                            Korea
   Yamoussoukro             Cote d'Ivoire     6 49 N   5 17 W
   Yangon (see Rangoon)     Burma             16 47 N  96 10 E
   Yaounde [US Embassy]     Cameroon          3 52 N   11 31 E
   Yap Islands              Federated States  9 30 N   138 00 E
                            of Micronesia
   Yaren                    Nauru             0 32 S   166 55 E
   Yekaterinburg            Russia            56 50 N  60 39 E
   (Sverdlovsk) [US
   Consulate General]
   Yellow Sea               Pacific Ocean     36 00 N  123 00 E
   Yemen (Aden) [People's   Yemen             14 00 N  46 00 E
   Democratic Republic of
   Yemen]
   Yemen Arab Republic      Yemen             15 00 N  44 00 E
   Yemen, North [Yemen Arab Yemen             15 00 N  44 00 E
   Republic]
   Yemen (Sanaa) [Yemen     Yemen             15 00 N  44 00 E
   Arab Republic]
   Yemen, People's          Yemen             14 00 N  46 00 E
   Democratic Republic of
   Yemen, South [People's   Yemen             14 00 N  46 00 E
   Democratic Republic of
   Yemen]
   Yerevan [US Embassy]     Armenia           40 11 N  44 30 E
   Youth, Isle of (Isla de  Cuba              21 40 N  82 50 W
   la Juventud)
   Yucatan Peninsula        Mexico            19 30 N  89 00 W
   Yucatan Channel          Atlantic Ocean    21 45 N  85 45 W
   Yugoslavia               Bosnia and
                            Herzegovina,
                            Croatia, The
                            Former Yugoslav
                            Republic of
                            Macedonia,
                            Serbia and
                            Montenegro,
                            Slovenia


Z  Zagreb [US Embassy]      Croatia           45 48 N  15 58 E
   Zaire                    Democratic        15 00 S  30 00 E
                            Republic of the
                            Congo
   Zanzibar [island]        Tanzania          6 10 S   39 11 E
   Zion, Mount              Israel, Jordan    31 46 N  35 14 E
   Zurich                   Switzerland       47 23 N  8 32 E



=====================================================================








End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The 1999 CIA Factbook, by 
United States.  Central Intelligence Agency.

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE 1999 CIA FACTBOOK ***

***** This file should be named 27676.txt or 27676.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/2/7/6/7/27676/

Produced by Al Haines

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, is critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
