The Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph
[March 1897], by Various

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph [March 1897]
       A Monthly Serial designed to Promote Knowledge of Bird-Life

Author: Various

Release Date: September 26, 2009 [EBook #30103]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS ILLUSTRATED [MARCH 1897] ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and Anne Storer,
some images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net






Transcriber's Note: Title added.


       *       *       *       *       *




              BIRDS ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY

              Vol. One       MARCH, 1897       No. 3


       *       *       *       *       *




    FROM: THE PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' ASSOCIATION.

                       _STATE OF NEW YORK_
               _Department of Public Instruction_
                    _SUPERINTENDENT'S OFFICE_

                                _Albany_ December 26, 1896.

  [Illustration: (seal)]
  _Stenographic Letter_
  Dictated by __________


  W. E. Watt, President &c.,
                   Fisher Building,
                       277 Dearborn St., Chicago, Ill.

  My dear Sir:

  Please accept my thanks for a copy of the first publication of "Birds."
  Please enter my name as a regular subscriber. It is one of the most
  beautiful and interesting publications yet attempted in this direction.
  It has other attractions in addition to its beauty, and it must win its
  way to popular favor.

  Wishing the handsome little magazine abundant prosperity,
  I remain

                   Yours very respectfully,
                   [signature]
                                State Superintendent.


       *       *       *       *       *




 _"The KING can do no wrong"_

 [Illustration]
                      MONARCH
                       BICYCLES
                       ARE
                       FAULTLESS

                      MONARCH
                   CYCLE MF'G CO.
                 CHICAGO, NEW YORK,
                      LONDON.


      Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to advertisers.




                 +----------------------------+
                 |  #A. REED & SONS PIANOS.#  |
                 +----------------------------+

 Manufactured under patents granted by the governments of the
      United States, England, Germany, France and Canada.

                     #A New and Scientific
                      Method of Piano
                      Construction#

          FREE SOUNDING BOARD, VIBRATION BAR, STRINGS
           RESTING ON ALUMINUM WHEELS, ANTI-MOISTURE
                      PIN BLOCK, LATERAL
                            PEDALS

              #Grand Diploma and Medal of Honor#
         Awarded at Columbian World's Exposition, 1893

  Only American Piano receiving mention in the Official Report
                   to the German Government

                       #A. REED & SONS#
                No. 5 Adams Street ... CHICAGO

  Illustrated Catalogues ...
  containing full explanation Mailed Free.

      Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to advertisers.




   #Every Teacher#

       finds daily in her work
       some new and perplexing
       problem to solve.

   With

   The Teacher's
        Practical Library

     at hand for consultation the
     answer may always be found.

 It will cost you nothing

     to have this library placed
     upon your table for inspection.

     Send postal-card for particulars,
     mentioning this paper.

                       #AGENTS WANTED#

 #D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers#
      NEW YORK--CHICAGO.
 CHICAGO OFFICE--243 Wabash Ave.




            #PREPARE FOR A GOOD POSITION#

 #By studying Architecture, Engineering, Electricity, Drafting,
 Mathematics, Shorthand, Typewriting, English, Penmanship, Bookkeeping,
 Business, Telegraphy, Plumbing.# Best teachers. Thorough individual
 instruction. Rates lower than any other school. Instruction also by mail
 in any desired study. Steam engineering a specialty. Call or address,
                          INSTITUTE OF TECHNOLOGY,
                                 151 Throop St., Chicago.




             What would #George Washington#
                        think of
                       Mark Hanna?

                     [Illustration]

               If you want to know, read
                  #"SPIRITS OF '76,"#

               By FREDERICK UPHAM ADAMS,
                   in last number of

                    #New Occasions#

       A magazine of Reform; 96 pages; $1.00
       a year; 10 cents a copy. No free samples,
       but to any one sending us 6 2-cent
       stamps we will mail a sample copy with
       several reform books; over 300 pages
       in all. Agents wanted.

        Charles H. Kerr & Company, Publishers,
               56 Fifth Ave., Chicago.




 Buy Only the Best Presents for Children.
      THE FINEST BLACKBOARD MADE.

 IMPROVED
           [Illustration]

 Indispensable as an element for the general
 education of the children. This is not a toy,
 but an Educator for the home. Contains Sixteen
 Lessons on heavy cardboard, Writing, Drawing,
 Marking-letters, Music, Animal Forms, etc.
 Frame made of oak, 4 feet high and 2 feet wide.
 The Board is reversible and can be used on both
 sides. Has a desk attachment for writing. Weighs
 10 pounds, packed for shipment.

 #Price $3.50#                   Agents Wanted.
                            Send for Agents Prices.

 THE VAN-BENSON COMPANY,
       84 Adams Street, CHICAGO, U.S.A.




               The "OLD Reliable" House of
                       #"ANDREWS"#
                        FURNISHES
                   Everything
                           for Schools

      Rugby School Desks, Teachers' Desks and Chairs,
      Blackboards, Erasers, Dustless Crayons, Globes,
      Maps, Charts, Apparatus, etc., etc.

      #The Jones Model of the Earth# shows the
      reliefs of the land surface and ocean bed, 20
      inches diameter. Used by the Royal Geographical
      Society, Cornell University. Normal, and other
      schools of various forms and grades.

      #The Deep Sea Globe.# This new 12 in. globe
      shows all that is seen on the common globe, but
      in addition the varying depths of the ocean bed,
      by color shading, also 500 soundings by figures.

                 #The A. H. Andrews Co.#
                        CHICAGO.

        (Next Auditorium)         300 WABASH AVE.

          Also Manufactures Office, Church and
                    Bank Furniture.


      Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.


       *       *       *       *       *




LITTLE BOY BLUE.


Boys and girls, don't you think that is a pretty name? I came from the
warm south, where I went last winter, to tell you that Springtime is
nearly here.

When I sing, the buds and flowers and grass all begin to whisper to one
another, "Springtime is coming for we heard the Bluebird say so," and
then they peep out to see the warm sunshine. I perch beside them and
tell them of my long journey from the south and how I knew just when
to tell them to come out of their warm winter cradles. I am of the same
blue color as the violet that shows her pretty face when I sing, "Summer
is coming, and Springtime is here."

I do not like the cities for they are black and noisy and full of those
troublesome birds called English Sparrows. I take my pretty mate and
out in the beautiful country we find a home. We build a nest of twigs,
grass and hair, in a box that the farmer puts up for us near his barn.

Sometimes we build in a hole in some old tree and soon there are tiny
eggs in the nest. I sing to my mate and to the good people who own
the barn. I heard the farmer say one day, "Isn't it nice to hear the
Bluebird sing? He must be very happy." And I am, too, for by this time
there are four or five little ones in the nest.

Little Bluebirds are like little boys--they are always hungry. We work
hard to find enough for them to eat. We feed them nice fat worms and
bugs, and when their little wings are strong enough, we teach them how
to fly. Soon they are large enough to hunt their own food, and can take
care of themselves.

The summer passes, and when we feel the breath of winter we go south
again, for we do not like the cold.

       *       *       *

THE BLUE BIRD.

    I know the song that the Bluebird is singing
    Out in the apple tree, where he is swinging.
    Brave little fellow! the skies may be dreary,
    Nothing cares he while his heart is so cheery.
    Hark! how the music leaps out from his throat,
    Hark! was there ever so merry a note?

              Listen a while, and you'll hear what he's saying,
              Up in the apple tree swinging and swaying.
              "Dear little blossoms down under the snow,
              You must be weary of winter, I know;
              Hark! while I sing you a message of cheer,
              Summer is coming, and springtime is here!"

    "Dear little snow-drop! I pray you arise;
    Bright yellow crocus! come open your eyes;
    Sweet little violets, hid from the cold,
    Put on our mantles of purple and gold;
    Daffodils! daffodils! say, do you hear,
    Summer is coming! and springtime is here!"

[Illustration: BLUE BIRD.]




THE BLUE BIRD.


    Winged lute that we call a blue bird,
        You blend in a silver strain
    The sound of the laughing waters,
        The patter of spring's sweet rain,
    The voice of the wind, the sunshine,
        And fragrance of blossoming things,
    Ah! you are a poem of April
        That God endowed with wings.      E. E. R.

       *       *       *

Like a bit of sky this little harbinger of spring appears, as we see
him and his mate househunting in early March. Oftentimes he makes his
appearance as early as the middle of February, when his attractive note
is heard long before he himself is seen. He is one of the last to leave
us, and although the month of November is usually chosen by him as the
fitting time for departure to a milder clime, his plaintive note is
quite commonly heard on pleasant days throughout the winter season,
and a few of the braver and hardier ones never entirely desert us. The
Robin and the Blue Bird are tenderly associated in the memories of most
persons whose childhood was passed on a farm or in the country village.
Before the advent of the English Sparrow, the Blue Bird was sure to
be the first to occupy and the last to defend the little box prepared
for his return, appearing in his blue jacket somewhat in advance of
the plainly habited female, who on her arrival quite often found a
habitation selected and ready for her acceptance, should he find favor
in her sight. And then he becomes a most devoted husband and father,
sitting by the nest and warbling with earnest affection his exquisite
tune, and occasionally flying away in search of food for his mate and
nestlings.

The Blue Bird rears two broods in the season, and, should the weather
be mild, even three. His nest contains three eggs.

In the spring and summer when he is happy and gay, his song is
extremely soft and agreeable, while it grows very mournful and
plaintive as cold weather approaches. He is mild of temper, and a
peaceable and harmless neighbor, setting a fine example of amiability
to his feathered friends. In the early spring, however, he wages war
against robins, wrens, swallows, and other birds whose habitations are
of a kind to take his fancy. A celebrated naturalist says: "This bird
seems incapable of uttering a harsh note, or of doing a spiteful,
ill-tempered thing."

Nearly everybody has his anecdote to tell of the Blue Bird's courage,
but the author of "Wake Robin" tells his exquisitely thus: "A few years
ago I put up a little bird house in the back end of my garden for the
accommodation of the wrens, and every season a pair have taken up their
abode there. One spring a pair of Blue Birds looked into the tenement,
and lingered about several days, leading me to hope that they would
conclude to occupy it. But they finally went away. Late in the season
the wrens appeared, and after a little coquetting, were regularly
installed in their old quarters, and were as happy as only wrens can
be. But before their honeymoon was over, the Blue Birds returned. I
knew something was wrong before I was up in the morning. Instead of that
voluble and gushing song outside the window, I heard the wrens scolding
and crying out at a fearful rate, and on going out saw the Blue Birds in
possession of the box. The poor wrens were in despair and were forced to
look for other quarters."




THE SWALLOW.


    "Come, summer visitant, attach
      To my reedroof thy nest of clay,
    And let my ear thy music catch,
    Low twitting underneath the thatch,
      At the gray dawn of day."

Sure harbingers of spring are the Swallows. They are very common birds,
and frequent, as a rule, the cultivated lands in the neighborhood of
water, showing a decided preference for the habitations of man. "How
gracefully the swallows fly! See them coursing over the daisy-bespangled
grass fields; now they skim just over the blades of grass, and then with
a rapid stroke of their long wings mount into the air and come hovering
above your head, displaying their rich white and chestnut plumage to
perfection. Now they chase each other for very joyfulness, uttering
their sharp twittering notes; then they hover with expanded wings
like miniature Kestrels, or dart downwards with the velocity of
the sparrowhawk; anon they flit rapidly over the neighboring pool,
occasionally dipping themselves in its calm and placid waters, and
leaving a long train of rings marking their varied course. How easily
they turn, or glide over the surrounding hedges, never resting, never
weary, and defying the eye to trace them in the infinite turnings and
twistings of their rapid shooting flight. You frequently see them glide
rapidly near the ground, and then with a sidelong motion mount aloft, to
dart downwards like an animated meteor, their plumage glowing in the
light with metallic splendor, and the row of white spots on the tail
contrasting beautifully with the darker plumage."

The Swallow is considered a life-paired species, and returns to its
nesting site of the previous season, building a new nest close to the
old one. His nest is found in barns and outhouses, upon the beams of
wood which support the roof, or in any place which assures protection to
the young birds. It is cup-shaped and artfully moulded of bits of mud.
Grass and feathers are used for the lining. "The nest completed, five or
six eggs are deposited. They are of a pure white color, with deep rich
brown blotches and spots, notably at the larger end, round which they
often form a zone or belt." The sitting bird is fed by her mate.

The young Swallow is distinguished from the mature birds by the absence
of the elongated tail feathers, which are a mark of maturity alone. His
food is composed entirely of insects. Swallows are on the wing fully
sixteen hours, and the greater part of the time making terrible havoc
amongst the millions of insects which infest the air. It is said that
when the Swallow is seen flying high in the heavens, it is a never
failing indication of fine weather.

A pair of Swallows on arriving at their nesting place of the preceding
Summer found their nest occupied by a Sparrow, who kept the poor birds
at a distance by pecking at them with his strong beak whenever they
attempted to dislodge him. Wearied and hopeless of regaining possession
of their property, they at last hit upon a plan which effectually
punished the intruder. One morning they appeared with a few more
Swallows--their mouths filled with a supply of tempered clay--and, by
their joint efforts in a short time actually plastered up the entrance
to the hole, thus barring the Sparrow from the home which he had stolen
from the Swallows.

[Illustration: BARN SWALLOW.]




THE BROWN THRUSH.


    "However the world goes ill,
      The Thrushes still sing in it."

The Mocking-bird of the North, as the Brown Thrush has been called,
arrives in the Eastern and Middle States about the 10th of May, at which
season he may be seen, perched on the highest twig of a hedge, or on the
topmost branch of a tree, singing his loud and welcome song, that may be
heard a distance of half a mile. The favorite haunt of the Brown Thrush,
however, is amongst the bright and glossy foliage of the evergreens.
"There they delight to hide, although not so shy and retiring as the
Blackbird; there they build their nests in greatest numbers, amongst the
perennial foliage, and there they draw at nightfall to repose in warmth
and safety." The Brown Thrasher sings chiefly just after sunrise and
before sunset, but may be heard singing at intervals during the day. His
food consists of wild fruits, such as blackberries and raspberries,
snails, worms, slugs and grubs. He also obtains much of his food
amongst the withered leaves and marshy places of the woods and
shrubberies which he frequents. Few birds possess a more varied melody.
His notes are almost endless in variety, each note seemingly uttered at
the caprice of the bird, without any perceptible approach to order.

The site of the Thrush's nest is a varied one, in the hedgerows, under a
fallen tree or fence-rail; far up in the branches of stately trees, or
amongst the ivy growing up their trunks. The nest is composed of the
small dead twigs of trees, lined with the fine fibers of roots. From
three to five eggs are deposited, and are hatched in about twelve days.
They have a greenish background, thickly spotted with light brown,
giving the whole egg a brownish appearance.

The Brown Thrush leaves the Eastern and Middle States, on his migration
South, late in September, remaining until the following May.

       *       *       *

THE THRUSH'S NEST.

    "Within a thick and spreading hawthorn bush
      That overhung a molehill, large and round,
    I heard from morn to morn a merry thrush
      Sing hymns of rapture while I drank the sound
    With joy--and oft an unintruding guest,
      I watched her secret toils from day to day;
    How true she warped the moss to form her nest,
      And modeled it within with wood and clay.
    And by and by, with heath-bells gilt with dew,
      There lay her shining eggs as bright as flowers,
    Ink-spotted over, shells of green and blue:
      And there I witnessed, in the summer hours,
    A brood of nature's minstrels chirp and fly,
      Glad as the sunshine and the laughing sky."




THE BROWN THRUSH.


Dear Readers:

My cousin Robin Redbreast told me that he wrote you a letter last month
and sent it with his picture. How did you like it? He is a pretty
bird--Cousin Robin--and everybody likes him. But I must tell you
something of myself.

Folks call me by different names--some of them nicknames, too.

The cutest one of all is Brown Thrasher. I wonder if you know why they
call me Thrasher. If you don't, ask some one. It is really funny.

Some people think Cousin Robin is the sweetest singer of our family, but
a great many like my song just as well.

Early in the morning I sing among the bushes, but later in the day you
will always find me in the very top of a tree and it is then I sing my
best.

Do you know what I say in my song? Well, if I am near a farmer while he
is planting, I say: "Drop it, drop it--cover it up, cover it up--pull it
up, pull it up, pull it up."

One thing I very seldom do and that is, sing when near my nest. Maybe
you can tell why. I'm not very far from my nest now. I just came down to
the stream to get a drink and am watching that boy on the other side of
the stream. Do you see him?

One dear lady who loves birds has said some very nice things about me in
a book called "Bird Ways." Another lady has written a beautiful poem
about my singing. Ask your mamma or teacher the names of these ladies.
Here is the poem:

    There's a merry brown thrush sitting up in a tree.
    He is singing to me! He is singing to me!
    And what does he say--little girl, little boy?
    "Oh, the world's running over with joy!
        Hush! Look! In my tree,
        I am as happy as happy can be."

    And the brown thrush keeps singing, "A nest, do you see,
    And five eggs, hid by me in the big cherry tree?
    Don't meddle, don't touch--little girl, little boy--
    Or the world will lose some of its joy!
        Now I am glad! now I am free!
        And I always shall be,
        If you never bring sorrow to me."

    So the merry brown thrush sings away in the tree
    To you and to me--to you and to me;
    And he sings all the day--little girl, little boy--
    "Oh, the world's running over with joy!
        But long it won't be,
        Don't you know? don't you see?
        Unless we're good as good can be."

[Illustration: BROWN THRASHER.]




[Illustration: JAPAN PHEASANT.]

THE JAPAN PHEASANT.


Originally the Pheasant was an inhabitant of Asia Minor but has been
by degrees introduced into many countries, where its beauty of form,
plumage, and the delicacy of its flesh made it a welcome visitor. The
Japan Pheasant is a very beautiful species, about which little is known
in its wild state, but in captivity it is pugnacious. It requires much
shelter and plenty of food, and the breed is to some degree artificially
kept up by the hatching of eggs under domestic hens and feeding them in
the coop like ordinary chickens, until they are old and strong enough to
get their own living.

The food of this bird is extremely varied. When young it is generally
fed on ants' eggs, maggots, grits, and similar food, but when it is full
grown it is possessed of an accommodating appetite and will eat many
kinds of seeds, roots, and leaves. It will also eat beans, peas, acorns,
berries, and has even been known to eat the ivy leaf, as well as the
berry.

This Pheasant loves the ground, runs with great speed, and always
prefers to trust to its legs rather than to its wings. It is crafty, and
when alarmed it slips quickly out of sight behind a bush or through a
hedge, and then runs away with astonishing rapidity, always remaining
under cover until it reaches some spot where it deems itself safe. The
male is not domestic, passing an independent life during a part of the
year and associating with others of its own sex during the rest of the
season.

The nest is very rude, being merely a heap of leaves and grass on the
ground, with a very slight depression. The eggs are numerous, about
eleven or twelve, and olive brown in color. In total length, though they
vary considerably, the full grown male is about three feet. The female
is smaller in size than her mate, and her length a foot less.

The Japan Pheasant is not a particularly interesting bird aside from his
beauty, which is indeed brilliant, there being few of the species more
attractive.




THE FLICKER.


A great variety of names does this bird possess. It is commonly known
as the Golden Winged Woodpecker, Yellow-shafted Flicker, Yellow Hammer,
and less often as High-hole or High-holer, Wake-up, etc. In suitable
localities throughout the United States and the southern parts of
Canada, the Flicker is a very common bird, and few species are more
generally known. "It is one of the most sociable of our Woodpeckers,
and is apparently always on good terms with its neighbors. It usually
arrives in April, occasionally even in March, the males preceding the
females a few days, and as soon as the latter appear one can hear their
voices in all directions."

The Flicker is an ardent wooer. It is an exceedingly interesting and
amusing sight to see a couple of males paying their addresses to a coy
and coquettish female; the apparent shyness of the suitors as they sidle
up to her and as quickly retreat again, the shy glances given as one
peeps from behind a limb watching the other--playing bo-peep--seem
very human, and "I have seen," says an observer, "few more amusing
performances than the courtship of a pair of these birds." The defeated
suitor takes his rejection quite philosophically, and retreats in a
dignified manner, probably to make other trials elsewhere. Few birds
deserve our good will more than the Flicker. He is exceedingly useful,
destroying multitudes of grubs, larvæ, and worms. He loves berries and
fruit but the damage he does to cultivated fruit is very trifling.

The Flicker begins to build its nest about two weeks after the bird
arrives from the south. It prefers open country, interspersed with
groves and orchards, to nest in. Any old stump, or partly decayed limb
of a tree, along the banks of a creek, beside a country road, or in
an old orchard, will answer the purpose. Soft wood trees seem to be
preferred, however. In the prairie states it occasionally selects
strange nesting sites. It has been known to chisel through the weather
boarding of a dwelling house, barns, and other buildings, and to nest
in the hollow space between this and the cross beams; its nests have
also been found in gate posts, in church towers, and in burrows of
Kingfishers and bank swallows, in perpendicular banks of streams. One
of the most peculiar sites of his selection is described by William A.
Bryant as follows: "On a small hill, a quarter of a mile distant from
any home, stood a hay stack which had been placed there two years
previously. The owner, during the winter of 1889-90, had cut the stack
through the middle and hauled away one portion, leaving the other
standing, with the end smoothly trimmed. The following spring I noticed
a pair of flickers about the stack showing signs of wanting to make it
a fixed habitation. One morning a few days later I was amused at the
efforts of one of the pair. It was clinging to the perpendicular end of
the stack and throwing out clipped hay at a rate to defy competition.
This work continued for a week, and in that time the pair had excavated
a cavity twenty inches in depth. They remained in the vicinity until
autumn. During the winter the remainder of the stack was removed. They
returned the following spring, and, after a brief sojourn, departed for
parts unknown."

From five to nine eggs are generally laid. They are glossy white in
color, and when fresh appear as if enameled.

The young are able to leave the nest in about sixteen days; they crawl
about on the limbs of the tree for a couple of days before they venture
to fly, and return to the nest at night.

[Illustration: FLICKER.]




THE BOBOLINK.


    "When Nature had made all her birds,
    And had no cares to think on,
    She gave a rippling laugh,
    And out there flew a Bobolinkon."

No American ornithologist omits mention of the Bobolink, and naturalists
generally have described him under one of the many names by which he is
known. In some States he is called the Rice Bird, in others Reed Bird,
the Rice or Reed Bunting, while his more familiar title, throughout the
greater part of America, is Bobolink, or Bobolinkum. In Jamaica, where
he gets very fat during his winter stay, he is called the Butter Bird.
His title of Rice Troopial is earned by the depredations which he
annually makes upon the rice crops, though his food "is by no means
restricted to that seed, but consists in a large degree of insects,
grubs, and various wild grasses." A migratory bird, residing during the
winter in the southern parts of America, he returns in vast multitudes
northward in the early Spring. According to Wilson, their course of
migration is as follows: "In April, or very early in May, the Rice
Buntings, male and female, arrive within the southern boundaries of
the United States, and are seen around the town of Savannah, Georgia,
sometimes in separate parties of males and females, but more generally
promiscuously. They remain there but a short time, and about the middle
of May make their appearance in the lower part of Pennsylvania. While
here the males are extremely gay and full of song, frequenting meadows,
newly plowed fields, sides of creeks, rivers, and watery places, feeding
on May flies and caterpillars, of which they destroy great quantities.
In their passage, however, through Virginia at this season, they do
great damage to the early wheat and barley while in their milky state.
About the 20th of May they disappear on their way to the North. Nearly
at the same time they arrive in the State of New York, spread over the
whole of the New England States, as far as the river St. Lawrence, and
from Lake Ontario to the sea. In all of these places they remain during
the Summer, building their nests and rearing their young."

The Bobolink's song is a peculiar one, varying greatly with the
occasion. As he flys southward, his cry is a kind of clinking note; but
the love song addressed to his mate is voluble and fervent. It has been
said that if you should strike the keys of a pianoforte haphazard, the
higher and the lower singly very quickly, you might have some idea of
the Bobolink's notes. In the month of June he gradually changes his
pretty, attractive dress and puts on one very like the females, which is
of a plain rusty brown, and is not reassumed until the next season of
nesting. The two parent birds in the plate represent the change from the
dark plumage in which the bird is commonly known in the North as the
Bobolink, to the dress of yellowish brown by which it is known
throughout the South as the Rice or Reed Bird.

His nest, small and a plain one, too, is built on the ground by his
industrious little wife. The inside is warmly lined with soft fibers of
whatever may be nearest at hand. Five pretty white eggs, spotted all
over with brown are laid, and as soon

    "As the little ones chip the shell
    And five wide mouths are ready for food,
    'Robert of Lincoln' bestirs him well,
    Gathering seeds for this hungry brood."




BOBOLINK.


Other birds may like to travel alone, but when jolly Mr. Bobolink and
his quiet little wife come from the South, where they have spent the
winter, they come with a large party of friends. When South, they eat so
much rice that the people call them Rice Birds. When they come North,
they enjoy eating wheat, barley, oats and insects.

Mr. and Mrs. Bobolink build their simple little nest of grasses in some
field. It is hard to find on the ground, for it looks just like dry
grass. Mrs. Bobolink wears a dull dress, so she cannot be seen when she
is sitting on the precious eggs. She does not sing a note while caring
for the eggs. Why do you think that is?

Mr. Bob-Linkum does not wear a sober dress, as you can see by his
picture. He does not need to be hidden. He is just as jolly as he
looks. Shall I tell you how he amuses his mate while she is sitting?
He springs from the dew-wet grass with a sound like peals of merry
laughter. He frolics from reed to post, singing as if his little heart
would burst with joy.

Don't you think Mr. and Mrs. Bobolink look happy in the picture? They
have raised their family of five. Four of their children have gone to
look for food; one of them--he must surely be the baby--would rather
stay with his mamma and papa. Which one does he look like?

Many birds are quiet at noon and in the afternoon. A flock of Bobolinks
can be heard singing almost all day long. The song is full of high notes
and low, soft notes and loud, all sung rapidly. It is as gay and bright
as the birds themselves, who flit about playfully as they sing. You will
feel like laughing as merrily as they sing when you hear it some day.

[Illustration: BOBOLINKS.]




THE BLUE BIRD.


    "Drifting down the first warm wind
      That thrills the earliest days of spring,
    The Bluebird seeks our maple groves
      And charms them into tasselling."

    "He sings, and his is Nature's voice--
      A gush of melody sincere
    From that great fount of harmony
      Which thaws and runs when Spring is here."

    "Short is his song, but strangely sweet
      To ears aweary of the low
    Dull tramps of Winter's sullen feet,
      Sandalled in ice and muffled in snow."

       *       *       *

    "Think, every morning, when the sun peeps through
       The dim, leaf-latticed windows of the grove,
     How jubilant the happy birds renew
       Their old, melodious madrigals of love!
     And when you think of this, remember, too,
       'Tis always morning somewhere, and above
     The awakening continents, from shore to shore,
     Somewhere the birds are singing evermore.

    "Think of your woods and orchards without birds!
       Of empty nests that cling to boughs and beams
     As in an idiot's brain remembered words
       Hang empty 'mid the cobwebs of his dreams!
     Will bleat of flocks or bellowing of herds
       Make up for the lost music, when your teams
     Drag home the stingy harvest, and no more
     The feathered gleaners follow to your door?"
                    FROM "THE BIRDS OF KILLINGSWORTH."




THE CROW.


Caw! Caw! Caw! little boys and girls. Caw! Caw! Caw! Just look at my
coat of feathers. See how black and glossy it is. Do you wonder I am
proud of it?

Perhaps you think I look very solemn and wise, and not at all as if I
cared to play games. I do, though; and one of the games I like best is
hide-and-seek. I play it with the farmer in the spring. He hides, in the
rich, brown earth, golden kernels of corn. Surely he does it because he
knows I like it, for sometimes he puts up a stick all dressed like a man
to show where the corn is hidden. Sometimes I push my bill down into the
earth to find the corn, and at other times I wait until tiny green
leaves begin to show above the ground, and then I get my breakfast
without much trouble. I wonder if the farmer enjoys this game as much
as I do. I help him, too, by eating worms and insects.

During the spring and summer I live in my nest on the top of a very
high tree. It is built of sticks and grasses and straw and string and
anything else I can pick up. But in the fall, I and all my relations and
friends live together in great roosts or rookeries. What good times we
do have--hunting all day for food and talking all night. Wouldn't you
like to be with us?

The farmer who lives in the house over there went to the mill to-day
with a load of corn.

One of the ears dropped out of the wagon and it didn't take me long to
find it. I have eaten all I can possibly hold and am wondering now what
is the best thing to do. If you were in my place would you leave it here
and not tell anybody and come back to-morrow and finish it? Or would you
fly off and get Mrs. Crow and some of the children to come and finish
it? I believe I'll fly and get them. Good-bye.

Caw! Caw! Caw!

[Illustration: COMMON CROW.]




THE COMMON CROW.


    "The crow doth sing as merry as the lark,
     When neither is attended."

Few birds have more interesting characteristics than the Common Crow,
being, in many of his actions, very like the Raven, especially in his
love for carrion. Like the Raven, he has been known to attack game,
although his inferior size forces him to call to his assistance the aid
of his fellows to cope with larger creatures. Rabbits and hares are
frequently the prey of this bird which pounces on them as they steal
abroad to feed. His food consists of reptiles, frogs, and lizards; he
is a plunderer of other birds' nests. On the seashore he finds crabs,
shrimps and inhabited shells, which he ingeniously cracks by flying with
them to a great height and letting them fall upon a convenient rock.

The crow is seen in single pairs or in little bands of four or five.
In the autumn evenings, however, they assemble in considerable flocks
before going to roost and make a wonderful chattering, as if comparing
notes of the events of the day.

The nest of the Crow is placed in some tree remote from habitations of
other birds. Although large and very conspicuous at a distance, it is
fixed upon one of the topmost branches quite out of reach of the hand of
the adventurous urchin who longs to secure its contents. It is loosely
made and saucer shaped. Sticks and softer substances are used to
construct it, and it is lined with hair and fibrous roots. Very recently
a thrifty and intelligent Crow built for itself a summer residence in an
airy tree near Bombay, the material used being gold, silver, and steel
spectacle frames, which the bird had stolen from an optician of that
city. Eighty-four frames had been used for this purpose, and they were
so ingeniously woven together that the nest was quite a work of art.
The eggs are variable, or rather individual, in their markings, and
even in their size. The Crow rarely uses the same nest twice, although
he frequently repairs to the same locality from year to year. He is
remarkable for his attachment to his mate and young, surpassing the
Fawn and Turtle Dove in conjugal courtesy.

The Somali Arabs bear a deadly hatred toward the Crow. The origin of
their detestation is the superstition that during the flight of Mohammed
from his enemies, he hid himself in a cave, where he was perceived by
the Crow, at that time a bird of light plumage, who, when he saw the
pursuers approaching the spot, perched above Mohammed's hiding place,
and screamed, "Ghar! Ghar!" (cave! cave!) so as to indicate the place
of concealment. His enemies, however, did not understand the bird, and
passed on, and Mohammed, when he came out of the cave, clothed the Crow
in perpetual black, and commanded him to cry "Ghar" as long as Crows
should live.

And he lives to a good old age. Instances are not rare where he has
attained to half a century, without great loss of activity or failure of
sight.

At Red Bank, a few miles northeast of Cincinnati, on the Little Miami
River, in the bottoms, large flocks of Crows congregate the year around.
A few miles away, high upon Walnut Hills, is a Crow roost, and in the
late afternoons the Crows, singly, in pairs, and in flocks, are seen on
the wing, flying heavily, with full crops, on the way to the roost, from
which they descend in the early morning, crying "Caw! Caw!" to the
fields of the newly planted, growing, or matured corn, or corn stacks,
as the season may provide.




THE RETURN OF THE BIRDS.


     "Everywhere the blue sky belongs to them and is their appointed
     rest, and their native country, and their own natural home
     which they enter unannounced as lords that are certainly
     expected, and yet there is a silent joy at their arrival."

The return of the birds to their real home in the North, where they
build their nests and rear their young, is regarded by all genuine
lovers of earth's messengers of gladness and gayety as one of the most
interesting and poetical of annual occurrences. The naturalist, who
notes the very day of each arrival, in order that he may verify former
observation or add to his material gathered for a new work, does not
necessarily anticipate with greater pleasure this event than do many
whose lives are brightened by the coming of the friends of their youth,
who alone of early companions do not change. First of all--and ever the
same delightful warbler--the Bluebird, who, in 1895, did not appear at
all in many localities, though here in considerable numbers last year,
betrays himself. "Did he come down out of the heaven on that bright
March morning when he told us so softly and plaintively that, if we
pleased, spring had come?" Sometimes he is here a little earlier, and
must keep his courage up until the cold snap is over and the snow is
gone. Not long after the Bluebird, comes the Robin, sometimes in March,
but in most of the northern states April is the month of his arrival.
With his first utterance the spell of winter is broken, and the
remembrance of it afar off. Then appears the Woodpecker in great
variety, the Flicker usually arriving first. He is always somebody's old
favorite, "announcing his arrival by a long, loud call, repeated from
the dry branch of some tree, or a stake in the fence--a thoroughly
melodious April sound."

Few perhaps reflect upon the difficulties encountered by the birds
themselves in their returning migrations. A voyager sometimes meets
with many of our common birds far out at sea. Such wanderers, it is
said, when suddenly overtaken by a fog, completely lose their sense of
direction and become hopelessly lost. Humming birds, those delicately
organized, glittering gems, are among the most common of the land
species seen at sea.

The present season has been quite favorable to the protection of birds.
A very competent observer says that not all of the birds migrated this
winter. He recently visited a farm less than an hour's ride from
Chicago, where he found the old place, as he relates it, "chucked full
of Robins, Blackbirds, and Woodpeckers," and others unknown to him.
From this he inferred they would have been in Florida had indications
predicted a severe winter. The trees of the south parks of Chicago,
and those in suburban places, have had, darting through their branches
during the months of December and January, nearly as many members of the
Woodpecker tribe as were found there during the mating season in May
last.

Alas, that the Robin will visit us in diminished numbers in the
approaching spring. He has not been so common for a year or two as
he was formerly, for the reason that the Robins died by thousands of
starvation, owing to the freezing of their food supply in Tennessee
during the protracted cold weather in the winter of 1895. It is indeed
sad that this good Samaritan among birds should be defenseless against
the severity of Nature, the common mother of us all. Nevertheless the
return of the birds, in myriads or in single pairs, will be welcomed
more and more, year by year, as intelligent love and appreciation of
them shall possess the popular mind.




 [Illustration: BLACK TERN.
 Mother and Young with Eggs.]

THE BLACK TERN.


"The Tern," says Mr. F. M. Woodruff, of the Chicago Academy of Sciences,
"is the only representative of the long-winged swimmers which commonly
nests with us on our inland fresh water marshes, arriving early in May
in its brooding plumage of sooty black. The color changes in the autumn
to white, and a number of the adult birds may be found, in the latter
part of July, dotted and streaked here and there with white. On the
first of June, 1891, I found a large colony of Black Terns nesting on
Hyde Lake, Cook County, Illinois. As I approached the marsh a few birds
were seen flying high in the air, and, as I neared the nesting site, the
flying birds gave notes of alarm, and presently the air was filled with
the graceful forms of this beautiful little bird. They circled about me,
darting down to within a few feet of my head, constantly uttering a
harsh, screaming cry. As the eggs are laid upon the bare ground, which
the brownish and blackish markings so closely resemble, I was at first
unable to find the nests, and discovered that the only way to locate
them was to stand quietly and watch the birds. When the Tern is passing
over the nest it checks its flight, and poises for a moment on quivering
wings. By keeping my eyes on this spot I found the nest with very little
trouble. The complement of eggs, when the bird has not been disturbed,
is usually three. These are laid in a saucer shaped structure of dead
vegetation, which is scraped together, from the surface of the wet,
boggy ground. The bird figured in the plate had placed its nest on the
edge of an old muskrat house, and my attention was attracted to it by
the fact that upon the edge of the rat house, where it had climbed to
rest itself, was the body of a young dabchick, or piedbilled grebe,
scarcely two and one-half inches long, and not twenty-four hours out of
the egg, a beautiful little ball of blackish down, striped with brown
and white. From the latter part of July to the middle of August large
flocks of Black Terns may be seen on the shores of our larger lakes on
their annual migration southward."

The Rev. P. B. Peabody, in alluding to his observation of the nests
of the Tern, says: "Amid this floating sea of aquatic nests I saw an
unusual number of well constructed homes of the Tern. Among these was
one that I count a perfect nest. It rested on the perfectly flat
foundation of a small decayed rat house, which was about fourteen
inches in diameter. The nest, in form, is a truncated cone (barring
the cavity), was about eight inches high and ten inches in diameter.
The hollow--quite shallow--was about seven inches across, being thus
unusually large. The whole was built up of bits of rushes, carried to
the spot, these being quite uniform in length--about four inches." After
daily observation of the Tern, during which time he added much to his
knowledge of the bird, he pertinently asks: "Who shall say how many
traits and habits yet unknown may be discovered through patient watching
of community-breeding birds, by men enjoying more of leisure for such
delightful studies than often falls to the lot of most of us who have
bread and butter to earn and a tiny part of the world's work to
finish?"




THE MEADOW LARK.


        "Not an inch of his body is free from delight.
    Can he keep himself still if he would? Oh, not he!
        The music stirs in him like wind through a tree."

The well known Meadow or Old Field Lark is a constant resident south
of latitude 39, and many winter farther north in favorite localities.
Its geographical range is eastern North America, Canada to south Nova
Scotia, Quebec, and Ontario to eastern Manitoba; west to Minnesota,
Iowa, Missouri, eastern Kansas, the Indian Territory, and Texas; south
to Florida and the Gulf coast, in all of which localities, except in the
extreme north, it usually rears two or three broods in a season. In the
Northern States it is only a summer resident, arriving in April and
remaining until the latter part of October and occasionally November.
Excepting during the breeding season, small flocks may often be seen
roving about in search of good feeding grounds. Major Bendire says
this is especially true in the fall of the year. At this time several
families unite, and as many as two dozen may occasionally be flushed in
a field, over which they scatter, roaming about independently of each
other. When one takes wing all the others in the vicinity follow. It
is a shy bird in the East, while in the middle states it is quite the
reverse. Its flight is rather laborious, at least in starting, and is
continued by a series of rapid movements of the wings, alternating with
short distances of sailing, and is rarely protracted. On alighting,
which is accompanied with a twitching of its tail, it usually settles on
some fence rail, post, boulder, weedstock, or on a hillock in a meadow
from which it can get a good view of the surroundings, and but rarely
on a limb of a tree. Its favorite resorts are meadows, fallow fields,
pastures, and clearings, but in some sections, as in northern Florida,
for instance, it also frequents the low, open pine woods and nests
there.

The song of the Meadow Lark is not much varied, but its clear, whistling
notes, so frequently heard in the early spring, are melodious and
pleasing to the ear. It is decidedly the farmers' friend, feeding, as
it does, on noxious insects, caterpillars, moths, grasshoppers, spiders,
worms and the like, and eating but little grain. The lark spends the
greater part of its time on the ground, procuring all its food there.
It is seldom found alone, and it is said remains paired for life.

Nesting begins in the early part of May and lasts through June. Both
sexes assist in building the nest, which is always placed on the ground,
either in a natural depression, or in a little hollow scratched out by
the birds, alongside a bunch of grass or weeds. The nest itself is lined
with dry grass, stubble, and sometimes pine needles. Most nests are
placed in level meadows. The eggs and young are frequently destroyed by
vermin, for the meadow lark has many enemies. The eggs vary from three
to seven, five being the most common, and both sexes assist in the
hatching, which requires about fifteen or sixteen days. The young leave
the nest before they are able to fly--hiding at the slightest sign of
danger. The Meadow Lark does not migrate beyond the United States. It is
a native bird, and is only accidental in England. The eggs are spotted,
blotched, and speckled with shades of brown, purple and lavender. A
curious incident is told of a Meadow Lark trying to alight on the top
mast of a schooner several miles at sea. It was evidently very tired but
would not venture near the deck.




[Illustration: MEADOW LARK.]

THE MEADOW LARK.


I told the man who wanted my picture that he could take it if he would
show my nest and eggs. Do you blame me for saying so? Don't you think it
makes a better picture than if I stood alone?

Mr. Lark is away getting me some breakfast, or he could be in the
picture, too. After a few days I shall have some little baby birds, and
then won't we be happy.

Boys and girls who live in the country know us pretty well. When they
drive the cows out to pasture, or when they go out to gather wild
flowers, we sit on the fences by the roadside and make them glad with
our merry song.

Those of you who live in the city cannot see us unless you come out into
the country.

It isn't very often that we can find such a pretty place for a nest as
we have here. Most of the time we build our nest under the grass and
cover it over, and build a little tunnel leading to it. This year we
made up our minds not to be afraid.

The people living in the houses over there do not bother us at all and
we are so happy.

You never saw baby larks, did you? Well, they are queer little fellows,
with hardly any feathers on them.

Last summer we had five little birdies to feed, and it kept us busy from
morning till night. This year we only expect three, and Mr. Lark says he
will do all the work. He knows a field that is being plowed, where he
can get nice, large worms.

Hark! that is he singing. He will be surprised when he comes back and
finds me off the nest. He is so afraid that I will let the eggs get
cold, but I won't. There he comes, now.




THE LONG-EARED OWL.


The name of the Long-Eared Owl is derived from the great length of his
"ears" or feather-tufts, which are placed upon the head, and erect
themselves whenever the bird is interested or excited. It is the "black
sheep" of the owl family, the majority of owls being genuine friends of
the agriculturist, catching for his larder so many of the small animals
that prey upon his crops. In America he is called the Great Horned
Owl--in Europe the Golden Owl.

Nesting time with the owl begins in February, and continues through
March and April. The clown-like antics of both sexes of this bird while
under the tender influence of the nesting season tend somewhat to impair
their reputation for dignity and wise demeanor. They usually have a
simple nest in a hollow tree, but which seems seldom to be built by the
bird itself, as it prefers to take the deserted nest of some other bird,
and to fit up the premises for its own use. They repair slightly from
year to year the same nest. The eggs are white, and generally four or
five in number. While the young are still in the nest, the parent birds
display a singular diligence in collecting food for them.

If you should happen to know of an owl's nest, stand near it some
evening when the old birds are rearing their young. Keep quiet and
motionless, and notice how frequently the old birds feed them. Every ten
minutes or so the soft flap, flap of their wings will be heard, the male
and female alternately, and you will obtain a brief glimpse of them
through the gloom as they enter the nesting place. They remain inside
but a short time, sharing the food equally amongst their brood, and
then are off again to hunt for more. All night, were you to have the
inclination to observe them, you would find they pass to and fro with
food, only ceasing their labors at dawn. The young, as soon as they
reach maturity, are abandoned by their parents; they quit the nest and
seek out haunts elsewhere, while the old birds rear another, and not
infrequently two more broods, during the remainder of the season.

The habits of the Long-Eared Owl are nocturnal. He is seldom seen in the
light of day, and is greatly disturbed if he chance to issue from his
concealment while the sun is above the horizon. The facial disk is very
conspicuous in this species. It is said that the use of this circle is
to collect the rays of light, and throw them upon the eye. The flight
of the owl is softened by means of especially shaped, recurved
feather-tips, so that he may noiselessly steal upon his prey, and
the ear is also so shaped as to gather sounds from below.

The Long-Eared Owl is hardly tameable. The writer of this paragraph, when
a boy, was the possessor, for more than a year, of a very fine specimen.
We called him Judge. He was a monster, and of perfect plumage. Although
he seemed to have some attachment to the children of the family who fed
him, he would not permit himself to be handled by them or by any one in
the slightest. Most of his time he spent in his cage, an immense affair,
in which he was very comfortable. Occasionally he had a day in the barn
with the rats and mice.

The owl is of great usefulness to gardener, agriculturist, and landowner
alike, for there is not another bird of prey which is so great a
destroyer of the enemies of vegetation.




[Illustration: GREAT HORNED OWL.]

THE OWL.


              We know not alway
              Who are kings by day,
    But the king of the night is the bold brown owl!

I wonder why the folks put my picture last in the book. It can't be
because they don't like me, for I'm sure I never bother them. I don't
eat the farmer's corn like the crow, and no one ever saw me quarrel with
other birds.

Maybe it is because I can't sing. Well, there are lots of good people
that can't sing, and so there are lots of good birds that can't sing.

Did you ever see any other bird sit up as straight as I do? I couldn't
sit up so straight if I hadn't such long, sharp claws to hold on with.

My home is in the woods. Here we owls build our nests--most always in
hollow trees.

During the day I stay in the nest or sit on a limb. I don't like day
time for the light hurts my eyes, but when it begins to grow dark then
I like to stir around. All night long I am wide awake and fly about
getting food for my little hungry ones. They sleep most of the day and
it keeps me busy nearly all night to find them enough to eat.

I just finished my night's work when the man came to take my picture. It
was getting light and I told him to go to a large stump on the edge of
the woods and I would sit for my picture. So here I am. Don't you think
I look wise? How do you like my large eyes? If I could smile at you I
would, but my face always looks sober. I have a great many cousins and
if you really like my picture, I'll have some of them talk to you next
month. I don't think any of them have such pretty feathers though. Just
see if they have when they come.

Well, I must fly back to my perch in the old elm tree. Good-bye.




THE OWL.


    In the hollow tree, in the old gray tower,
      The spectral owl doth dwell;
    Dull, hated, despised in the sunshine hour,
      But at dusk he's abroad and well!
    Not a bird of the forest e'er mates with him;
      All mock him outright by day;
    But at night, when the woods grow still and dim,
      The boldest will shrink away!

          O! when the night falls, and roosts the fowl,
          Then, then, is the reign of the Horned Owl!

    And the owl hath a bride, who is fond and bold,
      And loveth the wood's deep gloom;
    And, with eyes like the shine of the moonstone cold,
      She awaiteth her ghastly groom.
    Not a feather she moves, not a carol she sings,
      As she waits in her tree so still,
    But when her heart heareth his flapping wings,
      She hoots out her welcome shrill!

          O! when the moon shines, and dogs do howl,
          Then, then, is the joy of the Horned Owl!

    Mourn not for the owl, nor his gloomy plight!
      The owl hath his share of good--
    If a prisoner he be in the broad daylight,
      He is lord in the dark greenwood!
    Nor lonely the bird, nor his ghastly mate,
      They are each unto each a pride;
    Thrice fonder, perhaps, since a strange, dark fate
      Hath rent them from all beside!

          So, when the night falls, and dogs do howl,
          Sing, Ho! for the reign of the Horned Owl!
              We know not alway
              Who are kings by day,
    But the King of the Night is the bold Brown Owl!

                     BRYAN W. PROCTER
                           (Barry Cornwall.)


       *       *       *       *       *




    THE
     Racycle
        NARROW TREAD

    THE VERDICT IS IN

     [Illustration]


      Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to advertisers.




TESTIMONIALS.


                           FRANKFORT, KY., February 3, 1897.
 W. J. BLACK, Vice-President,
                     Chicago, Ill.

Dear Sir: I have a copy of your magazine entitled "Birds," and beg to
say that I consider it one of the finest things on the subject that I
have ever seen, and shall be pleased to recommend it to county and city
superintendents of the state.

                            Very respectfully,
                                    W. J. DAVIDSON,
                   State Superintendent Public Instruction.

       *       *       *

                      SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., January 27, 1897.
 W. J. BLACK, ESQ.,
           Chicago, Ill.

Dear Sir: I am very much obliged for the copy of "Birds" that has just
come to hand. It should be in the hands of every primary and grammar
teacher. I send herewith copy of "List of San Francisco Teachers."

                            Very respectfully,
                                       M. BABCOCK.

       *       *       *

                            LINCOLN, NEB., February 9, 1897.
 W. J. BLACK,
     Chicago, Ill.

Dear Sir: The first number of your magazine, "Birds," is upon my
desk. I am highly pleased with it. It will prove a very serviceable
publication--one that strikes out along the right lines. For the purpose
intended, it has, in my opinion, no equal. It is clear, concise, and
admirably illustrated.

                            Very respectfully,
                                      W. R. JACKSON,
                   State Superintendent Public Instruction.

       *       *       *

                         NORTH LIMA, OHIO, February 1, 1897.
 MR. W. E. WATT,

Dear Sir: Sample copy of "Birds" received. All of the family delighted
with it. We wish it unbounded success. It will be an excellent
supplement to "In Birdland" in the Ohio Teachers' Reading Circle, and I
venture Ohio will be to the front with a good subscription list. I
enclose list of teachers.

                            Very truly,
                               C. M. L. ALTDOERFFER,
                                  Township Superintendent.

       *       *       *

                                MILWAUKEE, January 30, 1897.
 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
             227 Dearborn Street, Chicago.

Gentlemen: I acknowledge with pleasure the receipt of your publication,
"Birds," with accompanying circulars. I consider it the best on the
subject in existence. I have submitted the circulars and publication to
my teachers, who have nothing to say but praise in behalf of the
monthly.

                            JULIUS TORNEY,
             Principal 2nd Dist. Primary School, Milwaukee, Wis.




OUR PREMIUM


 A picture of wonderful beauty of the
 Golden Pheasant almost life size in
 a natural scene, plate 12x18 inches,
 on card 19x25 inches, is given as a
 premium to yearly subscribers. Our
 price on this picture in Art Stores
 is $3.50.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph
[March 1897], by Various

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS ILLUSTRATED [MARCH 1897] ***

***** This file should be named 30103-8.txt or 30103-8.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/0/1/0/30103/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper and Anne Storer,
some images courtesy of The Internet Archive and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
