The Project Gutenberg eBook, Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph, Volume
1, Number 2, February, 1897, by anonymous


This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org





Title: Birds Illustrated by Color Photograph, Volume 1, Number 2, February, 1897
       A Monthly Serial Designed to Promote Knowledge of Bird-Life


Author: anonymous



Release Date: December 8, 2009  [eBook #30626]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ISO-8859-1


***START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR
PHOTOGRAPH, VOLUME 1, NUMBER 2, FEBRUARY, 1897***


E-text prepared by Chris Curnow, Joseph Cooper, Anne Storer, and the
Project Gutenberg Online Distributed Proofreading Team
(http://www.pgdp.net). Some images were generously provided by Internet
Archive (http://www.archive.org).



Note: Project Gutenberg also has an HTML version of this
      file which includes the original lovely illustrations.
      See 30626-h.htm or 30626-h.zip:
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/30626/30626-h/30626-h.htm)
      or
      (http://www.gutenberg.org/files/30626/30626-h.zip)


Transcriber's note:

      Title added.





             BIRDS.
ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY
================================
VOL. I.   FEBRUARY 1897    NO. 2
================================

       *       *       *       *       *


    FROM: THE PRESIDENT OF THE NATIONAL TEACHERS' ASSOCIATION.

                       _STATE OF NEW YORK_
               _Department of Public Instruction_
                    _SUPERINTENDENT'S OFFICE_

                                _Albany_ December 26, 1896.

  [Illustration: (seal)]
  _Stenographic Letter_
  Dictated by __________


  W. E. Watt, President &c.,
                   Fisher Building,
                       277 Dearborn St., Chicago, Ill.

  My dear Sir:

  Please accept my thanks for a copy of the first publication of "Birds."
  Please enter my name as a regular subscriber. It is one of the most
  beautiful and interesting publications yet attempted in this direction.
  It has other attractions in addition to its beauty, and it must win its
  way to popular favor.

  Wishing the handsome little magazine abundant prosperity,
  I remain

                   Yours very respectfully,
                   [signature]
                                State Superintendent.


       *       *       *       *       *




 THE WONDERFUL
 SINGER
 PIANOS

    HONESTLY
      CONSTRUCTED

 TONE
 QUALITY
 DURABILITY

 MANDOLIN
 EFFECTS
 PRODUCED AT WILL

 SINGER PIANO CO.
 COR. JACKSON ST. & WABASH AVE. CHICAGO

 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.




 HERO BICYCLE   MODEL   FOR BOYS   Diamond or
                1897    OR GIRLS   Drop Frame

 GIVEN TO SUBSCRIBERS FOR "BIRDS." WRITE FOR PARTICULARS.

 20-INCH
 WHEELS FOR
 30
 SUBSCRIBERS

 24-INCH           [Illustration: IT'S A BEAUTY!]
 WHEELS FOR
 35
 SUBSCRIBERS

 26-INCH
 WHEELS FOR
 40
 SUBSCRIBERS

 These Wheels are made by a responsible firm and are guaranteed by
 the Home Rattan Co. Very best of material used throughout in the
 construction.




 The Crown Fountain Pen.

 AWARDED TWO MEDALS AND FOUR DIPLOMAS
 AT WORLD'S FAIR, CHICAGO, 1893.

 The Pen is of Solid Gold
 and the Workmanship                                         One of
 is of the                 [Illustration]                These Pens
 BEST                                                   Price $2.25
 Throughout.                                        Given Away with
                                         Three Yearly Subscriptions
                                  to "BIRDS"

    ADDRESS ...
    NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING CO.
 FISHER BUILDING,        CHICAGO, ILL.

 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.




 THE
 AMERICAN COLLEGE of
 ORATORY and ELOCUTION

 is the best place to prepare to become public speakers
 and entertainers. A course of #32 Evening Lessons for
 $5.00#. Saturday class, 24 lessons, beginning at 1:30 p.m.,
 only $8.00. #Regular Day Instruction $12.50 per month.#

 A #distinguished# faculty of eleven instructors, together
 with the best location, largest recital rooms, finest
 furnished and elegant in every respect, makes this
 the #Best College of Oratory in America#.

 #Stammering# and defective speech cured.

 #Dancing# only $2.00 for eight evening lessons; eight
 4 o'clock afternoon lessons, only $3; latest society, waltz,
 two-step, glide, etc., on Monday, Wednesday, Friday
 and Saturday evenings. Afternoon classes each afternoon
 at 4 o'clock. All fancy and stage dances taught.

    MODERN METHODS AND
    POPULAR PRICES

 is our motto. Prepare for contests at the American.
 Diplomas granted and prizes awarded. Public recitals
 each month. Call or address,

 M. T. DODGE, President,
       704 Masonic Temple, CHICAGO.




 ESTABLISHED 1857.

 FRED. KAEMPFER,

 Taxidermist and
 Bird Fancier

 BIRDS     CAGES
    GOLD FISH
       AND
     AQUARIA

 Mocking Bird Food, Bird Seeds, etc.

 TAXIDERMY IN ALL ITS BRANCHES AND A
     FULL LINE OF TAXIDERMIST'S
             MATERIALS.

 French Moss, Artificial Leaves,
             Glass Eyes for Birds and Animals,
     Oologist's and Entomologist's Supplies.

 217 Madison Street near Franklin Street,
             CHICAGO, ILL.




 1897      The Latest Improved and Best      Bicycle Lamp
               CHEAPEST HIGH GRADE


 WEIGHT 12 OUNCES     THE "STAY-LIT"     PATENTS PENDING
 HEIGHT 6 INCHES

 Burns Kerosene.
 Packed Oil Font Prevents Leaking.
 Burns 10 to 12 Hours.
 Always Cool.
 Perfected Construction.

 [Illustration]

 Impossible to Blow or Jar Out.
 Original, New and Beautiful Designs.
 Side Jewels.
 Rigid Bracket.
 PRICE $2.50

 The "STAY-LIT" Lamp is made of the best grade of Brass highly Nickeled
 and Polished. With all parts riveted, and easily cleaned. With its
 polished Ground Lense and Parabolic Reflector it throws a better light
 farther in advance of rider than any other lamp.

 For Sale by  STAY-LIT MFG. CO.,   910 Tacoma   CHICAGO, ILL., U. S. A.
 Dealers or                        Building,


 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.




 EVERY TEACHER

 finds daily in her work
 some new and perplexing
 problem to solve.

 With

 THE TEACHER'S
   PRACTICAL LIBRARY

 at hand for consultation the
 answer may always be found.

 #It will cost you nothing#

 to have this Library placed upon
 your table for inspection.

 Send postal-card for particulars,
 mentioning this paper.

                             AGENTS WANTED

  D. APPLETON & CO., Publishers
       NEW YORK--CHICAGO.
 CHICAGO OFFICE--243 Wabash Ave.




 What would George Washington
    think of
  Mark Hanna?

 [Illustration]

 If you want to
 know, read
   #"SPIRITS
       OF '76,"#
 By FREDERICK
 UPHAM ADAMS,
 in last number of

 NEW OCCASIONS

 A magazine of Reform; 96 pages; $1.00
 a year; 10 cents a copy. No free samples,
 but to any one sending us 6 2-cent
 stamps we will mail a sample copy with
 several reform books; over 300 pages
 in all. Agents wanted.

 #Charles H. Kerr & Company, Publishers,
       56 Fifth Ave., Chicago.#




 Buy Only the Best Presents for Children.
      THE FINEST BLACKBOARD MADE.

 IMPROVED

 [Illustration]

 Indispensable as an element for the general
 education of the children. This is not a toy,
 but an Educator for the home. Contains Sixteen
 Lessons on heavy cardboard: Writing, Drawing,
 Marking-letters, Music, Animal Forms, etc.
 Frame made of oak, 4 feet high and 2 feet wide.
 The Board is reversible and can be used on both
 sides. Has a desk attachment for writing.
 Weighs 10 pounds, packed for shipment.

 Price $3.50                    Agents Wanted.
                            Send for Agents Prices.

 THE VAN-BENSON COMPANY,
        84 Adams Street, CHICAGO, U.S.A.




 "THE QUEEN"       WOOD'S KITCHEN
                      CABINET.

 [Illustration]

 Has drawers for Linen, Spices, etc.
 Receptacles for different kinds of Flour.

 #A Necessity.      Price only $10.#

      THE QUEEN CABINET COMPANY,
 Dept. ----, 212 Monroe St., CHICAGO.

 Descriptive matter mailed free to any address
                 on request.

 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.


       *       *       *       *       *



BIRDS

A MONTHLY

ILLUSTRATED BY
COLOR PHOTOGRAPHY

[Illustration: AMERICAN BLUE JAY.]

NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY
OFFICE: FISHER BUILDING





[Illustration: AMERICAN BLUE JAY.]

THE BLUE JAY.


During about three-fourths of the year the American Jay is an extremely
tame, noisy and even obstrusive bird in its habits. As the breeding
season approaches he suddenly becomes silent, preparing the nest in
the most secluded parts of his native forests, and exercising all his
cunning to keep it concealed. He is omniverous but is especially fond
of eggs and young birds. The Jay may be regarded as eminently injurious
though in spring he consumes a number of insects to atone for his sins
of stealing fruit and berries in autumn. He is a professional nest
robber, and other birds are as watchful of him as is a mother of her
babe. He glides through the foliage of the trees so swiftly and
noiselessly that his presence is scarcely suspected until he has
committed some depredation. The Robin is his most wary foe, and when
the Jay is found near his nest will pursue him and drive him from the
neighborhood. He is as brave as he is active, however, and dashes boldly
in pursuit of his more plainly attired neighbors who venture to intrude
upon his domain.

The Jay has a curious antipathy toward the owl, perching on trees
above it and keeping up a continual screeching. Some years ago an Ohio
gentleman was presented with a magnificent specimen of the horned owl,
which he kept for a time in a large tin cage. In favorable weather the
cage was set out of doors, when it would soon be surrounded by Jays,
much in the manner described of the Toucan, and an incessant screeching
followed, to which the owl appeared indifferent. They would venture
near enough to steal a portion of his food, the bars of his cage being
sufficiently wide apart to admit them. On one occasion, however, he
caught the tail of a Jay in his claws and left the tormentor without
his proud appendage.

The Jay remains with us throughout the year. He is one of the wildest
of our birds, the shyest of man, although seeing him most. He makes no
regular migrations at certain seasons, but, unless disturbed, will live
out his life close to his favorite haunts. His wings show him to be
unfitted for extended flight.

Jays are most easily discovered in the morning about sunrise on the tops
of young live oaks. Their notes are varied. Later in the day it is more
difficult to find them, as they are more silent, and not so much on the
tree tops as among the bushes.

The Jays breed in woods, forests, orchards, preferring old and very
shady trees, placing their nests in the center against the body, or at
the bifurcation of large limbs. The nest is formed of twigs and roots;
the eggs are from four to six.


THE BLUE JAY.

    Something glorious, something gay,
    Flits and flashes this-a-way!
    'Thwart the hemlock's dusky shade,
    Rich in color full displayed,
    Swiftly vivid as a flame--
    Blue as heaven and white as snow--
    Doth this lovely creature go.
    What may be his dainty name?
    "Only this"--the people say--
    "Saucy, chattering, scolding Jay!"




THE SWALLOW-TAILED INDIAN ROLLER.


Swallow-tailed Indian Rollers are natives of Northeastern Africa and
Senegambia, and also the interior of the Niger district. The bird is
so called from its way of occasionally rolling or turning over in its
flight, somewhat after the fashion of a tumbler pigeon. A traveller in
describing the habits of the Roller family, says:

"On the 12th of April I reached Jericho alone, and remained there in
solitude for several days, during which time I had many opportunities
of observing the grotesque habits of the Roller. For several successive
evenings, great flocks of Rollers mustered shortly before sunset on some
dona trees near the fountain, with all the noise but without the decorum
of Rooks. After a volley of discordant screams, from the sound of which
it derives its Arabic name of "schurkrak," a few birds would start from
their perches and commence overhead a series of somersaults. In a moment
or two they would be followed by the whole flock, and these gambols
would be repeated for a dozen times or more.

"Everywhere it takes its perch on some conspicuous branch or on the top
of a rock, where it can see and be seen. The bare tops of the fig trees,
before they put forth their leaves, are in the cultivated terraces, a
particularly favorite resort. In the barren Ghor I have often watched it
perched unconcernedly on a knot of gravel or marl in the plain, watching
apparently for the emergence of beetles from the sand. Elsewhere I have
not seen it settle on the ground.

"Like Europeans in the East, it can make itself happy without chairs and
tables in the desert, but prefers a comfortable easy chair when it is to
be found. Its nest I have seen in ruins, in holes in rocks, in burrows,
in steep sand cliffs, but far more generally in hollow trees. The colony
in the Wady Kelt used burrows excavated by themselves, and many a hole
did they relinquish, owing to the difficulty of working it. So cunningly
were the nests placed under a crumbling, treacherous ledge, overhanging
a chasm of perhaps one or two hundred feet, that we were completely
foiled in our siege. We obtained a nest of six eggs, quite fresh, in
a hollow tree in Bashan, near Gadara, on the 6th of May.

"The total length of the Roller is about twelve inches. The
Swallow-tailed Indian Roller, of which we present a specimen, differs
from the Europeon Roller only in having the outer tail feathers
elongated to an extent of several inches."

[Illustration: SWALLOW-TAILED INDIAN ROLLER.]




THE RED HEADED WOODPECKER.


Perhaps no bird in North America is more universally known than the Red
Headed Woodpecker. He is found in all parts of the United States and is
sometimes called, for short, by the significant name of Red Head. His
tri-colored plumage, red, white and black, glossed with steel blue, is
so striking and characteristic, and his predatory habits in the orchards
and cornfields, and fondness for hovering along the fences, so very
notorious, that almost every child is acquainted with the Red Headed
Woodpecker. In the immediate neighborhood of large cities, where the old
timber is chiefly cut down, he is not so frequently found. Wherever
there is a deadening, however, you will find him, and in the dead tops
and limbs of high trees he makes his home. Towards the mountains,
particularly in the vicinity of creeks and rivers, these birds are
extremely numerous, especially in the latter end of summer. It is
interesting to hear them rattling on the dead leaves of trees or see
them on the roadside fences, where they flit from stake to stake. We
remember a tremendous and quite alarming and afterwards ludicrous
rattling by one of them on some loose tin roofing on a neighbor's house.
This occurred so often that the owner, to secure peace, had the roof
repaired.

They love the wild cherries, the earliest and sweetest apples, for,
as is said of him, "he is so excellent a connoisseur in fruit, that
whenever an apple or pear is found broached by him, it is sure to be
among the ripest and best flavored. When alarmed he seizes a capital one
by striking his open bill into it, and bears it off to the woods." He
eats the rich, succulent, milky young corn with voracity. He is of a
gay and frolicsome disposition, and half a dozen of the fraternity are
frequently seen diving and vociferating around the high dead limbs of
some large trees, pursuing and playing with each other, and amusing the
passerby with their gambols. He is a comical fellow, too, prying around
at you from the bole of a tree or from his nesting hole therein.

Though a lover of fruit, he does more good than injury. Insects are his
natural food, and form at least two thirds of his subsistence. He
devours the destructive insects that penetrate the bark and body of a
tree to deposit their eggs and larvae.

About the middle of May, he begins to construct his nest, which is
formed in the body of large limbs of trees, taking in no material but
smoothing it within to the proper shape and size. The female lays six
eggs, of a pure white. The young appear about the first of June. About
the middle of September the Red Heads begin to migrate to warmer
climates, travelling at night time in an irregular way like a disbanded
army and stopping for rest and food through the day.

The black snake is the deadly foe of the Red Head, frequently entering
his nest, feeding upon the young, and remaining for days in possession.

"The eager school-boy, after hazarding his neck to reach the
Woodpecker's hole, at the triumphant moment when he thinks the nestlings
his own, strips his arm, launches it down into the cavity, and grasping
what he conceives to be the callow young, starts with horror at the
sight of a hideous snake, almost drops from his giddy pinnacle, and
retreats down the tree with terror and precipitation."




THE WOODPECKER.

The Drummer Bird.


My dear girls and boys:

The man who told me to keep still and look pleasant while he took my
picture said I might write you a letter to send with it. You say I
always keep on the other side of the tree from you. That is because
someone has told you that I spoil trees, and I am afraid that you will
want to punish me for it. I do not spoil trees. The trees like to have
me come to visit them, for I eat the insects that are killing them.
Shall I tell you how I do this?

I cling to the tree with my strong claws so sharply hooked. The pointed
feathers of my tail are stiff enough to help hold me against the bark.
Then my breast bone is quite flat, so that I may press close to the
tree. When I am all ready you hear my r-r-rap--just like a rattle. My
head goes as quickly as if it were moved by a spring. Such a strong,
sharp bill makes the chips fly! The tiny tunnel I dig just reaches the
insect.

Then I thrust out my long tongue. It has a sharp, horny tip, and has
barbs on it too. Very tiny insects stick to a liquid like glue that
covers my tongue. I suppose I must tell you that I like a taste of the
ripest fruit and grain. Don't you think I earn a little when I work so
hard keeping the trees healthy?

I must tell you about the deep tunnel my mate and I cut out of a tree.
It is just wide enough for us to slip into. It is not straight down, but
bent, so that the rain cannot get to the bottom. There we make a nest of
little chips for our five white eggs.

I should like to tell you one of the stories that some boys and girls
tell about my red head. You will find it on another page of the book.
Now I must fly away to peck for more bugs.

                               Your loving friend,
                                            WOODPECKER.

[Illustration: RED HEADED WOODPECKER.]




MEXICAN MOT MOT.


Mot mots are peculiar to the new world, being found from Mexico
throughout the whole of Central America and the South American
continent. The general plumage is green, and the majority of the species
have a large racket at the end of the center tail feathers, formed by
the bird itself.

The Houton, (so called from his note,) according to Waterson, ranks high
in beauty among the birds of Demerara. This beautiful creature seems to
suppose that its beauty can be increased by trimming its tail, which
undergoes the same operation as one's hair in a barber shop, using its
own beak, which is serrated, in lieu of a pair of scissors. As soon as
its tail is fully grown, he begins about an inch from the extremity of
the two longest feathers in it and cuts away the web on both sides of
the shaft, making a gap about an inch long. Both male and female wear
their tails in this manner, which gives them a remarkable appearance
among all other birds.

To observe this bird in his native haunts, one must be in the forest
at dawn. He shuns the society of man. The thick and gloomy forests are
preferred by the Houton. In those far extending wilds, about day-break,
you hear him call in distinct and melancholy tone, "Houton, Houton!"
An observer says, "Move cautiously to the place from which the sound
proceeds, and you will see him sitting in the underwood, about a couple
of yards from the ground, his tail moving up and down every time he
articulates "Houton!"."

The Mot Mot lives on insects and berries found among the underwood, and
very rarely is seen in the lofty trees. He makes no nest, but rears his
young in a hole in the sand, generally on the side of a hill.

Mr. Osbert Salvin tells this curious anecdote: "Some years ago the
Zoological Society possessed a specimen which lived in one of the large
cages of the parrot house by itself. I have a very distinct recollection
of the bird, for I used every time I saw it to cheer it up a bit by
whistling such of its notes as I had picked up in the forests of
America. The bird always seemed to appreciate this attention, for
although it never replied, it became at once animated, hopped about the
cage, and swung its tail from side to side like the pendulum of a clock.
For a long time its tail had perfect spatules, but toward the end of its
life I noticed that the median feathers were no longer trimmed with such
precision, and on looking at its beak I noticed that from some cause or
other it did not close properly, gaped slightly at the tip, and had thus
become unfitted for removing the vanes of the feathers."




KING PARROT OR KING LORY.


Lory is the name of certain birds, mostly from the Moluccas and New
Guinea, which are remarkable for their bright scarlet or crimson
coloring, though also applied to some others in which the plumage is
chiefly green. Much interest has been excited by the discovery of
Dr. A. B. Meyer that the birds of this genus having a red plumage are
the females of those wearing green feathers. For a time there was much
difference of opinion on this subject, but the assertion is now
generally admitted.

They are called "brush-tongued" Parrots. The color of the first plumage
of the young is still unsettled. This bird is a favorite among bird
fanciers, is readily tamed, and is of an affectionate nature. It can be
taught to speak very creditably, and is very fond of attracting the
attention of strangers and receiving the caresses of those whom it
likes.

There are few things a parrot prefers to nuts and the stones of various
fruits. Wood says he once succeeded in obtaining the affections of a
Parisian Parrot, solely through the medium of peach stones which he
always saved for the bird and for which it regularly began to gabble as
soon as it saw him coming. "When taken freshly from the peach," he says,
"the stones are very acceptable to the parrot, who turns them over,
chuckling all the while to show his satisfaction, and picking all the
soft parts from the deep indentations in the stone." He used to crack
the stone before giving it to the bird, when his delight knew no bounds.
They are fond of hot condiments, cayenne pepper or the capsicum pod. If
a bird be ailing, a capsicum will often set it right again.

The parrot is one of the hardiest of birds when well cared for and
will live to a great age. Some of these birds have been known to attain
an age of seventy years, and one seen by Vaillant had reached the
patriarchal age of ninety three. At sixty its memory began to fail, at
sixty-five the moult became very irregular and the tail changed to
yellow. At ninety it was a very decrepit creature, almost blind and
quite silent, having forgotten its former abundant stock of words.

A gentleman once had for many years a parrot of seemingly rare
intelligence. It was his custom during the summer to hang the parrot's
cage in front of his shop in a country village, where the bird would
talk and laugh and cry, and condole with itself. Dogs were his special
aversion and on occasions when he had food to spare, he would drop it
out of the cage and whistle long and loud for them. When the dogs had
assembled to his satisfaction he would suddenly scream in the fiercest
accents, "Get out, dogs!" and when they had scattered in alarm his
enjoyment of it was demonstrative. This parrot's vocabulary, however,
was not the most refined, his master having equipped him with certain
piratical idioms.

According to authority, the parrot owner will find the health of his pet
improved and its happiness promoted by giving it, every now and then, a
small log or branch on which the mosses and lichens are still growing.
Meat, fish, and other similar articles of diet are given with evil
effects.

It is impossible for anyone who has only seen these birds in a cage or
small inclosure to conceive what must be the gorgeous appearance of a
flock, either in full flight, and performing their various evolutions,
under a vertical sun, or sporting among the superb foliage of a tropical
forest which, without these, and other brilliant tenants, would present
only a solitude of luxuriant vegetation.




[Illustration: KING PARROT.]




THE AMERICAN ROBIN.

The Bird of the Morning.


Yes, my dear readers, I am the bird of the morning. Very few of you rise
early enough to hear my first song. By the time you are awake our little
ones have had their breakfast, Mrs. Robin and I have had our morning
bath and we are all ready to greet you with our morning song.

I wonder if any of you have seen our nest and can tell the color of the
eggs that Mrs. Robin lays. Some time I will let you peep into the nest
and see them, but of course you will not touch them.

I wonder, too, if you know any of my cousins--the Mocking bird, the
Cat-bird or the Brown Thrush--I think I shall ask them to have their
pictures taken soon and talk to you about our gay times.

Did you ever see one of my cousins on the ground? I don't believe you
can tell how I move about. Some of you may say I run, and some of you
may say I hop, and others of you may say I do both. Well, I'll tell you
how to find out. Just watch me and see. My little friends up north won't
be able to see me though until next month, as I do not dare leave the
warm south until Jack Frost leaves the ground so I can find worms to
eat.

I shall be about the first bird to visit you next month and I want you
to watch for me. When I do come it will be to stay a long time, for I
shall be the last to leave you. Just think, the first to come and last
to leave. Don't you think we ought to be great friends? Let us get
better acquainted when next we meet. Your friend,

                                              ROBIN.


    How do the robins build their nest?
    Robin Red Breast told me,
    First a wisp of yellow hay
    In a pretty round they lay;
    Then some shreds of downy floss,
    Feathers too, and bits of moss,
    Woven with a sweet, sweet song,
    This way, that way, and across:
    That's what Robin told me.

    Where do the robins hide their nest?
    Robin Red Breast told me,
    Up among the leaves so deep,
    Where the sunbeams rarely creep,
    Long before the winds are cold,
    Long before the leaves are gold
    Bright-eyed stars will peep and see
    Baby Robins--one, two, three:
    That's what Robin told me.




THE AMERICAN ROBIN.

"Come, sweetest of the feathered throng."


Our American Robin must not be confounded with the English Robin
Redbreast, although both bear the same name. It is the latter bird in
whose praise so much has been written in fable and song. The American
Robin belongs to the Thrush family; the Mocking bird, Cat-bird and Brown
Thrush, or Thrasher, being other familiar children. In this family, bird
organization reaches its highest development. This bird is larger than
his English cousin the Redbreast and many think has a finer note than
any other of the Thrush family.

The Robin courts the society of man, following close upon the plow and
the spade and often becoming quite tame and domestic. It feeds for a
month or two on strawberries and cherries, but generally on worms and
insects picked out of the ground. It destroys the larvae of many insects
in the soil and is a positive blessing to man, designed by the Creator
for ornament and pleasure, and use in protecting vegetation. John
Burroughs, the bird lover, says it is the most native and democratic of
our birds.

It is widely diffused over the country, migrating to milder climates in
the Winter. We have heard him in the early dawn on Nantucket Island
welcoming the coming day, in the valleys of the Great and the little
Miami, in the parks of Chicago, and on the plains of Kansas, his song
ever cheering and friendly. It is one of the earliest heralds of Spring,
coming as early as March or April, and is one of the latest birds to
leave us in Autumn. Its song is a welcome prelude to the general concert
of Summer.

    "When Robin Redbreast sings,
     We think on budding Springs."

The Robin is not one of our most charming songsters, yet its carol is
sweet, hearty and melodious. Its principal song is in the morning
before sunrise, when it mounts the top of some tall tree, and with its
wonderful power of song, announces the coming of day. When educated, it
imitates the sounds of various birds, and even sings tunes. It must be
amusing to hear it pipe out so solemn a strain as Old Hundred.

It has no remarkable habits. It shows considerable courage and anxiety
for its young, and is a pattern of propriety when keeping house and
concerned with the care of its offspring. Two broods are often reared
out of the same nest. In the Fall these birds become restless and
wandering, often congregating in large flocks, when, being quite fat,
they are much esteemed as food.

The Robin's nest is sometimes built in a corner of the porch, but
oftener it is saddled on the horizontal limb of an orchard tree. It is
so large and poorly concealed that any boy can find it, yet it is seldom
molested. The Robin is not a skillful architect. The masonry of its nest
is rough and the material coarse, being composed largely of leaves or
old grass, cemented with mud. The eggs number four to six and are
greenish blue in color.

An observer tells the following story of this domestic favorite:

"For the last three years a Robin has nested on a projecting pillar that
supports the front piazza. In the Spring of the first year she built her
nest on the top of the pillar--a rude affair--it was probably her first
effort. The same season she made her second nest in the forks of an Oak,
which took her only a few hours to complete.

[Continued page 59.]

[Illustration: AMERICAN ROBIN.]




[Illustration: MEXICAN MOT MOT.]




THE AMERICAN ROBIN. (Continued)

"She reared three broods that season; for the third family she returned
to the piazza, and repaired the first nest. The following Spring she
came again to the piazza, but selected another pillar for the site of
her domicile, the construction of which was a decided improvement upon
the first. For the next nest she returned to the Oak and raised a second
story on the old one of the previous year, but making it much more
symmetrical than the one beneath. The present season her first dwelling
was as before, erected on a pillar of the piazza--as fine a structure as
I ever saw this species build. When this brood was fledged she again
repaired to the Oak, and reared a third story on the old domicile, using
the moss before mentioned, making a very elaborate affair, and finally
finishing up by festooning it with long sprays of moss. This bird and
her mate were quite tame. I fed them with whortleberries, which they
seemed to relish, and they would come almost to my feet to get them.

The amount of food which the young robin is capable of absorbing is
enormous. A couple of vigorous, half-grown birds have been fed, and in
twelve hours devoured ravenously, sixty-eight earth worms, weighing
thirty-four pennyweight, or forty-one per cent more than their own
weight. A man at this rate should eat about seventy pounds of flesh per
day, and drink five or six gallons of water.

The following poem by the good Quaker poet Whittier is sweet because
_he_ wrote it, interesting because it recites an old legend which
incidentally explains the color of the robin's breast, and unique
because it is one of the few poems about our American bird.


THE ROBIN.

     My old Welsh neighbor over the way
       Crept slowly out in the sun of spring,
     Pushed from her ears the locks of gray,
       And listened to hear the robin sing.

     Her grandson, playing at marbles, stopped,
       And--cruel in sport, as boys will be--
     Tossed a stone at the bird, who hopped
       From bough to bough in the apple tree.

    "Nay!" said the grandmother; "have you not heard,
       My poor, bad boy! of the fiery pit,
     And how, drop by drop, this merciful bird
       Carries the water that quenches it?

    "He brings cool dew in his little bill,
       And lets it fall on the souls of sin:
     You can see the mark on his red breast still
       Of fires that scorch as he drops it in.

    "My poor Bron rhuddyn! my breast-burned bird,
       Singing so sweetly from limb to limb,
     Very dear to the heart of Our Lord
       Is he who pities the lost like Him."

    "Amen!" I said to the beautiful myth;
       "Sing, bird of God, in my heart as well:
     Each good thought is a drop wherewith
       To cool and lessen the fires of hell.

    "Prayers of love like rain-drops fall,
       Tears of pity are cooling dew,
     And dear to the heart of Our Lord are all
       Who suffer like Him in the good they do."




THE KINGFISHER.


Dear Children:

I shall soon arrive from the south. I hear that all the birds are going
to tell stories to the boys and girls.

I have never talked much with children myself for I never really cared
for people. They used to say that the dead body of a Kingfisher kept
them safe in war and they said also that it protected them in lightning.

Even now in some places in France they call us the moth birds, for they
believe that our bodies will keep away moths from woolen cloth.

I wish that people would not believe such things about us. Perhaps you
cannot understand me when I talk. You may think that you hear only a
child's rattle.

Listen again! It is I, the Kingfisher. That sound is my way of talking.
I live in the deep woods. I own a beautiful stream and a clear, cool
lake. Oh, the little fish in that lake are good enough for a king to
eat! I know, for I am a king.

You may see me or some of my mates near the lake any pleasant day.
People used to say that we always brought pleasant weather. That is a
joke. It is the pleasant weather that always brings us from our homes.
When it storms or rains we cannot see the fish in the lake. Then we may
as well stay in our nests.

My home once belonged to a water rat. He dug the fine hall in the gravel
bank in my stream. It is nearly six feet long. The end of it is just the
kind of a place for a nest. It is warm, dry and dark. In June my wife
and I will settle down in it. By that time we shall have the nest well
lined with fish bones. We shall put in some dried grass too. The fish
bones make a fine lining for a nest. You know we swallow the fish whole,
but we save all the bones for our nest.

I shall help my wife hatch her five white eggs and shall try in every
way to make my family safe.

Please tell the people not to believe those strange things about me and
you will greatly oblige,

                      A neighbor,
                         THE KINGFISHER.

 [Illustration: KINGFISHER.
                Copyrighted by
                Nature Study Pub. Co., 1897, Chicago.]




THE KINGFISHER.

The Lone Fisherman.


The American species belongs to the true group of Kingfishers. It
occupies the whole continent of North America and although migrating in
the north, he is a constant resident of our southern states. The belted
Kingfisher is the only variety found along the inland streams of the
United States. Audubon declares that "belted" should apply only to the
female, however.

Like most birds of brilliant plumage, the Kingfisher prefers a quiet
and secluded haunt. It loves the little trout streams, with wooded and
precipitous banks, the still ponds and small lakes, ornamental waters
in parks, where it is not molested, and the sides of sluggish rivers,
drains and mill-ponds.

Here in such a haunt the bird often flits past like an indistinct gleam
of bluish light. Fortune may sometimes favor the observer and the bird
may alight on some twig over the stream, its weight causing it to sway
gently to and fro. It eagerly scans the shoal of young trout sporting in
the pool below, when suddenly it drops down into the water, and, almost
before the observer is aware of the fact, is back again to its perch
with a struggling fish in its beak. A few blows on the branch and its
prey is ready for the dexterous movement of the bill, which places it
in a position for swallowing. Sometimes the captured fish is adroitly
jerked into the air and caught as it falls.

Fish is the principal food of the Kingfisher; but it also eats various
kinds of insects, shrimps, and even small crabs. It rears its young in
a hole, which is made in the banks of the stream it frequents. It is a
slatternly bird, fouls its own nest and its peerless eggs. The nesting
hole is bored rather slowly, and takes from one to two weeks to
complete. Six or eight white glossy eggs are laid, sometimes on the bare
soil, but often on the fish bones which, being indigestible, are thrown
up by the bird in pellets.

The Kingfisher has a crest of feathers on the top of his head, which he
raises and lowers, especially when trying to drive intruders away from
his nest.

The plumage is compact and oily, making it almost impervious to water.
The flesh is fishy and disagreeable to the taste, but the eggs are said
to be good eating. The wings are long and pointed and the bill longer
than the head. The voice is harsh and monotonous.

It is said that few birds are connected with more fables than the
Kingfisher. The superstition that a dead Kingfisher when suspended
by the throat, would turn its beak to that particular point of the
compass from which the wind blew, is now dead. It was also supposed
to possess many astonishing virtues, as that its dried body would avert
thunderbolts, and if kept in a wardrobe would preserve from moths the
woolen stuffs and the like contained in it.

Under the name of "halcyon," it was fabled by the ancients to build its
nest on the surface of the sea, and to have the power of calming the
troubled waves during its period of incubation; hence the phrase
"halcyon days."

A pair of Kingfishers have had their residence in a bank at the south
end of Washington Park, Chicago, for at least three seasons past. We
have watched the Kingfisher from secluded spots on Long Island ponds and
tidal streams, where his peculiar laughing note is the same as that
which greets the ear of the fisherman on far inland streams on still
summer days.




THE BLACKBIRD.

    "I could not think so plain a bird
       Could sing so fine a song."


    One on another against the wall
    Pile up the books--I am done with them all;
    I shall be wise, if I ever am wise,
    Out of my own ears, and of my own eyes.

    One day of the woods and their balmy light--
    One hour on the top of a breezy hill,
    There in the sassafras all out of sight
    The Blackbird is splitting his slender bill
    For the ease of his heart:
                  Do you think if he said
    "I will sing like this bird with the mud colored back
    And the two little spots of gold over his eyes,
    Or like to this shy little creature that flies
    So low to the ground, with the amethyst rings
    About her small throat--all alive when she sings
    With a glitter of shivering green--for the rest,
    Gray shading to gray, with the sheen of her breast
    Half rose and half fawn--
                  Or like this one so proud,
    That flutters so restless, and cries out so loud,
    With stiff horny beak and a top-knotted head,
    And a lining of scarlet laid under his wings--"
    Do you think, if he said, "I'm ashamed to be black!"
    That he could have shaken the sassafras-tree
    As he does with the song he was born to? not he!
                                     --ALICE CARY.


    "Do you ne'er think what wondrous beings these?
      Do you ne'er think who made them--who taught
    The dialect they speak, where melodies
      Alone are the interpreters of thought?
    Whose household words are songs in many keys,
      Sweeter than instrument of man ere caught!
    Whose habitation in the tree-tops even
      Are half-way houses on the road to heaven!

           *       *       *       *       *

    "You call them thieves or pillagers; but know,
      They are the winged wardens of your farms,
    Who from the cornfields drive the insidious foe,
      And from your harvest keep a hundred harms;
    Even the blackest of them all, the crow,
      Renders good service as your man-at-arms,
    Crushing the beetle in his coat of mail,
      And crying havoc on the slug and snail."
                 --FROM "THE BIRDS OF KILLINGWORTH."




[Illustration: BLUE MOUNTAIN LORY.]

BLUE MOUNTAIN LORY.


This bird inhabits the vast plains of the interior of New South Wales.
It is one of the handsomest, not only of the Australian Parrots, but
takes foremost place among the most gorgeously dressed members of the
Parrot family that are to be met with in any part of the world. It
is about eleven or twelve inches in length. The female cannot with
certainty be distinguished from her mate, but is usually a very little
smaller. The Lory seldom descends to the ground, but passes the greater
part of its life among the gum trees upon the pollen and nectar on which
it mainly subsists. In times of scarcity, however, it will also eat
grass seeds, as well as insects, for want of which it is said, it often
dies prematurely when in captivity.

Dr. Russ mentions that a pair obtained from a London dealer in 1870 for
fifty dollars were the first of these birds imported, but the London
Zoological Society had secured some of them two years before.

Despite his beauty, the Blue Mountain Lory is not a desirable bird to
keep, as he requires great care. A female which survived six years in an
aviary, laying several eggs, though kept singly, was fed on canary seed,
maize, a little sugar, raw beef and carrots. W. Gedney seems to have
been peculiarly happy in his specimens, remarking, "But for the terribly
sudden death which so often overtakes these birds, they would be the
most charming feathered pets that a lady could possess, having neither
the power nor inclination to bite savagely." The same writer's
recommendation to feed this Lory exclusively upon soft food, in which
honey forms a great part, probably accounts for his advice to those
"whose susceptible natures would be shocked" by the sudden death of
their favorite, not to become the owner of a Blue Mountain Lory.

Like all the parrot family these Lories breed in hollow boughs, where
the female deposits from three to four white eggs, upon which she sits
for twenty-one days. The young from the first resemble their parents
closely, but are a trifle less brilliantly colored.

They are very active and graceful, but have an abominable shriek. The
noise is said to be nearly as disagreeable as the plumage is beautiful.
They are very quarrelsome and have to be kept apart from the other
parrots, which they will kill. Other species of birds however, are not
disturbed by them. It is a sort of family animosity. They have been bred
in captivity.

The feathers of the head and neck are long and very narrow and lie
closely together; the claws are strong and hooked, indicating their tree
climbing habits. Their incessant activity and amusing ways make these
birds always interesting to watch.




THE RED WING BLACK BIRD.

The Bird of Society.

    The blackbirds make the maples ring
    With social cheer and jubilee;
    The redwing flutes his o-ka-lee.--EMERSON.


The much abused and persecuted Red Wing Black Bird is found throughout
North America, from the Atlantic to the Pacific; and it breeds more
or less abundantly wherever found. In New England it is generally
migratory, though instances are on record where a few have been known
to remain throughout the winter in Massachusetts. Passing, in January,
through the lower counties of Virginia, one frequently witnesses the
aerial evolutions of great numbers of these birds. Sometimes they appear
as if driven about like an enormous black cloud carried before the wind,
varying every moment in shape. Sometimes they rise suddenly from the
fields with a noise like thunder, while the glittering of innumerable
wings of the brightest vermillion, amid the black cloud, occasion a very
striking effect. At times the whole congregated multitude will suddenly
alight in some detached grove and commence one general concert, that can
plainly be distinguished at the distance of more than two miles. With
the Redwings the whole winter season seems one continued carnival. They
find abundant food in the old fields of rice, buckwheat and grain, and
much of their time is spent in aerial movements, or in grand vocal
performances.

The Redwings, for their nest, always select either the borders of
streams or low marshy situations, amongst thick bunches of reeds. One
nest was found built on a slender sapling at the distance of fourteen
feet from the ground. The nest was pensile, like that of the Baltimore
Oriole.

They have from one to three or more broods in a season, according to
locality.

In the grain growing states they gather in immense swarms and commit
havoc, and although they are shot in great numbers, and though their
ranks are thinned by the attacks of hawks, it seems to have but little
effect upon the survivors.

On the other hand, these Black Birds more than compensate the farmer
for their mischief by the benefit they confer in the destruction of grub
worms, caterpillars, and various kinds of larvae, the secret and deadly
enemies of vegetation. It has been estimated the number of insects
destroyed by these birds in a single season, in the United States, to
be twelve thousand millions.

The eggs average about an inch in length. They are oval in shape, have a
light bluish ground, and are marbled, lined and blotched with markings
of light and dark purple and black.


BLACKBIRD.

    'Tis a woodland enchanted!
    By no sadder spirit
    Than blackbirds and thrushes,
    That whistle to cheer it
    All day in the bushes,
    This woodland is haunted;
    And in a small clearing,
    Beyond sight or hearing
    Of human annoyance,
    The little fount gushes.--LOWELL.

[Illustration: RED-WING BLACK BIRD.]




THE BIRD OF SOCIETY.


The blackbird loves to be one of a great flock. He talks, sings or
scolds from morning until night. He cannot keep still. He will only stay
alone with his family a few months in the summer. That is the reason he
is called the "Bird of Society." When he is merry, he gaily sings,
"Conk-quer-ree." When he is angry or frightened he screams, "Chock!
Chock!" When he is flying or bathing he gives a sweet note which sounds
like ee-u-u. He can chirp--chick, check, chuck, to his little ones as
softly as any other bird. But only his best friends ever hear his
sweetest tones, for the Blackbirds do not know how to be polite. They
all talk at once. That is why most people think they only scream and
chatter. Did you ever hear the blackbirds in the cornfields? If the
farmers thought about it perhaps they would feel that part of every corn
crop belongs to the Blackbirds. When the corn is young, the farmer
cannot see the grubs which are eating the young plants. The Blackbirds
can. They feed them to their babies--many thousands in a day. That is
the way the crops are saved for the farmer. But he never thinks of that.
Later when the Blackbirds come for their share of the corn the farmer
says, "No, they shall not have my corn. I must stop that quickly."
Perhaps the Blackbirds said the same thing to the grubs in the spring.
It is hard to have justice for everyone.

In April the Blackbird and his mate leave the noisy company. They seek
a cosy home near the water where they can be quiet until August. They
usually choose a swampy place among low shrubs and rushes. Here in the
deep nest of coarse grass, moss and mud the mother bird lays her five
eggs. They are very pretty--light blue with purple and black markings.
Their friends say this is the best time to watch the blackbirds. In the
flock they are all so much alike we cannot tell one from another. You
would like to hear of some of the wise things Blackbirds do when they
are tame.

One friend of the birds turned her home into a great open bird cage. Her
chair was the favorite perch of her birds. She never kept them one
minute longer than they wanted to stay. Yet her home was always full.
This was Olive Thorne Miller. If you care to, you might ask mother to
get "Bird Ways" and read you what she says about this "bird of society"
and the other birds of this book.




THE AMERICAN RED BIRD.


American Red Birds are among our most common cage birds, and are very
generally known in Europe, numbers of them having been carried over both
to France and England. Their notes are varied and musical; many of them
resembling the high notes of a fife, and are nearly as loud. They are in
song from March to September, beginning at the first appearance of dawn
and repeating successively twenty or thirty times, and with little
intermission, a favorite strain.

The sprightly figure and gaudy plumage of the Red Bird, his vivacity,
strength of voice, and actual variety of note, and the little expense
with which he is kept, will always make him a favorite.

This species is more numerous to the east of the great range of the
Alleghenies, but is found in Pennsylvania and Ohio, and is numerous in
the lower parts of the Southern States. In January and February they
have been found along the roadsides and fences, hovering together in
half dozens, associating with snow birds, and various kinds of sparrows.
In the northern states they are migratory, and in the southern part of
Pennsylvania they reside during the whole year, frequenting the borders
of rivulets, in sheltered hollows, covered with holly, laurel, and other
evergreens. They love also to reside in the vicinity of fields of Indian
corn, a grain that constitutes their chief and favorite food. The seeds
of apples, cherries, and other fruit are also eaten by them, and they
are accused of destroying bees.

Early in May the Red Bird begins to prepare his nest, which is very
often fixed in a holly, cedar or laurel bush. A pair of Red Birds in
Ohio returned for a number of years to build their nest in a honeysuckle
vine under a portico. They were never disturbed and never failed to rear
a brood of young. The nest was constructed of small twigs, dry weeds,
slips of vine bark, and lined with stalks of fine grass. Four eggs of
brownish olive were laid, and they usually raised two broods in a
season.

In confinement they fade in color, but if well cared for, will live to
a considerable age. They are generally known by the names: Red Bird,
Virginia Red Bird, Virginia Nightingale, and Crested Red Bird. It is
said that the female often sings nearly as well as the male.


THE REDBIRDS.

    Two Redbirds came in early May,
    Flashing like rubies on the way;
    Their joyous notes awoke the day,
    And made all nature glad and gay.

    Thrice welcome! crested visitants;
    Thou doest well to seek our haunts;
    The bounteous vine, by thee possessed,
    From prying eyes shall keep thy nest.

    Sing to us in the early dawn;
    'Tis then thy scarlet throats have drawn
    Refreshing draughts from drops of dew,
    The enchanting concert to renew.

    No plaintive notes, we ween, are thine;
    They gurgle like a royal wine;
    They cheer, rejoice, they quite outshine
    Thy neighbor's voice, tho' it's divine.

    Free as the circumambient air
    Do thou remain, a perfect pair,
    To come once more when Proserpine
    Shall swell the buds of tree and vine.
                                 --C. C. M.

 [Illustration: CARDINAL.]

THE RED BIRD.


    Is it because he wears a red hat,
      That we call him the Cardinal Bird?
    Or is it because his voice is so rich
      That scarcely a finer is heard?

    'Tis neither, but this--I've guessed it, I'm sure--
    His dress is a primary color of Nature.
    It blends with the Oriole's golden display,
    And the garment of Blue Bird completes the array.
                                 --C. C. M.


       *       *       *       *       *




 ATTEND THE BEST.
 CHICAGO BUSINESS COLLEGE
 Wabash Ave. & Randolph St.

 [Illustration]

 Elegant new building. Finer apartments than any other Commercial School
 in the United States. Thorough courses in BUSINESS, SHORTHAND and ENGLISH.
 Day and Evening Sessions. Write for catalogue mailed FREE.

                                  Address GONDRING & VIRDEN, Principals.

 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.




 WRITE FOR SAMPLES
 AND PRICES OF
 COMMENCEMENT
 PROGRAMS

         MIZE & STEARNS
         PRINTERS AND BINDERS
         CHICAGO

 Telephone Harrison 560      346 to 350 Dearborn Street

                                            CATALOGUES
                                            PERIODICALS
                                            EMBOSSING
                                            FINE STATIONERY

 SAM R. CARTER, President.        GUSTAV ZEESE, Secretary.




 CHICAGO Colortype COMPANY
 PHOTOGRAPHY IN NATURAL COLORS

 ART COLOR... PRINTERS and ENGRAVERS,

 Office and Works:
    1205-1213 Roscoe Street.      CHICAGO.

             PAINTINGS,
             WATER COLORS,
             LITHOGRAPHS,

 and Articles of every description faithfully reproduced
       IN THEIR NATURAL COLORS.

 The Illustrations in this Magazine were engraved and printed by us.




 WHAT WE WILL
 SELL YOU FOR $12.00

 [Illustration]

 #4 FEET LONG, 2 FEET 5 INCHES WIDE.#

 Oak, Extension Slide, Finished back Quarter-sawed
 Sycamore Pigeon Holes,
 Combination Lock on Drawers,
 Spring Lock with two keys on Curtain.
 GUARANTEED PERFECT.
 Can not be duplicated for less than $20.00.

 Securely Packed and put on board cars for
 $12.00 and shipped C. O. D. with privilege of examination.

         THE BAKER SAFE COMPANY,
 47 and 49 Dearborn Street, Chicago, Ill.




 The Best is the Cheapest

 CROWN FOUNTAIN PENS
 CROWN GOLD PENS

 Received Highest Awards
      at World's Fair, Chicago, 1893

 [Illustration]

 ALL SIZES AND STYLES
      EVERY PEN GUARANTEED

  CROWN PEN CO., Manufacturers
 78 State Street, CHICAGO, ILL.

 ALL MAKES OF FOUNTAIN AND GOLD PENS
             REPAIRED.




 What POINTS do You Want in a COPYING Machine?

 These points {You want RAPIDITY        Copies one hundred letters in
 are all                                  seven minutes.
 contained in {You want ECONOMY         Save copy books, blotters, cloths,
 Anderson's                               baths, etc.
 Automatic    {You want EFFICIENCY      It makes the most perfect copies.
 Copying      {You want UNIFORMITY      One copy the same as another.
 Machine.     {You want SIMPLICITY      Easy to learn, easy to run; it's
                                          simplicity itself.
              {You want DURABILITY      Well constructed of selected
                                          metals.
              {You want ATTRACTIVENESS  An ornament to any office.

 FAST--DURABLE--SIMPLE.

 SAVES TIME, MATERIAL, MONEY.
   SAVES ITS COST EVERY YEAR BY ECONOMY IN COPYING PAPER.
     EVERY BUSINESS AND PROFESSIONAL MAN NEEDS IT.

 Will allow for your old screw press. SEND FOR TRADE PROPOSITION. Address

    ANDERSON AUTOMATIC COPYING MACHINE CO.
                      910 Monadnock Block, CHICAGO.

 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.




 STEGER
    PIANOS

  CELEBRATED
  FOR THEIR

 Liquid Quality of Tone
 Elasticity of Action
 Great Durability

 STEGER & CO.
 MANUFACTURERS

 COR. WABASH AVE.
 AND JACKSON ST    CHICAGO, ILL. U.S.A.

 Please mention "BIRDS" when you write to Advertisers.




TESTIMONIALS.

                                  FRANKFORT. KY., February 3, 1897.

 W. J. BLACK, Vice-President,
                     Chicago, Ill.

Dear Sir: I have a copy of your magazine entitled "Birds," and beg to
say that I consider it one of the finest things on the subject that I
have ever seen, and shall be pleased to recommend it to county and city
superintendents of the state.

                           Very respectfully,
                                     W. J. DAVIDSON,
                           State Superintendent Public Instruction.


                             SAN FRANCISCO, CAL., January 27, 1897.

 W. J. BLACK, ESQ.,
           Chicago, Ill.

Dear Sir: I am very much obliged for the copy of "Birds" that has just
come to hand. It should be in the hands of every primary and grammar
teacher. I send herewith copy of "List of San Francisco Teachers."

                                            Very respectfully,
                                                        M. BABCOCK.


                                   LINCOLN, NEB., February 9, 1897.

 W. J. BLACK,
     Chicago, Ill.

Dear Sir: The first number of your magazine, "Birds," is upon my desk. I
am highly pleased with it. It will prove a very serviceable
publication--one that strikes out along the right lines. For the purpose
intended, it has, in my opinion, no equal. It is clear, concise, and
admirably illustrated.

                     Very respectfully,
                                       W. R. JACKSON,
                           State Superintendent Public Instruction.


                                NORTH LIMA, OHIO, February 1, 1897.

 MR. W. E. WATT,

Dear Sir: Sample copy of "Birds" received. All of the family delighted
with it. We wish it unbounded success. It will be an excellent
supplement to "In Birdland" in the Ohio Teachers' Reading Circle, and I
venture Ohio will be to the front with a good subscription list. I
enclose list of teachers.

                        Very truly,
                                   C. M. L. ALTDOERFFER,
                                           Township Superintendent.


                                       MILWAUKEE, January 30, 1897.

 NATURE STUDY PUBLISHING COMPANY,
             227 Dearborn Street, Chicago.

Gentlemen: I acknowledge with pleasure the receipt of your publication,
"Birds," with accompanying circulars. I consider it the best on the
subject in existence. I have submitted the circulars and publication to
my teachers, who have nothing to say but praise in behalf of the
monthly.

                                JULIUS TORNEY,
                Principal 2nd Dist. Primary School, Milwaukee, Wis.




OUR PREMIUM

 A picture of wonderful beauty
 of the Golden Pheasant almost
 life size in a natural scene,
 plate 1218 inches, on card
 1925 inches, is given as a
 premium to yearly subscribers.
 Our price on this picture in
 Art Stores is $3.50.



***END OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK BIRDS ILLUSTRATED BY COLOR
PHOTOGRAPH, VOLUME 1, NUMBER 2, FEBRUARY, 1897***


******* This file should be named 30626-8.txt or 30626-8.zip *******


This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
http://www.gutenberg.org/dirs/3/0/6/2/30626



Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://www.gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/pglaf.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://www.gutenberg.org/about/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:
http://www.gutenberg.org/fundraising/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

