The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mammals of Warren Woods, Berrien
County, Michigan, by Lee Raymond Dice

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Mammals of Warren Woods, Berrien County, Michigan
       Occasional Paper of the Museum of Zoology, Number 86

Author: Lee Raymond Dice

Release Date: September 5, 2010 [EBook #33648]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS OF WARREN WOODS, MICHIGAN ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net









  NUMBER 86            JUNE 24, 1920

  OCCASIONAL PAPERS OF THE MUSEUM OF
  ZOOLOGY

  UNIVERSITY OF MICHIGAN

  ANN ARBOR, MICHIGAN PUBLISHED BY THE UNIVERSITY




THE MAMMALS OF WARREN WOODS, BERRIEN COUNTY, MICHIGAN

BY LEE RAYMOND DICE


Few detailed studies of the mammal associations of the forests of the
United States have been made. But if we are ever to know, for our
different species of mammals, the natural environments under which
their evolution and differentiation occurred, we must study and
describe their habitats and habitat limitations before all the native
areas in the country have been altered by the activities of mankind.
As a contribution to this subject the following paper is presented.

The Warren Woods are a state preserve under the Edward K. Warren
Foundation. They are located in Berrien County, Michigan, about three
miles north of Three Oaks. The preserve consists of about two hundred
acres, of which somewhat less than half is in clearing and the
remainder mostly covered by forest, much of it still nearly in its
primitive condition.

[Illustration: FIG. 1.--Sketch map of Warren Woods Preserve. The
distribution of the various mammal habitats is indicated.]

The topography is nearly level, though the area is cut by a number of
ravines draining to the Galien River, which flows through the
preserve. Along the river and in its bends there are moderate-sized
flood-plains.

On the flood-plains a few small buttonbush swamps occur; and along the
margins of the river a few freshly formed mud bars have not yet become
forested; but most of the flood-plains are covered by heavy forest.
The higher ground, except that in the clearing, is covered by heavy
beech-maple forest.

Several types of habitats are represented in the clearing: in a few of
the cleared ravines a thick growth of sedges and iris occurs; on the
higher ground small areas are dominated by rushes, other areas by
sedges, while the greater part is covered by grass. In parts of the
clearing blackberries and other shrubs have grown up to form thickets,
and in many places, especially along the edges of ravines,
second-growth trees of oak, maple, or beech grow in the thickets or
form small groves.

The mammal habitats found on the preserve may be listed as follows:

_Natural habitats_

    Aquatic habitat
    Buttonbush-swamp habitat
    Shore habitat
    Mud-bar herbage habitat
    Flood-plain forest habitat
    Beech-maple forest habitat
    Aerial habitat

_Modified and artificial habitats_

    Second-growth, forest and scrub habitat
    Cleared-ravine sedge habitat
    Cleared-upland rush habitat
    Cleared-upland sedge habitat
    Cleared-upland blue-grass habitat
    Cultivated field habitat
    Orchard habitat
    Edificarian habitat

It is unfortunate that all of the area in clearing and about half of
the forested area on the preserve has been and is being heavily
pastured by cattle and horses. The presence of stock has changed the
native conditions so much that, so far as interpreting the primitive
mammal associations is concerned, little dependence can be placed on
studies made in that portion of the preserve. The grass and herbage is
extensively eaten off, and many of the shrubs and young trees eaten
or badly mutilated. Under the pastured forest little underbrush or
herbage remains, and the conditions are very poor for small mammals.

In all the forest, in the unpastured as well as in the pastured part,
a number of trees have been cut out in former years, and although no
trees are now being cut down, all the trees and branches which fall
are being cut up for firewood. This results in there being few logs
and little dead brush on the ground, and removes a favorite place for
small mammal nests and runways, as well as largely eliminating as
mammal food the insects and larvae which are dependent on decaying
wood. However, with the exception of the removal of the logs and of a
few trees, that part of the forest to the north of the river is still
in practically its native condition, and it shows no evidence of ever
having been pastured. It is thus a splendid place for the study of the
native faunal conditions.

Although the whole area in the preserve is small there are other areas
of adjoining forest along the Galien River, so that, for the smaller
mammals at least, the results of the study and trapping should
indicate the primitive habitat distribution. The relative abundance of
the different species, however, is probably much changed by the
decrease throughout the whole region of the carnivores, which have
been much hunted and trapped by man.

The mammals of Warren Woods were intensively studied by the author
from July 3 to September 3 in the summer of 1919. A camp was
maintained near the edge of the Woods, and by trapping and hunting
every effort was made to determine the mammal fauna of the preserve.
From one hundred to two hundred traps for small mammals and about
twenty traps for the larger species were kept constantly in operation.
A small amount of trapping was done in the fields and along the
roadsides immediately adjoining the Woods and a few records were
secured from the camp house.

The work was supported by the Michigan Geological and Biological Survey.
Dr. Alexander G. Ruthven directed the work and gave much assistance in
securing the needed collecting equipment. Much help was given by George
R. Fox, Director of the Warren Foundation, not only in getting to and
from the camp at the Woods and in numerous other courtesies, but also in
information about the Woods and about the mammals there. The plant
identifications were made by Mr. C. Billington.

The figures following the specific names in the lists of mammals from
each habitat indicate the number of individuals trapped, shot, or seen
and positively identified in that habitat.




NATURAL HABITATS


_Aquatic habitat_:

     _Mustela vison mink._ Mink. Reported.

     _Fiber zibethicus zibethicus._ Muskrat. Reported.

Mink and muskrat are reported by residents to occur in the Galien
River in and near Warren Woods, but I was unable to secure any
specimens though traps were set for them; neither did I see any signs
of their presence.


_Buttonbush-swamp habitat_:

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 8.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 2.

A large buttonbush swamp occurs in the preserve just south of the
Galien River, but around this the native trees have been cut away and
over its accessible edges it has been heavily pastured, so that it is
not at all in its natural conditions, and it was not trapped. In the
unpastured flood-plain north of the river there is another buttonbush
swamp of several hundred yards extent. This latter area was the one
selected for study.

In this typical swamp the buttonbush, _Cephalanthus occidentalis_, is
practically the only plant present. It thickly covers the area with
its tangled branches, which grow to heights of four to ten feet. The
water had drained away in August, leaving the ground bare, though
still wet and soft. Under the cover of the buttonbush there is no
herbage whatever, and upon the ground there are only a few decaying
logs and a few small sticks, which often carry a light growth of moss.

Around the edges of this swamp there is a narrow belt of thick herbage,
closely encroached upon by the typical forest of the flood-plain.

Fifty mouse traps set in this habitat took eight northern white-footed
mice and two house mice the first night, August 5.


_Shore habitat_:

     _Procyon lotor lotor._ Raccoon. Tracks.

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 1.

Along the shores of the Galien River a narrow strip of bare ground was
exposed in July and August. The ground of this strip is mostly mud,
but in a few places it is sand or gravel. Usually the habitat is
narrow, but in some places it is five to ten feet wide.

Tracks of raccoon were frequent on the shore along the river. From a
few mouse traps set on the bare mud shore one northern white-footed
mouse was taken August 4 beside a drift log.


_Mud-bar herbage habitat_:

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 4.

A few small recently formed mud bars occur along the Galien River in its
outer bends. These bars have not yet had time to become forested, and on
their outer edges nearest the river there is usually no vegetation, this
part being included in the shore habitat. On their older portions next
the forest of the flood-plains occurs a thick growth of herbs, several
annual grasses, and rarely a willow, _Salix_ sp., or a seedling tree of
white elm, _Ulmus americana_, cottonwood, _Populus deltoides_, maple,
_Acer rubrum_ or _saccharinum_, and others of the typical flood-plain
species. The vegetation during August is very thick, and reaches a
height of four to six feet. The soil is either mud or in a few places
fine sand, and the ground is quite moist.

In this habitat four northern white-footed mice were trapped August 3-4.


_Flood-plain forest habitat_:

     _Scalopus aquaticus machrinus._ Prairie mole. Ridges.

     _Blarina brevicauda talpoides._ Short-tailed shrew. 4.

     _Procyon lotor lotor._ Raccoon. 1.

     _Mustela noveboracensis noveboracensis._ New York weasel. 1.

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 52.

     _Microtus pinetorum scalopsoides._ Northern pine vole. 5.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 2.

     _Zapus hudsonius hudsonius._ Hudson Bay jumping mouse. 1.

     _Erethizon dorsatum dorsatum._ Canada porcupine. Tooth marks.

     _Marmota monax monax._ Southern woodchuck. 4.

     _Sciurus hudsonicus loquax._ Southern red squirrel. 4.

     _Sylvilagus floridanus mearnsii._ Mearns cottontail. 1.

There are considerable areas of flood-plain along the Galien River, and
except for the recently formed mud bars the flood-plains are heavily
covered with a mixed forest in which the linden, _Tilia americana_,
white elm, _Ulmus americana_, and sycamore, _Platanus occidentalis_, are
conspicuous species. Under this forest there are a few small trees, but
there is very little underbrush. The herbage also is sparse and, though
in a few places there is a considerable growth of ferns, grasses, and
sedges, and of other herbs, there are also many bare areas.

One of the significant features of the flood-plains, so far as the
mammals are concerned, is the flooding to which these areas are
subjected during the spring high-water. At that time the flood-plain for
a number of days or weeks may be covered with several feet of water.

During the period between July 29 and August 28 a total of one hundred
and seventy mouse traps set in the flood-plain forests along the
Galien River took for the first nights' trapping, twenty-two northern
white-footed mice and one house mouse. Short-tailed shrews, more
white-footed mice, pine voles, and a jumping mouse were secured on
nights after the first. Larger traps took during the whole period one
raccoon, one New York weasel, and two woodchucks. Several other
woodchucks and a number of red squirrels were seen. Ridges of moles
were numerous, but no specimens were secured. Tooth marks on an old,
partly fallen linden were probably made, perhaps a number of years
ago, by a porcupine.

Throughout the woods there are a number of small ravines. These
ravines are forested with trees mostly of the flood-plain type, and
there is evidence in many of the ravines, at least in their lower
parts, that flooding occurs in the ravine bottom during the spring.

Fifty mouse traps set August 26 in a large ravine north of the county
road took on the first day five northern white-footed mice and one
house mouse. Short-tailed shrews, more white-footed mice, and pine
voles were trapped on following days. Here also red squirrels and a
cottontail were seen, and tracks of raccoon noted. Evidently the fauna
is the same as that of the flood-plain, with which it is here included.


_Beech-maple forest habitat_:

     _Blarina brevicauda talpoides._ Short-tailed shrew. 7.

     _Procyon lotor lotor._ Raccoon. Tracks.

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 86.

     _Microtus pinetorum scalopsoides._ Northern pine vole. 5.

     _Zapus hudsonius hudsonius._ Hudson Bay jumping mouse. 1.

     _Marmota monax monax._ Southern woodchuck. Burrows.

     _Tamias striatus lysteri._ Northeastern chipmunk. 1.

     _Sciurus hudsonicus loquax._ Southern red squirrel. 10.

     _Sciurus niger rufiventer._ Fox squirrel. 7.

     _Sylvilagus floridanus mearnsii._ Mearns cottontail. 1.

The climax forest of the region is dominated by the beech, _Fagus
grandiflora_, and the sugar maple, _Acer saccharum_. The trees in this
forest are very large, so that the forest crown is high and the shade
dense. Only a few small trees occur and these are mostly young beeches
and young sugar maples. The underbrush varies much in height and
denseness; mostly it is quite open, so that one can easily walk
through the forest, but in a few places the growth is more dense.
Common members of the underbrush on the higher ground are the small
beeches, sugar maples, and the spice-bush, _Benzoin aestivale_; while
on the lower benches along the river seedlings of the paw-paw dominate
the undergrowth. The ground is heavily covered by decaying leaves and
a little dead brush and fallen branches, but nearly all the logs have
been removed. Early in the spring a thick growth of herbs covers the
ground, but by July the herbs are mostly gone, only a few remaining,
and there are many small bare areas covered only by leaves. The soil
under this forest seems to be mainly clay; in spring or after heavy
rains pools of water are formed, and these remain for a long time.

Between July 21 and August 27 a total of two hundred and eighty-five
mouse traps set in the upland forest took on the first nights one
short-tailed shrew and thirty northern white-footed mice. In addition
to these species pine voles and a jumping mouse were trapped on days
after the first. One shrew was caught alive August 30, as he was
running about on the forest floor at 7:30 A.M. A few tracks of raccoon
were seen from time to time on the road leading through the woods. A
few fresh burrows of woodchucks were noted at the edges of benches and
of ravines. A few red squirrels were seen at different times and two
collected. Fox squirrels were rare, being noted only a few times; Mr.
Norman A. Wood also saw these squirrels on two occasions in May. One
cottontail was shot, in the climax forest. Mr. Wood collected a
chipmunk in the climax forest on May 15, 1918, and saw another in the
same habitat in May, 1919.


_Aerial habitat_:

Bats were seen on a few evenings, flying about over the climax forest,
and over the adjacent region, but they were extremely rare, and
efforts to shoot a specimen failed.




MODIFIED AND ARTIFICIAL HABITATS


_Second-growth forest and scrub habitat_:

     _Mustela noveboracensis noveboracensis._ New York weasel. 1.

     _Mephitis nigra._ Eastern skunk. 1.

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 5.

     _Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus._ Pennsylvania vole. 4.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 1.

     _Marmota monax monax._ Southern woodchuck. 1.

     _Sciurus hudsonicus loquax._ Southern red squirrel. 1.

     _Sylvilagus floridanus mearnsii._ Mearns cottontail. 5.

Small trees and brush have grown up along the edges of many of the
ravines in the cleared fields in and surrounding the preserve. Many of
the trees are oaks, but beech and hard maple also occur, a few of them
being relics from the original forest. Considerable brush is present,
formed by a large variety of species. A few other small patches,
especially in ravine bottoms and on flood-plains have been allowed to
grow up to brush and small trees. In nearly every case these areas are
heavily pastured.

The conditions here included in the second-growth forest and scrub
habitat are not homogeneous, but differ in each different location
where the habitat is found, tree and shrub species abundant in one
situation not being present in another. The habitat is usually narrow
in extent, being often confined to the width of the steep ravine wall.

Owing to its poor development and uncertain characteristics no
intensive trapping was done in this type of habitat. A weasel was
trapped in open beech-maple-oak forest at the edge of a cleared
ravine, and a woodchuck was shot in the same type of habitat. Another
woodchuck and a skunk were trapped at different times in low willow
brush on the banks of the river just north of the woods. Northern
white-footed mice, Pennsylvania voles, and a house mouse were trapped
in thick oak brush and trees alongside a road north of the woods. A
red squirrel was shot in second-growth oak and aspen woods in the
north part of the preserve, and they were seen in open woods along
ravines. Cottontails were noted a few times in blackberry thickets,
in brush in ravines, in clearings along the river, and in
beech-maple-oak forest along ravines.


_Cleared-ravine sedge habitat_:

     _Blarina brevicauda talpoides._ Short-tailed shrew. 1.

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 3.

     _Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus._ Pennsylvania vole. 5.

A large ravine south of the river had been cleared of trees evidently
several years previously, and it has now grown up mostly to sedges,
grass, and iris in its more moist parts. Along the little brook which
flows through the ravine there is a fringe of willows, and among the
sedges a number of shrubs and small trees occur, mostly thorns and a
few young sycamores and black walnuts.

Fifty mouse traps set in this habitat took on the first day, August
16, three northern white-footed mice and three Pennsylvania voles.
More voles and a short-tailed shrew were taken on later days.


_Cleared-upland rush habitat_:

     _Mephitis nigra._ Eastern skunk. Den.

     _Peromyscus maniculatus bairdii._ Prairie white-footed mouse. 1.

     _Synaptomys cooperi._ Cooper lemming-vole. 1.

     _Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus._ Pennsylvania vole. 7.

     _Microtus ochrogaster._ Prairie vole. 1.

     _Citellus tridecemlineatus tridecemlineatus._ Thirteen-striped
     ground squirrel. 2.

In the shallow, poorly drained depressions of the cleared upland the
vegetation is dominated by rushes, which grow in clumps and form a
thick growth, reaching a height of about one meter as a maximum. At
the edges of the habitat and in places not thickly covered by the
rushes a growth of sedges, grasses, and moss covers the ground; but
under the thickest growth of rushes the ground is bare and is
evidently covered by water during a part of the year. On this upland
one small pond surrounded by rushes did not dry up until late in
August. In a few places small blackberry thickets occur in the areas
of rushes and dominate all other plants.

Fifty traps set in this habitat, on August 8, took on the first night
one prairie white-footed mouse and one Pennsylvania vole; the prairie
white-footed mouse was taken just at the edge of the growth of rushes.
Other Pennsylvania voles as well as a lemming-vole, a prairie vole,
and several young ground squirrels were secured on later nights by the
same trap-line. A skunk den was situated in a blackberry thicket in
the midst of the largest patch of rushes.


_Cleared-upland sedge habitat_:

     _Peromyscus maniculatus bairdii._ Prairie white-footed mouse. 3.

     _Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus._ Pennsylvania vole. 1.

     _Microtus ochrogaster._ Prairie vole. 9.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 1.

     _Citellus tridecemlineatus tridecemlineatus._ Thirteen-striped
     ground squirrel. Burrows.

Sedges are dominant over a part of the cleared upland, occurring on
the moist gentle slopes which are too well drained for rushes, but not
in any numbers on the drier and higher parts of the upland. With the
sedges there are a few grasses, and the ground is sometimes covered by
a moss, but the sedges are by far the most abundant plant.

Fifty mouse traps set in this habitat took on the first night, August
15, one prairie white-footed mouse and one prairie vole. Other prairie
voles and white-footed mice were taken on later nights, as well as one
Pennsylvania vole and one house mouse. Burrows of the thirteen-striped
ground squirrel were numerous in the sedges.


_Cleared-upland blue-grass habitat_:

     _Peromyscus maniculatus bairdii._ Prairie white-footed mouse. 12.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 1.

     _Citellus tridecemlineatus tridecemlineatus._ Thirteen-striped
     ground squirrel. 23.

The most widespread habitat of the cleared upland on the south part of
the preserve is the blue-grass habitat. In this habitat the
blue-grass, _Poa_, is the dominant plant, growing to a height of
usually not over 0.5 meter. With the blue-grass are associated a few
thistles, yarrow, and several other herbs. During the whole period of
my stay in the region, July and August, the habitat was very dry, and
the grass and herbs had mostly dried up. This habitat and all the
other habitats of the clearing were being heavily pastured by stock.

Trap-lines totaling one hundred mouse traps, set on August 6 and
August 18, took on the first nights two prairie white-footed mice, one
house mouse, and one young thirteen-striped ground squirrel. More
white-footed mice were taken on later nights. Many ground squirrels
were taken in larger traps at the mouths of their burrows; most of
these were young of the year, and all of them were very fat in
preparation for their approaching hibernation.


_Cultivated field habitat_:

     _Scalopus aquaticus machrinus._ Prairie mole. 1.

     _Peromyscus maniculatus bairdii._ Prairie white-footed mouse. 23.

     _Microtus ochrogaster._ Prairie vole. 1.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 2.

     _Sylvilagus floridanus mearnsii._ Mearns cottontail. 2.

Cultivated fields occur throughout the region about the woods, but the
only ones in which trapping was done were wheat stubble-fields. After
the wheat was cut off these stubble-fields grew up rather thickly to
weeds. On the ground there were a number of fallen heads of wheat and
some shelled-out grain, furnishing abundant food for mice.

Seventy mouse traps set in a wheat stubble-field just north of Warren
Woods, caught on the first nights, August 13 and August 29, sixteen
prairie white-footed mice. Other white-footed mice and two house mice
were taken on later nights. Several cottontails were seen in this
field, and a few mole ridges were noted. A prairie mole was taken by
Clifford Reid in a grassy patch at the edge of a garden. In another
wheat field the Helming boys picked up a prairie vole.


_Orchard habitat_:

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 1.

     _Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus._ Pennsylvania vole. 2.

No especial study of the mammal life of the orchard was made, and no
intensive trapping was done in the habitat. However, the orchard cannot
be included in any of the other habitats recognized in the region.

A northern white-footed mouse was caught alive by the Helming boys in
an orchard on July 16. A vole was seen to cross a road in a small
orchard on July 15; a trap was set and two Pennsylvania voles secured,
one a young of the year.


_Edificarian habitat_:[1]

     _Blarina brevicauda talpoides._ Short-tailed shrew. 1.

     _Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed
     mouse. 2.

     _Rattus norvegicus._ Norway rat. 4.

     _Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse. 22.

     _Sylvilagus floridanus mearnsii._ Mearns cottontail. 2.

From time to time a few traps were set in the old farmhouse and in the
barn and other outbuildings of our camp. In these buildings northern
white-footed mice, Norway rats, and house mice were taken. Several
cottontails were seen in and under the old barn. The Helming boys
trapped a short-tailed shrew and also house mice and a white-footed
mouse in the basement of their house.




RECORDS OF THE NUMBER OF EMBRYOS


All the females taken were examined for embryos, and the results are
here tabulated by species and dates. The term _subadult_ is used to
indicate an individual which has reached adult size, but which is
still immature as shown by the pelage, unworn condition of the teeth,
and weakness of the skull sutures. For each individual the age is
first stated, next the number of embryos if any, and last the length
of the embryos in millimeters measured as they lie rolled in the fetal
membranes. For embryos too small to measure with field equipment the
term _small_ is applied.

These records indicate the breeding period of the different species
and the number of young.


_Mephitis nigra._ Eastern skunk

    August 19: subadult, 0 embryos.


_Peromyscus leucopus noveboracensis._ Northern white-footed mouse

    July 16: adult, 3 embryos, size small.
    July 21: adult, 0; adult, 0.
    July 22: adult, 5, 10 5 mm.; subadult, 0.
    July 23: subadult, 0.
    July 25: juvenile, 0, juvenile, 0; juvenile 0; subadult, 3, small.
    July 30: adult, 0; adult, 0; adult, 0; subadult, 0.
    August 2: adult, 0; subadult, 2, small; subadult, 0; subadult, 0.
    August 5: adult, 5, small; subadult, 0.
    August 23: subadult, 0; adult, 5, 10 mm.
    August 24: adult, 5, 8 mm.; adult, 0; adult, 0; adult, 3, small.
    August 25: adult, 5, 23 mm.; adult, 0; adult, 4, small; adult, 3,
        small.
    August 26: subadult, 4, 8 mm.; adult, 0.
    August 29: adult, 4, 17 mm.


_Peromyscus maniculatus bairdii._ Prairie white-footed mouse

    August 7: subadult, 0.
    August 10: adult, 5, 8 mm.
    August 13: adult, 3, 8 mm.; adult, 0.
    August 20: adult, 5, small.
    August 28: adult, 4, 17 mm.; adult, 4, 13 mm.
    August 29: adult, 5, 17 mm.
    August 30: adult, 0; adult, 4, 11 mm.


_Synaptomys cooperi._ Cooper lemming-vole

    August 11: adult, 2, 10 mm.


_Microtus pennsylvanicus pennsylvanicus._ Pennsylvania vole

    July 15: adult, 4, not measured, juvenile, 0.
    August 9: subadult, 0.
    August 10: subadult, 0; subadult, 0.
    August 13: subadult, 0.
    August 16: adult, 0.
    August 24: adult, 4, 11 mm.


_Microtus ochrogaster._ Prairie vole

    July 25: juvenile, 0.
    August 15: adult, 4, small.


_Microtus pinetorum scalopsoides._ Northern pine vole

    July 22: juvenile, 0.
    July 25: juvenile, 0.
    July 31: adult, 0.


_Rattus norvegicus._ Norway rat

    July 11: adult, 7, 37 mm.
    July 12: adult, 9, 26 mm.
    July 14: juvenile, 0.


_Mus musculus musculus._ House mouse

    July 9: subadult, 0.
    July 10: juvenile, 0; subadult, 0.
    July 11: adult, 0 (was nursing 3 or more half-grown young).
    July 17: adult, 11, 6 mm.
    July 22: adult, 7, 3.5 mm.


_Zapus hudsonius hudsonius._ Hudson Bay jumping mouse

    July 27: subadult, 0.


_Marmota monax monax._ Southern woodchuck

    July 11: adult, 0.
    July 28: juvenile, 0.
    August 3: adult, 0.
    August 22: juvenile, 0.


_Citellus tridecemlineatus tridecemlineatus._ Thirteen-striped ground
squirrel

    August 14: adult, 0.


_Sciurus hudsonicus loquax._ Southern red squirrel

    July 24: adult, 0.
    July 27: juvenile, 0.


_Sciurus niger rufiventer._ Fox squirrel

    August 11: subadult, 0.


_Sylvilagus floridanus mearnsii._ Mearns cottontail

    July 21: adult, 4, 70 mm.




NEW STATE RECORD OF THE PRAIRIE VOLE


The specimens of prairie vole, _Microtus ochrogaster_, listed above from
the sedges and rushes of cleared upland in the Warren Woods preserve and
from a nearby wheat field constitute the first authentic record of the
species from Michigan. The prairie vole had previously been erroneously
reported to be abundant in Washtenaw County by Covert[2], who evidently
mistook the Pennsylvania vole for this species.




OTHER MAMMALS OF THIS REGION


The following notes on mammals formerly or at present living in the
region but not found by me in Warren Woods are based mostly on
information furnished by George R. Fox, Director of the Edward K.
Warren Foundation, and by William Schmidt, a trapper and hunter.

_Didelphis virginiana virginiana._ Virginia opossum. Three were seen
and one captured in Three Oaks in the winter of 1919-20, and another
was found in a granary on the outskirts of the town. The previous
winter one was shot just southwest of town, and another was seen in a
ravine north of Harbert. One was killed in Warren Woods some time ago.

_Condylura cristata._ Star-nosed mole. Mr. Hans captured one four miles
south of Three Oaks, near the Indiana line in 1919, and brought the skin
to Mr. Fox. One was taken by Dr. Parker at Lakeside in June, 1919.

_Ursus americanus americanus._ Eastern black bear. Formerly occurred
in the region.

_Canis lycaon._ Timber wolf. About eleven years ago three were killed
from a pack of nine wolves at Lakeside. About 1910 a pack of eight
were seen at various times during the winter on the marsh between
Three Oaks and Galien. The following winter the same pack, or another
of the same number, was seen southwest of Three Oaks, and four of the
pack were killed just over the Indiana line.

_Vulpes fulva._ Eastern red fox. Common in the region. One was killed
in December, 1919, after having been chased from the Warren Woods by
dogs. Another was seen in January, 1920, half a mile north of Three
Oaks. In preceding winters a number have been killed south of Sawyer
where they evidently come from the sand dunes.

_Lutra canadensis canadensis._ Canada otter. Formerly occurred along
the streams, but are now apparently all gone.

_Felis couguar._ Cougar. One was killed a few miles northeast of Three
Oaks many years ago. Another was killed near New Buffalo in the early
days.

_Lynx ruffus ruffus._ Bobcat. One was killed a few years ago near the
Galien River a few miles northeast of Three Oaks.

_Erethizon dorsatum dorsatum._ Canada porcupine. Found here in the
early days.

_Sciurus carolinensis leucotis._ Northeastern gray squirrel. Black
squirrels were found in numbers in the early days.

_Glaucomys volans volans._ Eastern flying squirrel. Said to be common. A
large number were seen by Mr. Schmidt on one old stub in Warren Woods
some years ago. Several were seen in 1918 by Mr. Fox in second-growth
oak woods in a little ravine about one and one-fourth mile west of
Warren Woods. One was caught in Three Oaks in the fall of 1919.

_Cervus canadensis canadensis._ American elk. One horn from a large
swamp in Berrien County is in the Chamberlain Memorial Museum of Three
Oaks.

_Odocoileus virginianus borealis._ Northern white-tailed deer.
Formerly abundant in the region. Several molars were picked up in
Warren Woods.




FOSSIL MAMMALS OF BERRIEN COUNTY


The records of fossil mammals from Berrien County here published have
been collected by George R. Fox, who has also kindly loaned from the
collections under his care several specimens for identification. Dr.
E. C. Case assisted with the identification of the mammoth teeth.

_Mammut americanum._ Mastodon. (1) About 1897 the teeth of a mastodon
were dug up by a dredge within the village limits of Eau Claire. Their
disposition is unknown.

(2) At Snow, in section 36, Lake Township, a tooth was found. This
came into the possession of Frank Striker of Buchanan.

(3) A portion of a tusk and part of a skull were found on the Beebe
Farm near Baroda. These were sent to Washington, D.C.

(4) In the excavation of a ditch through a small marsh lying near
Bakerstown in Section 3, of Bertrand Township, the dredge uncovered in
the distance of between two and three miles bones, teeth, and other
evidences of six mastodons. Of these remains the most important was a
nearly complete skull with teeth in place and disintegrated parts of
the tusks. The skull was secured by Dr. E. H. Crane, who restored
parts, the tusks he did not attempt to restore. This skull is now on
exhibition at the Ward Museum, Rochester, New York.

The skull lay about seven feet deep. It was under a bed of matted oak
brush on top of which lay a huge stone slab, estimated to weigh two or
three tons. Above was a layer of silt, then gravelly clay; above were
more silt beds, three in number. W. Hillis Smith, who helped Dr. Crane
secure the skull, furnished the above information.

(5) On the Avery marsh, two miles east of Three Oaks, a badly decayed
mastodon skull and several teeth were excavated in 1884. Dr. Bonine,
Sr., of Niles, assisted at the excavation. The bones and teeth were in
the muck about twenty inches below the surface. Other teeth, making
seven in all, were found near the same place. Some of the teeth from
this locality are on exhibition at the Chamberlain Memorial Museum of
Three Oaks.

In addition to the above there are several indefinite records of
mastodon remains from the county.

_Elephas columbi._ Columbian mammoth. (1) One-half of the tooth of a
mammoth was found in the spring of 1917 on the Beeson and Holden farm in
Section 6, NE. 1/4, Township of Galien, by D. H. Beeson while
cultivating corn. Two weeks later the other half of the tooth was found.
The specimen is now in the Chamberlain Memorial Museum of Three Oaks.

The specimen is a well-worn lower third molar having twenty
ridge-plates, but some of the ridge-plates have been worn out and lost.
Seven and a half ridge-plates are included in a 100 mm. line. The
greatest length of the tooth is 280 mm. and its greatest breadth 95 mm.

(2) A complete set of mammoth teeth with some portions of the bones was
found about the year 1900 on a farm two miles southeast of Three Oaks
owned by E. K. Warren. They were discovered while digging post holes.
The specimens are on exhibition in the Chamberlain Memorial Museum.

One of the teeth sent us for identification proves to be a partly worn
lower third molar having twenty-four ridge-plates. There are seven and
a half ridge-plates in 100 mm. The greatest length of the tooth is 350
mm. and its greatest breadth 95 mm.

(3) There is another record of a mammoth tooth which was found at an
unknown location in Berrien County. It was at one time owned by Mr.
Smith, who gave it to Dr. Crane. Its present whereabouts is unknown.




PLATE I


A mud bar beside the Galien River in Warren Woods. A growth of mud-bar
herbs adjoins the flood-plain forest on the left. August 29, 1919.

Flood-plain forest in Warren Woods. There are few shrubs, but a
considerable amount of herbage is present. August 29, 1919.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




PLATE II


Buttonbush swamp in Warren Woods. The swamp is surrounded by
flood-plain forest. August 29, 1919.

Climax beech-maple forest on the higher ground in Warren Woods. August
29, 1919.

[Illustration]

[Illustration]




Footnotes:


  [Footnote 1: L. R. Dice, _Occasional Papers, Mus. Zool._, No. 65.]

  [Footnote 2: Adolphe B. Covert, _Natural History--History of Washtenaw
  County_, p. 194. 1881.]




Transcriber's Note:


  *The footnotes have been moved to the end of the publication.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Mammals of Warren Woods, Berrien
County, Michigan, by Lee Raymond Dice

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK MAMMALS OF WARREN WOODS, MICHIGAN ***

***** This file should be named 33648.txt or 33648.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/3/6/4/33648/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
