The Project Gutenberg EBook of A Bilateral Division of the Parietal Bone
in a Chimpanzee; with a Special Reference, by Ales Hrdlicka

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: A Bilateral Division of the Parietal Bone in a Chimpanzee; with a Special Reference to the Oblique Sutures in the Parietal
       Bulletin of the AMNH, Vol. XIII, Article XXI, pp. 281-295, Dec. 31, 1900

Author: Ales Hrdlicka

Release Date: October 19, 2010 [EBook #34101]

Language: English

Character set encoding: UTF-8

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARIETAL BONE IN A CHIMPANZEE ***




Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net










  _A Bilateral Division of the Parietal Bone
       in a Chimpanzee; with a Special Reference
       to the Oblique Sutures in the
       Parietal._

  By ALEŠ HRDLIČKA

  AUTHOR'S EDITION, extracted from BULLETIN
  OF THE
  _American Museum of Natural History_,
  VOL. XIII, ARTICLE XXI, pp. 281-295.

  _New York, Dec. 31, 1900._




  _The Knickerbocker Press, New York_




=Article XXI.=--A BILATERAL DIVISION OF THE PARIETAL BONE IN A
CHIMPANZEE; WITH SPECIAL REFERENCE TO THE OBLIQUE SUTURES IN THE
PARIETAL.

By ALEŠ HRDLIČKA.


The first to describe a case of division of the parietal bone in apes
was Johannes Ranke, in 1899.[1] The skull in question is that of an
adolescent female orang, one of 245 orang crania in the Selenka
collection in the Munich Anthropological Institute. The abnormal
suture divides the right parietal into an upper larger and a lower
smaller portion. "The suture runs nearly parallel with the sagittal
suture," but, as the illustration shows (Fig. 1), it descends in its
posterior extremity towards the temporo-parietal suture, and
terminates in this a few millimetres in front of the lambdoid suture.
The abnormal suture shows but little serration, and the articulation
of the two divisions of the parietal bone is squamous in character,
the lower portion overlapping the upper. Below the junction of the
abnormal with the coronal suture, the latter takes a pronounced bend
forward. A similar bend in the coronal suture is present in the same
specimen on the left side. This is common among the other orang skulls
in the collection. The portions of the coronal suture below and above
the bend differ somewhat in character.

Besides the above-mentioned complete division, Ranke found among the
245 orang skulls 13 with incomplete division of the parietal bone. The
division consisted invariably of a longer or shorter remnant of a
horizontal "parietal suture," ending in the coronal suture at the top
of the bend above referred to. A similar anterior remnant of an
abnormal parietal suture was found by Ranke in a young chimpanzee
skull; but the author questions the word "chimpanzee," which evidently
means that the identity of the skull is somewhat doubtful.

In consequence of his finds, Ranke believes both complete and
incomplete divisions in the parietal bone to be much more frequent in
the orang than in man.[2] He also thinks that the bend usually present
in the coronal suture in the orang signifies that, "even where there
are no traces of a parietal suture, such a suture has actually existed
in an earlier stage of development." This implies the development of
the adult parietal bone in the orang from two original segments, one
above the other.

[Illustration: Fig. 1. Division of the Right Parietal in an Orang
(Ranke, Abh. d. k. bayer. Akad. d. Wiss., II cl., XX Bd., ii Abth.).]

The divisions which I am about to describe occur, one in each
parietal, in the skull of a nine-year-old male chimpanzee, which was
captured, when young, in West Africa. Later on he was one of the
attractions of the Barnum and Bailey Circus, and was familiarly known
as Chico. The chimpanzee died in 1894, since when his skin and bones
have been preserved in the American Museum of Natural History, New
York City. Prof. J. A. Allen, the curator of the Zoölogical Department
of the Museum, has kindly given me permission to describe the skeletal
parts for publication.[3]

The most interesting part of Chico is unquestionably the skull. The
divisions of the parietal bones which the specimen presents are not
only the first complete divisions of the parietal observed in a
chimpanzee, but are also unique in character, no divisions of the same
nature having been observed before, either in man, in apes, or in
monkeys. The position and extent of the divisions in this skull will
throw considerable light on the question of the aberrant, complete
divisions of the parietal bone, by which term may be designated
divisions differing from the typical horizontal ones.

The skull under consideration shows in general a good development and
an almost perfect symmetry. The capacity of the brain cavity, measured
according to Flower's method, is 390 c.c.

The masculine features of this skull, and particularly the temporal
ridges, are not quite as marked as those of another skull of an
adolescent male chimpanzee in the Museum. The temporal ridges are
slightly prominent, and in their middle third, over part of the frontal
and the parietal bones, not more pronounced than in some human crania.
They are, however, situated very high. Their upper lines or boundaries
touch each other over a part of the sagittal suture, a little back of
the bregma; while the lower lines approach to within 6 mm. of the
sagittal suture. The supraorbital ridges are not very massive, although
prominent to such a degree that, when the skull rests on the occipital
condyles and on the teeth, the plane of the orbits is almost vertical.
The sagittal crest is insignificant; the occipital crest is high, but
not very massive. The zygomatic arches are less strong than they are in
an average white male; and the mastoids are small, even smaller than in
an average adult white female.

The second dentition is incomplete; the third molars have not reached
the level of the opening of their sockets. The condition of the
sutures, so far as their patency is concerned, does not bear the same
relation to the stage of dentition as it does in man: all the sutures
of this skull are more or less obliterated. There are no signs on any
part of the skull that point to the closure of any of the sutures as
premature. In detail, the condition of the sutures is as follows: The
spheno-maxillary articulation is completely closed, but still plainly
traceable. Of the various facial sutures, only remnants are open; the
suture in the zygomatic arch, however, is almost fully patent on both
sides. The spheno-frontal articulation is completely obliterated on
the left, but traces of it remain on the right side. The left
temporo-sphenoidal and squamo-frontal sutures (the squama of the
temporal articulates with the frontal bone) are, with the exception of
the basal part of the former, which remains open, quite obliterated,
but on the right side both are open. The temporo-parietal sutures,
with the exception of 8 mm. of the anterior end of the suture on the
right side, are both entirely closed and hardly traceable. The coronal
suture is partly open on the left, and wholly open on the right, up to
a point a little below the middle of the anterior border of the
parietal bone. At this point on each side, the lower portion of the
coronal suture bends backward and continues as the anomalous suture;
the upper portion of the coronal, particularly on the right, is
completely obliterated, though still traceable. There are no signs
left of the sagittal and lambdoid sutures, and only the basal portions
of the temporo-occipital articulation remain. The palatine sutures,
also, are entirely obliterated.

The skull shows no important anomalies besides the division of the
parietals.

The divisions of the parietal bones begin on the left 32 mm., on the
right 28 mm. (measured with a tape), above the point of junction of
the coronal and temporo-parietal sutures. From the point where the
anomalous sutures leave the coronal suture, to the bregma, the
distance on the left is 44 mm., on the right 42 mm. The excess of size
of the left over the right parietal bone along the coronal suture (6
mm.) compensates the greater height of that portion of the right
temporal squama which articulates with the frontal bone. Measured
across their middle from the temporo-parietal suture, the two
parietals appear to be almost of equal size (left 82 mm., right 80
mm.). In an antero-posterior direction, from the beginning of the
division to the middle of the parietal portion of the occipital crest,
both bones measure the same, namely 75 mm.

The division in the left parietal begins at a V-shaped cleft, which is
filled with a process of the frontal bone. There are slightly distinct
markings on the bone and a number of insular ossicles, which make it
probable that the cleft had been originally much greater and was
largely filled by a Wormian or, rather, a fontanel bone, the lower
border of which has subsequently united with the parietal.

For 30 mm. from its beginning the abnormal suture proceeds directly
backward, and to this extent shows but little obliteration. The original
cleft has, it seems, extended up to this point. From here the suture
takes a slight bend upwards, and proceeds almost directly upwards and
backwards, becoming gradually obliterated, until it disappears at the
temporal ridge, 16 mm. from the median line. Originally the suture must
have terminated on the posterior border of the parietal bone, not far
from the lambda. The whole suture shows fairly good serration. The
coronal suture on this side, below the division, shows serration about
equal to that of the abnormal suture; the obliterated portion above this
was, so far as can be seen, more simple.

[Illustration: Figs. 2-4. Skull of an Adolescent Male Chimpanzee.]

On the right side the division of the parietal may also have begun with
a cleft in the anterior border of the bone, but, owing to the advanced
state of obliteration of the upper portion of the coronal suture on this
side, the existence of the cleft cannot be fully ascertained. Here also
the abnormal suture, at first wholly open, runs for the first 26 mm.
directly backwards; at this point the suture, still quite patent, takes
a turn somewhat sharper than that on the left, and proceeds for 16 mm.
backwards and upwards; here it takes a second turn, and proceeds almost
directly upwards towards the sagittal suture. This last portion of the
abnormal suture is considerably obliterated, and on and beyond the
temporal ridge is scarcely traceable. The point at which the division
has reached the sagittal suture is situated a little behind the middle
of the latter. The abnormal as well as the open part of the coronal
suture on this side shows a simpler serration than the corresponding
sutures on the left side.

In this specimen there is on neither side any encroachment of the
lower portion of the parietal bone upon the frontal, such as Ranke
lays stress on in the case of his orangs. A second skull of an
adolescent male chimpanzee, in the Museum of Natural History, has a
decided bend in the coronal suture, not unlike that which Ranke
describes, and which, as he thinks, generally indicates an old
parietal division; but in this case the bend is situated between the
inferior and superior boundaries of the prominent temporal ridge, and
apparently owes its origin to the latter (Figs. 2, 3, 4).

The main interest in the case just described centres in the direction
of the abnormal sutures, and in the clearness with which the two
divisions appear as equivalent and of the same origin, although one
divides the parietal completely, while the other is restricted to one
of its angles.

As to the course of the abnormal suture in the parietal bone, in all
the cases thus far reported, the division runs in a horizontal
direction (cases of Tarin, Soemmering, Gruber, Hyrtl, Welcker, Turner,
Putnam, Dorsey, Ranke, and others); or it runs obliquely from or near
the middle of the lambdoid suture to some part of the temporo-parietal
suture, the sphenoidal angle, or the lower portion of the coronal
suture (cases of Curnow, Ekmark, Gruber, Hyrtl, Lucae, Welcker,
Putnam, Traquair, Ranke); in a case of _Simia silenus_ described by
Gruber and in an Egyptian cranium described by Smith, the divisions
run to the lambda and begin respectively slightly above the pterion
and at it. In Boyd's and in two of Hyrtl's cases, the abnormal suture
begins at or below the bregma on the coronal margin of the parietal
bone, and ends at or near its mastoid angle; finally, in Blumenbach's
(cited by Welcker), Bianchi's, Fusari's, and Coraini's cases (those of
Coraini include two monkeys) the division is vertical, passing between
the temporo-parietal and sagittal sutures. The left division in our
chimpanzee approaches those in Gruber's _Simia silenus_ and Smith's
cases; but it originates much higher anteriorly, and terminates
slightly below the lambda on the occipital border of the parietal. The
division in the right parietal of the chimpanzee, beginning slightly
below the middle of the anterior border of the bone, and ending
slightly back of the middle of its sagittal border, has no analogy
among the cases previously described.

The difference in extent and terminations of the two abnormal sutures
in the chimpanzee is of particular interest in connection with the
problem of the significance and origin of those divisions of the
parietal bone that involve more or less only one of its angles.

Since the observations of Toldt,[4] and more recently of Ranke,[5] on
the development of the parietal bone in the human embryo, it appears,
though it cannot as yet be said whether the fact is or is not general,
that the bone originates from two centres of ossification. These
centres appear in most cases one directly above the other, but, as
Ranke himself shows,[6] and as can hardly be otherwise, these
primitive components of the parietal do not always show the same
relations in size or position. The centres blend together, ordinarily,
at the end of the third or during the first half of the fourth month
of fœtal life. On this account, the typical, complete, horizontal
division of the human parietal bone, when met with at any time after
the fourth month of fœtal life, is generally interpreted to-day as
a retardation of the union, or a persistence of separation, of the two
original segments of the bone. Opinion, however, is still unsettled as
to the significance of the more atypical, oblique divisions of the
parietal, particularly of those where the separation is limited to one
angle. Up to the recent contribution on the subject by Ranke, the
weight of opinion on the point, although rather briefly expressed,
seems to have been in favor of attributing to these smaller, oblique
divisions, the same significance as was given to the more typical,
horizontal ones. Gruber,[7] in reporting a new case of a bilateral
oblique suture in the parietal bone, calls the separated mastoid
angles "the secondary posterior parietals." Hyrtl and Welcker advance
no definite theories on this point, though the latter expresses an
opinion[8] that in both the horizontal division and the separation of
the mastoid angle of the parietal bone the development of the
condition may be identical. In 1883 Prof. F. W. Putnam, in describing
one of his Tennessee skulls with an abnormal oblique suture in each
parietal,[9] referred the development of the separated mastoid angle
on the right side, as well as the larger oblique inferior portion of
the parietal on the left side, to a "separate centre" of ossification.
Ranke[10] opposes both Gruber's and Putnam's opinion, and presents
instead a theory somewhat vague and not satisfactorily demonstrated,
by which he accounts for the origin of oblique sutures from partial
horizontal sutures in the parietal bone through "half-pathological
processes." In his words, "the oblique parietal suture is allied to
the half-pathological conditions of the skull; it is wholly
unjustifiable to speak, as W. Gruber has done, of a separate Parietale
secundarium posterius, severed by the suture, as of a typical, in a
certain sense normal, formation. The oblique parietal suture is
nothing more than an incomplete (posterior), true, _i. e._, typical,
parietal suture with a sagittal course, modified by certain
half-pathological conditions." These half-pathological conditions are
produced, the author explains on the preceding page, "durch
Einknickung der nach Herrn G. H. Meyer 'plastisch' aufwärts gebogenen
hinteren Scheitelbeinränder."

This opinion of Ranke calls for a few words about the incomplete
horizontal parietal sutures. These sutures are apparently very rare in
human adults, only five instances being on record (4 Ranke's, 1
Turner's). They are more frequent in orangs (Ranke), and quite common
(as Ranke shows, and as I found independently before Ranke's publication
of his observations) in the human embryos near term and in new-born or
very young infants. In the human family, these partial divisions of the
parietal generally begin in the posterior part, and run sagittally to
the posterior border of the bone, ending in this border at or near its
middle. In orangs the incomplete horizontal divisions seem to begin, as
a rule, in the anterior part, and end at or near the middle of the
anterior border of the parietal. The length of these divisions varies
from a few millimetres to several centimetres, and they even reach up to
the centre of the parietal bone.[11] These divisions are, without doubt,
the remains of the original anterior and posterior clefts, or, if we go
a step further, of the original intervening antero-posterior space
between the original inferior and superior segments of the parietal.
From the very first contact of the growing centres, the median extremity
of these clefts is bounded both below and above by a mass of bone; and
when the anterior or posterior border of the parietal comes finally in
contact with the frontal or occipital bone, the anterior and posterior
sagittal clefts, if they still exist, lie between two well-developed,
firm portions of the bone. Under these circumstances it is quite
impossible to imagine any disturbance, mechanical or pathological, that
could affect solely or mainly the median portion of the cleft, and cause
a deflection downward in this portion of the division, or cause its
extension to the inferior border or even the anterior-inferior angle of
the parietal.

There are only two factors that can possibly affect and modify the
course of the incomplete parietal suture, and both of these would show
their influence mainly or entirely on the distal portion of the same.
These two factors are, first, an abnormal development, either
defective or excessive, of one of the original parietal segments; and,
secondly, influences that would interfere with the freedom of full
growth of the anterior or posterior border of the parietal.

In the first case, as can easily be imagined or even artificially
demonstrated, there would be possible only a lower or higher situation
or an obliquity affecting mostly the marginal portion of the division.
The results would be low or high sagittal sutures, and curved or
oblique sutures diverging from the parietal eminence,--effects
entirely different from the actually observed oblique sutures that
sever the lower portion of the parietal, or its mastoid angle.

Influences interfering with the free development of the anterior or
posterior border of the parietal bone could only deflect upwards or
downwards the marginal end of an incomplete parietal suture, or, at
most, in a case of a short suture, render it oblique or curved in its
entirety. No pathological condition, unless it were accompanied by a
fracture, could extend even a deflected antero-posterior incomplete
division to any of the borders of the bone.

There are, it seems to me, only three possible ways in which an
oblique suture, extending between any two borders of the parietal
bone, can be produced.

In the first case the oblique suture, or rather a suture-like
formation, may be the effect of an early fracture. A fracture produced
in adult life is generally recognizable as such; but a fracture dating
from earlier stages of life, produced before the growth of the bone
has ceased, may, if not entirely obliterated, present more or less the
characteristics of a suture. I have seen several skulls where a
division in the parietal bone or the temporal squama presented at the
same time features of a fracture and suture; in one or two of these
cases so much so, that it was and still is impossible for me to decide
exactly which of the two conditions I had before me. Gruber describes
one such case[12] as an instance of an oblique parietal suture, while
Hyrtl and Ranke both consider this case as one with an acquired
division. To differentiate a congenital real oblique suture from a
division which is the result of a fracture, we must be guided largely
by the situation, form, and serration of the division, and the
condition of the surrounding bones, especially that of the opposite
parietal. A straight course, ending with one extremity in or near the
middle of the anterior or posterior border of the parietal, a complex
serration, no continuity of the division on the neighboring bones, and
particularly a co-existence of an allied or similar division on the
opposite parietal,--all favor the conclusion that the division under
consideration is a real congenital suture, and not the result of a
fracture.

In the second case there are reasons for believing that an oblique
suture of the parietal bone can originate in the same way as the
horizontal one, namely, through a persistence of the original separation
between the two centres from which the bone is developed, and a
co-existent difference in the relative position or the relative growth
of the two centres. It is in this connection that the above-described
division in the parietals of the chimpanzee will prove of value.

The occasional persistence of the separation between the two original
segments of the parietal bone is sufficiently demonstrated by the
presence of the complete horizontal parietal suture. Differences in
the relative position of these segments can be observed in a limited
degree in Ranke's illustrations of embryos, before referred to; it can
be deduced from such cases as the two of Hyrtl,[13] in which the
division of the parietal was directed from the upper portion of the
anterior to the lower portion of the posterior border of the bone. The
most pronounced change in the position of these centres may be
witnessed in cases where the parietal bone shows a perfect vertical
instead of a horizontal suture. Such cases have been referred to
before, and I presented at the meeting of the Association of American
Anatomists, in 1899, several such examples, found by me in skulls of
monkeys in Professor Huntington's anatomical collection in the Medical
Department of Columbia University. One of these specimens is shown in
the accompanying illustration (Fig. 5).

A difference in the relative growth of the two centres of the
parietal bone is well shown in the difference of size between the
inferior and superior portions of the parietal in cases of the
complete horizontal suture in the same. In the majority of such cases
on record the superior portion is larger, particularly anteriorly,
than the inferior; so much so, that that condition seems to be the
typical one. The difference in the size of the two portions of the
parietal, and in their relative anterior and posterior height, is most
pronounced in one of Gruber's cases,[14] where the "parietal suture"
begins only 10 mm. above the pterion, and ends 40 mm. above the
asterion. In Dorsey's case[15] the lower portion of the divided
parietal is 12 mm. higher than the upper. The same condition as is
found in Gruber's case, here mentioned, exists in the almost identical
left division of the second case of Putnam, of which I have a
photograph in my hands. A somewhat similar excess of the posterior
over the anterior part of the lower severed portion of the parietal
can also be seen in the illustrations of the cases of Tarin, Lucae,
and Turner (Admiralty Islands skull). In Calori's interesting case[16]
there is a decided excess of the lower portion of the divided parietal
in its posterior portion on the left and in its anterior portion on
the right side.

[Illustration: Fig. 5. _Macacus rhesus_ (Medical Department, Columbia
University), showing a Complete Division of the Right Parietal Bone in
a Vertical Direction.]

In case the upper segment was not vertically above the lower one, but
in a position a little more forward or backward of it; and,
furthermore, if the relative growth of the two segments differed, and
their separation remained permanent,--the separation of any portion of
the parietal bone in almost any form and to almost any extent might
result. Such coincidence of anomalous conditions, although
necessarily rare, cannot, from what we know on the subject in parietal
and other bones, be declared improbable. All cases where oblique
suture on one side co-exists with more or less horizontal suture on
the other side in the parietal bone, as in the second of Putnam's
cases, would of course point directly to a similar origin of the
anomaly on both sides of the cranium. That such cases have not been
more frequently observed is largely due, I think, to the rarity of
bilateral parietal divisions.

A third mode of development of the oblique suture in the parietal bone
suggests itself where the severed portion of the bone is small, and
that is the possible existence of a supernumerary, third centre of
ossification. I am by no means ready to defend this theory, yet there
are cases in which it would afford the easiest explanation. I have a
Peruvian skull at hand, in which there is a bilateral, quite
symmetrical quadrangular separate piece of bone, encroaching on the
mastoid process of the parietal. The surface of the left parietal bone
in this skull measures across its middle in antero-posterior direction
120 mm., in infero-superior direction 130 mm.; similar measures of the
right parietal are respectively 117 and 130 mm. The separate bone on
the left measures across its middle in antero-posterior direction 20
mm., in infero-superior direction 12 to 21 mm.; the same portion on
the right measures respectively 25 and 11 to 15 mm. Both pieces are
joined to the parietal bone by a squamous suture (Fig. 6).

[Illustration: Fig. 6 (99/3550). Quadrilateral Fontanel Bones in a
Peruvian Male Skull, encroaching upon the Mastoid Angle of the
Parietals.]

It is apparent that the separate pieces of bone in this case are too
small to be easily taken for representatives of one of the regular
centres of ossification of the parietal bone; but the same pieces are
somewhat too large, and especially too singularly outlined and joined
to the parietal, to be without difficulty diagnosed as simple Wormian
or fontanel bones. One of Ranke's cases,[17] though the separation of
the mastoid angle is oblong instead of quadrangular, as in the
Peruvian skull, seems to me to present a similar difficulty in
properly diagnosing the nature of the severed portion. This group of
cases needs further observation, particularly on the bones of infants
and embryos. I have two monkey skulls at hand which actually show a
multiplicity of the original segments of the parietal. These specimens
will be described in a future publication.

So much as to the _formation_ of the oblique sutures in the parietal.
It should not be forgotten that such sutures can be _simulated_ by
those which divide true Wormian or fontanel bones from the parietal.
The distinction between the real oblique parietal and these
extra-parietal sutures must depend largely on the extent of the
division and form of the separate piece of bone.

We may now return to the skull of our chimpanzee. In considering the
nature of the divisions in the parietal bones of this skull, we can at
once and absolutely discard the idea of the divisions being due to
fractures, or being boundaries of Wormian or fontanel bones, and thus
really extra-parietal in their nature. There is nothing about the
sutures, or the divided pieces, or the neighboring bones, that would
even suggest such an explanation; and in our records on Wormian and
fontanel bones we find no analogies either in man, or apes, or lower
animals, to the conditions here observed. The necessary conclusion
from this can only be that we have before us two examples of real
parietal division.

The division on the left side, had it existed alone, would be readily
acceptable as an instance of the "parietal suture." The anterior
extremity and more than the anterior third of the course of the
division correspond exactly to the same features of a typical,
horizontal "parietal suture;" while the elevation of the posterior
extremity of the division, though unusual, can readily be explained as
due to an excess in growth of the inferior original centre of the
bone, which may, in addition, have been situated slightly posterior to
the upper centre.

The division in the right parietal of the chimpanzee begins at its
anterior end, and runs for the first third of its course in the same
way as that on the left side; its posterior end, however, does not
reach the lambdoid, but turns up and ends in the sagittal border.
Should this formation have existed alone, I should be inclined to
consider it either as the result of an accessory centre of the
parietal, or, possibly, as a persistence of the anterior portion of
the divided superior centre of the bone, the posterior portion of the
same being united with the lower segment of the parietal in the usual
way. With the division of the left parietal in the same skull before
me, everything points to a similar origin of the division on both
sides, and to the right as well as the left division being a true
"parietal suture," deflected less on the left and more on the right
side by a disproportion in growth of the two original, regular
segments of each of the bones.

The disproportion of growth of the two original segments of the
parietal bone will, I believe, be found more common as attention is
directed to this subject. It can be well explained, though there may
at times be other factors present, by a difference in the blood-supply
to the two centres. This of course may occur not only in different
skulls, but also on the two sides of the same cranium.




Footnotes:


[Footnote 1: Die überzähligen Hautknochen des menschlichen
Schädeldachs, Abh. d. k. bayer. Akad. d. Wiss., II Cl., XX Bd., II
Abth., pp. 36 et seq., Fig. 17.]

[Footnote 2: _L. c._, p. 41. Among 3000 Bavarian crania, Ranke found
but one with complete and three with incomplete parietal sutures;
basing his conclusion on this observation, he says, "Bei den
Orangutanschädeln ist die Häufigkeit der Scheitelbeinnäthe circa 40
mal grösser als bei dem erwachsenen Menschen."]

[Footnote 3: Since finding the abnormal sutures on this skull, I have
been able to present the same at a meeting of the Association of
American Anatomists (1899) and before the Ethnological Society of New
York City (1900).]

[Footnote 4: Toldt, C., in Maska's Hdb. d. gerichtl. Med., 1882, v.
III, p. 515; the same in his U. d. Entwick. d. Scheitelbeins d.
Menschen, Zeitschr. f. Heilkunde, 1883, v. IV, pp. 83-86.]

[Footnote 5: _L. c._, pp. 324-330.]

[Footnote 6: _L. c._, pp. 327-330, Figs. 29-32.]

[Footnote 7: Gruber, W., Beobacht. a. d. menschl. u. vergl. Anat.,
Berlin, 1879, II Heft, pp. 12-15.]

[Footnote 8: Welcker, H., Untersuch. ü. d. Wachsthum u. Bau d.
menschl. Schädels, Leipzig, 1862, p. 109.]

[Footnote 9: Putnam, F. W., Abnormal Human Skulls from Stone Graves in
Tennessee (Proc. A. A. A. S., XXXII, 1884, p. 391).]

[Footnote 10: _L. c._, p. 309.]

[Footnote 11: Ranke's Fig. 25, p. 318.]

[Footnote 12: Virchow's Archiv, 1870, v. 50, p. 113.]

[Footnote 13: Hyrtl, J., Die doppelten Schläfenlinien d.
Menschenschädel, etc. (Denkschr. d. math. naturw. Classe d. k. Akad.
d. Wiss. zu Wien, 1871, v. XXXII, pp. 39-50).]

[Footnote 14: Gruber, W., Beobacht. a. d. menschl. u. vergl. Anat.,
Berlin, 1879, II Heft, p. 15.]

[Footnote 15: Dorsey, G. A., Chicago Med. Recorder, v. XII, Feb., 1897.]

[Footnote 16: Calori, Luigi, Sut. soprannum. d. Cranio Umano (Mem. d.
Accad. d. Sc. d. Ist. d. Bologna, 1867, pp. 327 et seq., Fig. 4).]

[Footnote 17: _L. c._, p. 303, Fig. 13.]




PUBLICATIONS OF THE American Museum of Natural History


The publications of the American Museum of Natural History consist of
the 'Bulletin,' in octavo, of which one volume, consisting of about
400 pages, and about 25 plates, with numerous text figures, is
published annually; and the 'Memoirs,' in quarto, published in parts
at irregular intervals.

The matter in the 'Bulletin' consists of about twenty-four articles
per volume, which relate about equally to Geology, Palæontology,
Mammalogy, Ornithology, Entomology, and (in the recent volumes)
Anthropology.

Each Part of the 'Memoirs,' forms a separate and complete monograph,
with numerous plates.


MEMOIRS.

Vol. I (not yet completed).

     PART I.--Republication of Descriptions of Lower Carboniferous
     Crinoidea from the Hall Collection now in the American Museum of
     Natural History, with Illustrations of the Original Type
     Specimens not heretofore Figured. By R. P. Whitfield. Pp. 1-37,
     pll. i-iii. September 15, 1893. Price, $2.00.

     PART II.--Republication of Descriptions of Fossils from the Hall
     Collection in the American Museum of Natural History, from the
     report of Progress for 1861 of the Geological Survey of
     Wisconsin, by James Hall, with Illustrations from the Original
     Type Specimens not heretofore Figured. By R. P. Whitfield. Pp.
     39-74, pll. iv-xii. August 10, 1895. Price, $2.00.

     PART III.--The Extinct Rhinoceroses. By Henry Fairfield Osborn.
     Part I. Pp. 75-164, pll. xii_a_-xx. April 22, 1898. Price, $4.20.

     PART IV.--A complete Mosasaur Skeleton. By Henry Fairfield
     Osborn. Pp. 165-188, pll. xxi-xxiii, with 15 text figures.
     October 25, 1899.

     PART V.--A Skeleton of Diplodocus. By Henry Fairfield Osborn. Pp.
     189-214, pll. xxiv-xxviii, with 15 text figures. October 25,
     1899. Price of Parts IV and V, issued under one cover, $2.00.

Vol. II. Anthropology (not yet completed).

_The Jesup North Pacific Expedition._

     PART I.--Facial Paintings of the Indians of Northern British
     Columbia. By Franz Boas. Pp. 1-24, pll. i-vi. June 16, 1898.
     Price, $2.00.

     PART II.--The Mythology of the Bella Coola Indians. By Franz
     Boas. Pp. 25-127, pll. vii-xii. November, 1898. Price, $2.00.

     PART III.--The Archæology of Lytton, British Columbia. By Harlan
     I. Smith. Pp. 129-161, pl. xiii, with 117 text figures. May,
     1899. Price, $2.00.

     PART IV.--The Thompson Indians of British Columbia. By James
     Teit. Edited by Franz Boas. Pp. 163-392, pll. xiv-xx, with 198
     text figures. April, 1900. Price, $5.00.

     PART V.--Basketry Designs of the Salish Indians. By Livingstone
     Farrand. Pp. 393-399, pll. xxi-xxiii, with 15 text figures.
     April, 1900. Price, 75 cts.

Vol. III. Anthropology (not yet completed).

     PART I.--Symbolism of the Huichol Indians. By Carl Lumholtz. Pp.
     1-228, pll. i-iv, with 291 text figures. May, 1900. Price, $5.00.


BULLETIN.

    Volume    I, 1881-86     Price, $5.50
       "     II, 1887-90       "     4.75
       "    III, 1890-91       "     4.00
       "     IV, 1892          "     4.00
       "      V, 1893          "     4.00
       "     VI, 1894          "     4.00
       "    VII, 1895          "     4.00
       "   VIII, 1896          "     4.00
       "     IX, 1897          "     4.75
       "      X, 1898          "     4.75
       "     XI, Part I, 1898  "     1.25
       "      "    " II, 1899  "     2.00
       "    XII, 1899          "     4.00

    For sale by G. P. PUTNAM'S SONS, New York and London;
    J. B. BAILLIÈRE ET FILS, Paris; R. FRIEDLÄNDER &
    SOHN, Berlin; and at the Museum.




Transcriber's Note:


  * Footnotes have been moved to the end of the article.

  * Text enclosed between equal signs was in bold face in the original
  (=bold=).





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of A Bilateral Division of the Parietal
Bone in a Chimpanzee; with a Special, by Ales Hrdlicka

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK PARIETAL BONE IN A CHIMPANZEE ***

***** This file should be named 34101-0.txt or 34101-0.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/1/0/34101/

Produced by Larry B. Harrison and the Online Distributed
Proofreading Team at https://www.pgdp.net


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
