The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of the Fly, by J. Henri Fabre

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Life of the Fly
       With Which are Interspersed Some Chapters of Autobiography

Author: J. Henri Fabre

Translator: Alexander Teixeira de Mattos

Posting Date: February 28, 2009 [EBook #3422]
Release Date: September, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF THE FLY ***




Produced by Gerry Rising





THE LIFE OF THE FLY:

With Which are Interspersed Some Chapters of Autobiography


By J. Henri Fabre


Translated by Alexander Teixeira de Mattos

Fellow of the Zoological Society of London




CONTENTS

   TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

   I      THE HARMAS
   II     THE ANTHRAX
   III    ANOTHER PROBER (PERFORATOR)
   IV     LARVAL DIMORPHISM
   V      HEREDITY
   VI     MY SCHOOLING
   VII    THE POND
   VIII   THE CADDIS WORM
   IX     THE GREENBOTTLES
   X      THE GRAY FLESH FLIES
   XI     THE BUMBLEBEE FLY
   XII    MATHEMATICAL MEMORIES: NEWTON'S BINOMIAL THEOREM
   XIII   MATHEMATICAL MEMORIES: MY LITTLE TABLE
   XIV    THE BLUEBOTTLE: THE LAYING
   XV     THE BLUEBOTTLE: THE GRUB
   XVI    A PARASITE OF THE MAGGOT
   XVII   RECOLLECTIONS OF CHILDHOOD
   XVIII  INSECTS AND MUSHROOMS
   XIX    A MEMORABLE LESSON
   XX     INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY




TRANSLATOR'S NOTE

The present volume contains all the essays on flies, or Diptera, from
the Souvenirs entomologiques, to which I have added, in order to make
the dimensions uniform with those of the other volumes of the series,
the purely autobiographical essays comprised in the Souvenirs. These
essays, though they have no bearing upon the life of the fly, are
among the most interesting that Henri Fabre has written and will, I am
persuaded, make a special appeal to the reader. The chapter entitled The
Caddis Worm has been included as following directly upon The Pond.

Since publishing The Life of the Spider, I was much struck by a passage
in Dr. Chalmers Mitchell's stimulating work, The Childhood of Animals,
in which the secretary of the Zoological Society of London says: 'I have
attempted to avoid the use of terms familiar only to students of zoology
and to refrain from anatomical detail, but at the same time to refrain
from the irritating habit assuming that my readers have no knowledge, no
dictionaries and no other books.'

I began to wonder whether I had gone too far in simplifying the
terminology of the Fabre essays and in appending explanatory footnotes
to the inevitable number of outlandish names of insects. But my doubts
vanished when I thought upon Fabre's own words in the first chapter of
this book: 'If I write for men of learning, for philosophers...I write
above all things for the young. I want to make them love the natural
story which you make them hate; and that is why, while keeping strictly
to the domain of truth, I avoid your scientific prose, which too often,
alas, seems borrowed from some Iroquois idiom!'

And I can but apologize if I have been too lavish with my notes to this
chapter in particular, which introduces to us, as in a sort of litany,
a multitude of the insects studied by the author. For the rest, I have
continued my system of references to the earlier Fabre books, whether
translated by myself or others. Of the following essays, The Harmas has
appeared, under another title, in The Daily Mail; The Pond, Industrial
Chemistry and the two Chapters on the bluebottle in The English Review;
and The Harmas, The Pond and Industrial Chemistry in the New York
Bookman. The others are new to England and America, unless any of them
should be issued in newspapers or magazines between this date and the
publication of the book.

I wish once more to thank Miss Frances Rodwell for her assistance in the
details of my work and in the verification of the many references; and
my thanks are also due to Mr. Edward Cahen, who has been good enough to
revise the two chemistry chapters for me, and to Mr. W. S. Graff Baker,
who has performed the same kindly task towards the two chapters entitled
Mathematical Memories.--Alexander Teixeira de Mattos. Chelsea, 8 July,
1913.

[Recorder's Note: Most Translator's Footnotes have been omitted from
this text, but some of his references to localities and insect names
are included in brackets. I apologize to English readers for changes to
American spelling.]




CHAPTER I. THE HARMAS

This is what I wished for, hoc erat in votis: a bit of land, oh, not so
very large, but fenced in, to avoid the drawbacks of a public way; an
abandoned, barren, sun scorched bit of land, favored by thistles and by
wasps and bees. Here, without fear of being troubled by the passersby, I
could consult the Ammophila and the Sphex [two digger or hunting wasps]
and engage in that difficult conversation whose questions and answers
have experiment for their language; here, without distant expeditions
that take up my time, without tiring rambles that strain my nerves,
I could contrive my plans of attack, lay my ambushes and watch their
effects at every hour of the day. Hoc erat in votis. Yes, this was my
wish, my dream, always cherished, always vanishing into the mists of the
future.

And it is no easy matter to acquire a laboratory in the open fields,
when harassed by a terrible anxiety about one's daily bread. For forty
years have I fought, with steadfast courage, against the paltry plagues
of life; and the long-wished-for laboratory has come at last. What it
has cost me in perseverance and relentless work I will not try to say.
It has come; and, with it--a more serious condition--perhaps a little
leisure. I say perhaps, for my leg is still hampered with a few links of
the convict's chain.

The wish is realized. It is a little late, O my pretty insects! I
greatly fear that the peach is offered to me when I am beginning to
have no teeth wherewith to eat it. Yes, it is a little late: the wide
horizons of the outset have shrunk into a low and stifling canopy, more
and more straitened day by day. Regretting nothing in the past, save
those whom I have lost; regretting nothing, not even my first youth;
hoping nothing either, I have reached the point at which, worn out by
the experience of things, we ask ourselves if life be worth the living.

Amid the ruins that surround me, one strip of wall remains standing,
immovable upon its solid base: my passion for scientific truth. Is that
enough, O my busy insects, to enable me to add yet a few seemly pages
to your history? Will my strength not cheat my good intentions? Why,
indeed, did I forsake you so long? Friends have reproached me for it.
Ah, tell them, tell those friends, who are yours as well as mine,
tell them that it was not forgetfulness on my part, not weariness, nor
neglect: I thought of you; I was convinced that the Cerceris [a digger
wasp] cave had more fair secrets to reveal to us, that the chase of the
Sphex held fresh surprises in store. But time failed me; I was alone,
deserted, struggling against misfortune. Before philosophizing, one had
to live. Tell them that; and they will pardon me.

Others again have reproached me with my style, which has not the
solemnity, nay, better, the dryness of the schools. They fear lest a
page that is read without fatigue should not always be the expression
of the truth. Were I to take their word for it, we are profound only
on condition of being obscure. Come here, one and all of you--you, the
sting bearers, and you, the wing-cased armor-clads--take up my defense
and bear witness in my favor. Tell of the intimate terms on which I live
with you, of the patience with which I observe you, of the care with
which I record your actions. Your evidence is unanimous: yes, my pages,
though they bristle not with hollow formulas nor learned smatterings,
are the exact narrative of facts observed, neither more nor less; and
whoever cares to question you in his turn will, obtain the same replies.

And then, my dear insects, if you cannot convince those good people,
because you do not carry the weight of tedium, I, in my turn, will say
to them: 'You rip up the animal and I study it alive; you turn it into
an object of horror and pity, whereas I cause it to be loved; you labor
in a torture chamber and dissecting room, I make my observations under
the blue sky to the song of the cicadas, you subject cell and protoplasm
to chemical tests, I study instinct in its loftiest manifestations;
you pry into death, I pry into life. And why should I not complete
my thought: the boars have muddied the clear stream; natural history,
youth's glorious study, has, by dint of cellular improvements, become a
hateful and repulsive thing. Well, if I write for men of learning, for
philosophers, who, one day, will try to some extent to unravel the tough
problem of instinct, I write also, I write above all things for the
young. I want to make them love the natural history which you make them
hate; and that is why, while keeping strictly to the domain of truth, I
avoid your scientific prose, which too often, alas seems borrowed from
some Iroquois idiom.

But this is not my business for the moment: I want to speak of the
bit of land long cherished in my plans to form a laboratory of living
entomology, the bit of land which I have at last obtained in the
solitude of a little village. It is a harmas, the name given, in this
district [the country round Serignan, in Provence], to an untilled,
pebbly expanse abandoned to the vegetation of the thyme. It is too poor
to repay the work of the plow; but the sheep passes there in spring,
when it has chanced to rain and a little grass shoots up.

My harmas, however, because of its modicum of red earth swamped by a
huge mass of stones, has received a rough first attempt at cultivation:
I am told that vines once grew here. And, in fact, when we dig the
ground before planting a few trees, we turn up, here and there, remains
of the precious stock, half carbonized by time. The three pronged fork,
therefore, the only implement of husbandry that can penetrate such
a soil as this, has entered here; and I am sorry, for the primitive
vegetation has disappeared. No more thyme, no more lavender, no more
clumps of kermes oak, the dwarf oak that forms forests across which we
step by lengthening our stride a little. As these plants, especially the
first two, might be of use to me by offering the Bees and Wasps a spoil
to forage, I am compelled to reinstate them in the ground whence they
were driven by the fork.

What abounds without my mediation is the invaders of any soil that is
first dug up and then left for a long time to its own resources. We
have, in the first rank, the couch grass, that execrable weed which
three years of stubborn warfare have not succeeded in exterminating.
Next, in respect of number, come the centauries, grim looking one
and all, bristling with prickles or starry halberds. They are the
yellow-flowered centaury, the mountain centaury, the star thistle and
the rough centaury: the first predominates. Here and there, amid their
inextricable confusion, stands, like a chandelier with spreading, orange
flowers for lights, the fierce Spanish oyster plant, whose spikes are
strong as nails. Above it, towers the Illyrian cotton thistle, whose
straight and solitary stalk soars to a height of three to six feet and
ends in large pink tufts. Its armor hardly yields before that of the
oyster plant. Nor must we forget the lesser thistle tribe, with first
of all, the prickly or 'cruel' thistle, which is so well armed that the
plant collector knows not where to grasp it; next, the spear thistle,
with its ample foliage, ending each of its veins with a spear head;
lastly, the black knapweed, which gathers itself into a spiky knot.
In among these, in long lines armed with hooks, the shoots of the blue
dewberry creep along the ground. To visit the prickly thicket when the
Wasp goes foraging, you must wear boots that come to mid-leg or else
resign yourself to a smarting in the calves. As long as the ground
retains a few remnants of the vernal rains, this rude vegetation does
not lack a certain charm, when the pyramids of the oyster plant and the
slender branches of the cotton thistle rise above the wide carpet formed
by the yellow-flowered centaury saffron heads; but let the droughts of
summer come and we see but a desolate waste, which the flame of a match
would set ablaze from one end to the other. Such is, or rather was,
when I took possession of it, the Eden of bliss where I mean to live
henceforth alone with the insect. Forty years of desperate struggle have
won it for me.

Eden, I said; and, from the point of view that interests me, the
expression is not out of place. This cursed ground, which no one would
have had at a gift to sow with a pinch of turnip seed, is an earthly
paradise for the bees and wasps. Its mighty growth of thistles and
centauries draws them all to me from everywhere around. Never, in my
insect hunting memories, have I seen so large a population at a single
spot; all the trades have made it their rallying point. Here come
hunters of every kind of game, builders in clay, weavers of cotton
goods, collectors of pieces cut from a leaf or the petals of a flower,
architects in pasteboard, plasterers mixing mortar, carpenters
boring wood, miners digging underground galleries, workers handling
goldbeater's skin and many more.

Who is this one? An Anthidium [a tailor bee]. She scrapes the cobwebby
stalk of the yellow-flowered centaury and gathers a ball of wadding
which she carries off proudly in the tips of her mandibles. She will
turn it, under ground, into cotton felt satchels to hold the store of
honey and the egg. And these others, so eager for plunder? They are
Megachiles [leaf-cutting bees], carrying under their bellies their
black, white or blood red reaping brushes. They will leave the thistles
to visit the neighboring shrubs and there cut from the leaves oval
pieces which will be made into a fit receptacle to contain the harvest.
And these, clad in black velvet? They are Chalicodomae [mason bees], who
work with cement and gravel. We could easily find their masonry on the
stones in the harmas. And these noisily buzzing with a sudden flight?
They are the Anthophorae [wild bees], who live in the old walls and the
sunny banks of the neighborhood.

Now come the Osmiae. One stacks her cells in the spiral staircase of an
empty snail shell; another, attacking the pith of a dry bit of bramble,
obtains for her grubs a cylindrical lodging and divides it into floors
by means of partition walls; a third employs the natural channel of a
cut reed; a fourth is a rent-free tenant of the vacant galleries of
some mason bee. Here are the Macrocerae and the Eucerae, whose males are
proudly horned; the Dasypodae, who carry an ample brush of bristles on
their hind legs for a reaping implement; the Andrenae, so manifold in
species; the slender-bellied Halicti [all wild bees]. I omit a host of
others. If I tried to continue this record of the guests of my thistles,
it would muster almost the whole of the honey yielding tribe. A learned
entomologist of Bordeaux, Professor Perez, to whom I submit the naming
of my prizes, once asked me if I had any special means of hunting,
to send him so many rarities and even novelties. I am not at all an
experienced and, still less, a zealous hunter, for the insect interests
me much more when engaged in its work than when struck on a pin in a
cabinet. The whole secret of my hunting is reduced to my dense nursery
of thistles and centauries.

By a most fortunate chance, with this populous family of honey gatherers
was allied the whole hunting tribe. The builders' men had distributed
here and there in the harmas great mounds of sand and heaps of stones,
with a view to running up some surrounding walls. The work dragged on
slowly; and the materials found occupants from the first year. The mason
bees had chosen the interstices between the stones as a dormitory where
to pass the night, in serried groups. The powerful eyed lizard, who,
when close pressed, attacks both man and dog, wide mouthed, had selected
a cave wherein to lie in wait for the passing scarab [a dung beetle
also known as the sacred beetle]; the black-eared chat, garbed like a
Dominican, white-frocked with black wings, sat on the top stone,
singing his short rustic lay: his nest, with its sky blue eggs, must be
somewhere in the heap. The little Dominican disappeared with the loads
of stones. I regret him: he would have been a charming neighbor. The
eyed lizard I do not regret at all.

The sand sheltered a different colony. Here, the Bembeces [digger wasps]
were sweeping the threshold of their burrows, flinging a curve of dust
behind them; the Languedocian Sphex was dragging her Ephippigera [a
green grasshopper] by the antennae; a Stizus [a hunting wasp] was
storing her preserves of Cicadellae [froghoppers]. To my sorrow, the
masons ended by evicting the sporting tribe; but, should I ever wish to
recall it, I have but to renew the mounds of sand: they will soon all be
there.

Hunters that have not disappeared, their homes being different, are the
Ammophilae, whom I see fluttering, one in spring, the others in autumn,
along the garden walks and over the lawns, in search of a caterpillar;
the Pompili [digger or hunting wasp], who travel alertly, beating their
wings and rummaging in every corner in quest of a spider. The largest
of them waylays the Narbonne Lycosa [known also as the black-bellied
tarantula], whose burrow is not infrequent in the harmas. This burrow is
a vertical well, with a curb of fescue grass intertwined with silk. You
can see the eyes of the mighty Spider gleam at the bottom of the den
like little diamonds, an object of terror to most. What a prey and what
dangerous hunting for the Pompilus! And here, on a hot summer afternoon,
is the Amazon ant, who leaves her barrack rooms in long battalions and
marches far afield to hunt for slaves. We will follow her in her raids
when we find time. Here again, around a heap of grasses turned to mould,
are Scoliae [large hunting wasps] an inch and a half long, who fly
gracefully and dive into the heap, attracted by a rich prey, the grubs
of Lamellicorns, Orycotes and Ceotoniae [various beetles].

What subjects for study! And there are more to come. The house was as
utterly deserted as the ground. When man was gone and peace assured, the
animal hastily seized on everything. The warbler took up his abode in
the lilac shrubs; the greenfinch settled in the thick shelter of the
cypresses; the sparrow carted rags and straw under every slate; the
Serin finch, whose downy nest is no bigger than half an apricot, came
and chirped in the plane tree tops; the Scops made a habit of uttering
his monotonous, piping note here, of an evening; the bird of Pallas
Athene, the owl, came hurrying along to hoot and hiss.

In front of the house is a large pond, fed by the aqueduct that supplies
the village pumps with water. Here, from half a mile and more around,
come the frogs and Toads in the lovers' season. The natterjack,
sometimes as large as a plate, with a narrow stripe of yellow down his
back, makes his appointments here to take his bath; when the evening
twilight falls, we see hopping along the edge the midwife toad, the
male, who carries a cluster of eggs, the size of peppercorns, wrapped
round his hindlegs: the genial paterfamilias has brought his precious
packet from afar, to leave it in the water and afterwards retire under
some flat stone, whence he will emit a sound like a tinkling bell.
Lastly, when not croaking amid the foliage, the tree frogs indulge in
the most graceful dives. And so, in May, as soon as it is dark, the
pond becomes a deafening orchestra: it is impossible to talk at table,
impossible to sleep. We had to remedy this by means perhaps a little
too rigorous. What could we do? He who tries to sleep and cannot needs
becomes ruthless.

Bolder still, the wasp has taken possession of the dwelling house. On my
door sill, in a soil of rubbish, nestles the white-banded Sphex: when
I go indoors, I must be careful not to damage her burrows, not to tread
upon the miner absorbed in her work. It is quite a quarter of a century
since I last saw the saucy cricket hunter. When I made her acquaintance,
I used to visit her at a few miles' distance: each time, it meant an
expedition under the blazing August sun. Today, I find her at my door;
we are intimate neighbors. The embrasure of the closed window provides
an apartment of a mild temperature for the Pelopaeus [a mason wasp]. The
earth-built nest is fixed against the freestone wall. To enter her home,
the spider huntress uses a little hole left open by accident in the
shutters. On the moldings of the Venetian blinds, a few stray mason
bees build their group of cells; inside the outer shutters, left ajar, a
Eumenes [a mason wasp] constructs her little earthen dome, surmounted by
a short, bell-mouthed neck. The common wasp and the Polistes [a solitary
wasp] are my dinner guests: they visit my table to see if the grapes
served are as ripe as they look.

Here, surely--and the list is far from complete--is a company both
numerous and select, whose conversation will not fail to charm my
solitude, if I succeed in drawing it out. My dear beasts of former days,
my old friends, and others, more recent acquaintances, all are here,
hunting, foraging, building in close proximity. Besides, should we wish
to vary the scene of observation, the mountain [Ventoux] is but a
few hundred steps away, with its tangle of arbutus, rock roses and
arborescent heather; with its sandy spaces dear to the Bembeces; with
its marly slopes exploited by different wasps and bees. And that is why,
foreseeing these riches, I have abandoned the town for the village and
come to Serignan to weed my turnips and water my lettuces.

Laboratories are being founded, at great expense, on our Atlantic and
Mediterranean coasts, where people cut up small sea animals, of but
meager interest to us; they spend a fortune on powerful microscopes,
delicate dissecting instruments, engines of capture, boats, fishing
crews, aquariums, to find out how the yolk of an Annelid's egg is
constructed, a question whereof I have never yet been able to grasp the
full importance; and they scorn the little land animal, which lives
in constant touch with us, which provides universal psychology with
documents of inestimable value, which too often threatens the public
wealth by destroying our crops. When shall we have an entomological
laboratory for the study not of the dead insect, steeped in alcohol, but
of the living insect; a laboratory having for its object the instinct,
the habits, the manner of living, the work, the struggles, the
propagation of that little world, with which agriculture and philosophy
have most seriously to reckon?

To know thoroughly the history of the destroyer of our vines might
perhaps be more important than to know how this or that nerve fiber of
a Cirriped [sea animals with hair-like legs, including the barnacles and
acorn shells] ends; to establish by experiment the line of demarcation
between intellect and instinct; to prove, by comparing facts in the
zoological progression, whether human reason be an irreducible faculty
or not: all this ought surely to take precedence of the number of joints
in a Crustacean's antenna. These enormous questions would need an army
of workers; and we have not one. The fashion is all for the Mollusk
and the Zoophytes [plant-like sea animals, including starfishes,
jellyfishes, sea anemones and sponges]. The depths of the sea are
explored with many drag nets; the soil which we tread is consistently
disregarded. While waiting for the fashion to change, I open my harmas
laboratory of living entomology; and this laboratory shall not cost the
ratepayers one farthing.




CHAPTER II. THE ANTHRAX

I made the acquaintance of the Anthrax in 1855 at Carpentras, at the
time when the life history of the oil beetles was causing me to search
the tall slopes beloved of the Anthophora bees [mason bees]. Her curious
pupae, so powerfully equipped to force an outlet for the perfect
insect incapable of the least effort, those pupae armed with a multiple
plowshare at the fore, a trident at the rear and rows of harpoons on the
back wherewith to rip open the Osmia bee's cocoon and break through
the hard crust of the hillside, betokened a field that was worth
cultivating. The little that I said about her at the time brought me
urgent entreaties: I was asked for a circumstantial chapter on the
strange fly. The stern necessities of life postponed to an ever
retreating future my beloved investigations, so miserably stifled.
Thirty years have passed; at last, a little leisure is at hand; and
here, in the harmas of my village, with an ardor that has in no wise
grown old, I have resumed my plans of yore, still alive like the coal
smoldering under the ashes. The Anthrax has told me her secrets, which I
in my turn am going to divulge. Would that I could address all those who
cheered me on this path, including first and foremost the revered Master
of the Landes [Leon Dufour]. But the ranks have thinned, many have been
promoted to another world and their disciple lagging behind them can but
record, in memory of those who are no more, the story of the insect clad
in deepest mourning.

In the course of July, let us give a few sideward knocks to the bracing
pebbles and detach the nests of the Chalicodoma of the Walls [a mason
bee] from their supports. Loosened by the shock, the dome comes off
cleanly, all in one piece. Moreover--and this is a great advantage--the
cells come into view wide open on the base of the exposed nest, for at
this point they have no other wall than the surface of the pebble. In
this way, without any scraping, which would be wearisome work for the
operator and dangerous to the inhabitants of the dome, we have all the
cells before our eyes, together with their contents, consisting of a
silky, amber-yellow cocoon, as delicate and translucent as an onion
peeling. Let us split the dainty wrapper with the scissors, chamber by
chamber, nest by nest. If fortune be at all propitious, as it always is
to the persevering, we shall end by finding that the cocoons harbor two
larvae together, one more or less faded in appearance, the other fresh
and plump. We shall also find some, no less plentiful, in which the
withered larva is accompanied by a family of little grubs wriggling
uneasily around it.

Examination at once reveals the tragedy that is happening under the
cover of the cocoon. The flacid and faded larva is the mason bee's.
A month ago, in June, having finished its mess of honey, it wove its
silken sheath for a bedchamber wherein to take the long sleep which is
the prelude to the metamorphosis. Bulging with fat, it is a rich and
defenseless morsel for whoever is able to reach it. Then, in spite
of apparently insurmountable obstacles, the mortar wall and the tent
without an opening, the flesh-eating larvae appeared in the secret
retreat and are now glutting themselves on the sleeper. Three different
species take part in the carnage, often in the same nest, in adjoining
cells. The diversity of shapes informs us of the presence of more than
one enemy; the final stage of the creatures will tell us the names and
qualities of the three invaders.

Forestalling the secrets of the future for the sake of greater
clearness, I will anticipate the actual facts and come at once to the
results produced. When it is by itself on the body of the mason bee's
larva, the murderous grub belongs either to Anthrax trifasciata, MEIGEN,
or to Leucospis gigas, FAB. But, if numerous little worms, often a score
and more, swarm around the victim, then it is a Chalcidid's family which
we have before us. Each of these ravagers shall have its biography. Let
us begin with the Anthrax.

And first the grub, as it is after consuming its victim, when it remains
the sole occupant of the mason bee's cocoon. It is a naked worm, smooth,
legless and blind, of a creamy dead white, each segment a perfect ring,
very much curved when at rest, but with the tendency to become
almost straight when disturbed. Through the diaphanous skin, the lens
distinguishes patches of fat, which are the cause of its characteristic
coloring. When younger, as a tiny grub a few millimeters long, it is
streaked with two different kinds of stains, some white, opaque and of a
creamy tint, others translucent and of the palest amber. The former
come from adipose masses in course of formation; the second from the
nourishing fluid or from the blood which laves those masses.

Including the head, I count thirteen segments. In the middle of the body
these segments are well marked, being separated by a slight groove; but
in the forepart they are difficult to count. The head is small and is
soft, like the rest of the body, with no sign of any mouth parts even
under the close scrutiny of the lens. It is a white globule, the size
of a tiny pin's head and continued at the back by a pad a little larger,
from which it is separated by a scarcely appreciable crease. The whole
is a sort of nipple swelling slightly on the upper surface; and its
double structure is so difficult to perceive that at first we take it
for the animal's head alone, though it includes both the head and the
prothorax, or first segment of the thorax.

The mesothorax, or middle segment of the thorax, which is two or three
times larger in diameter, is flattened in front and separated from the
nipple formed by the prothorax and the head by a deep, narrow, curved
fissure. On its front surface are two pale red stigmata, or respiratory
orifices, placed pretty close together. The metathorax, or last segment
of the thorax, is a little larger still in diameter and protrudes.
These abrupt increases in circumference result in a marked hump, sloping
sharply towards the front. The nipple of which the head forms part is
set at the bottom of this hump.

After the metathorax, the shape becomes regular and cylindrical, while
decreasing slightly in girth in the last two or three segments. Close to
the line of separation of the last two rings, I am able to distinguish,
not without difficulty, two very small stigmata, just a little darker
in color. They belong to the last segment. In all, four respiratory
orifices, two in front and two behind, as is the rule among Flies. The
length of the full sized larva is 15 to 20 millimeters and its breadth 5
to 6.

Remarkable in the first place by the protuberance of its thorax and
the smallness of its head, the grub of the Anthrax acquires exceptional
interest by its manner of feeding. Let us begin by observing that,
deprived of all, even the most rudimentary walking apparatus, the animal
is absolutely incapable of shifting its position. If I disturb its rest,
it curves and straightens itself in turns by a series of contractions,
it tosses about violently where it lies, but does not manage to
progress. It fidgets and gets no farther. We shall see later the
magnificent problem raised by this inertness.

For the moment, a most unexpected fact claims all our attention. I refer
to the extreme readiness with which the Anthrax' larva quits and returns
to the Chalicodoma grub on which it is feeding. After witnessing flesh
eating larvae at hundreds and hundreds of meals, I suddenly find myself
confronted with a manner of eating that bears no relation to anything
which I have seen before. I feel myself in a world that baffles my old
experience. Let us recall the table manners of a larva living on prey,
the Ammophila's for instance, when devouring its caterpillar. A hole is
made in the victim's side; and the head and neck of the nursling dive
deep into the wound, to root luxuriously among the entrails. There is
never a withdrawal from the gnawed belly, never a recoil to interrupt
the feast and to take breath awhile. The vivacious animal always goes
forward, chewing, swallowing, digesting, until the caterpillar's skin is
emptied of its contents. Once seated at table, it does not budge as long
as the victuals last. To tease it with a straw is not always enough
to induce it to withdraw its head outside the wound; I have to use
violence. When removed by force and then left to its own devices, the
creature hesitates for a long time, stretches itself and mouths around,
without trying to open a passage through a new wound. It needs the
attacking point that has just been abandoned. If it finds the spot,
it makes its way in and resumes the work of eating; but its future is
jeopardized from this time forward, for the game, now perhaps tackled at
inopportune points, is liable to go bad.

With the Anthrax' grub, there is none of this mangling, none of this
persistent clinging to the entrance wound. I have but to tease it with
the tip of a hair pencil and forthwith it retires; and the lens reveals
no wound at the abandoned spot, no such effusion of blood as there would
be if the skin were perforated. When its sense of security is restored,
the grub once more applies its pimple head to the fostering larva,
at any point, no matter where; and, so long as my curiosity does not
prevent it, keeps itself fixed there, without the least effort, or the
least perceptible movement that could account for the adhesion. If I
repeat the touch with the pencil, I see the same sudden retreat and,
soon after, the same contact just as readily renewed.

This facility for gripping, quitting and regripping, now here, now
there and always without a wound, the part of the victim whence the
nourishment is drawn tells us of itself that the mouth of the Anthrax
is not armed with mandibular fangs capable of digging into the skin and
tearing it. If the flesh were gashed by any such pincers, one or two
attempts would be necessary before they could be released or reapplied;
besides, each point bitten would display a lesion. Well, there is
nothing of the kind: a conscientious examination through the magnifying
glass shows conclusively that the skin is intact; the grub glues
its mouth to its prey or withdraws it with an ease that can only be
explained by a process of simple contact. This being so, the Anthrax
does not chew its food as do the other carnivorous grubs; it does not
eat, it inhales.

This method of taking nourishment implies an exceptional apparatus of
the mouth, into which it behooves us to inquire before continuing. My
most powerful magnifying glass at last discovers, at the center of the
pimple head, a small spot of an amber-russet color; and that is all. For
a more exhaustive examination we will employ the microscope. I cut off
the strange pimple with the scissors, wash it in a drop of water and
place it on the object slide. The mouth now stands revealed as a round
spot which, for hue and for the smallness of its size, may be compared
with the front stigmata. It is a small conical crater, with sides of a
pale yellowish-red and with faint, more or less concentric lines. At the
bottom of this funnel is the opening of the gullet, itself tinted red in
front and promptly spreading into a cone at the back. There is not the
slightest trace of mandibular fangs, of jaws, of mouth parts for seizing
and grinding. Everything is reduced to the bowl shaped opening, with a
delicate lining of horny texture, as is shown by the amber hue and
the concentric streaks. When I look for some term to designate this
digestive entrance, of which so far I know no other example, I can find
only that of a sucker or cupping glass. Its attack is a mere kiss, but
what a perfidious kiss!

We know the machine; now let us see the working. To facilitate
observation, I shifted the newborn Anthrax grub, together with the
Chalicodoma grub, its wet nurse, from the natal cell into a glass tube.
I was thus able, by employing as many tubes as I wanted, to follow from
start to finish, in all its most intimate details, the strange repast
which I am going to describe.

The worm is fixed by its sucker to any convenient part of the nurse,
plump and fat as butter. It is ready to break off its kiss suddenly,
should anything disquiet it, and to resume it as easily when
tranquillity is restored. No Lamb enjoys greater liberty with its
mother's teat. After three or four days of this contact of the nurse and
nursling, the former, at first replete and endowed with the glossy skin
that is a sign of health, begins to assume a withered aspect. Her sides
fall in, her fresh color fades, her skin becomes covered with little
folds and gives evidence of an appreciable shrinking in this breast
which, instead of milk, yields fat and blood. A week is hardly past
before the progress of the exhaustion becomes startlingly rapid. The
nurse is flabby and wrinkled, as though borne down by her own weight,
like a very slack object. If I move her from her place, she flops and
sprawls like a half-filled water bottle over the new supporting plane.
But the Anthrax' kiss goes on emptying her: soon she is but a sort of
shriveled lard bag, decreasing from hour to hour, from which the sucker
draws a few last oily drains. At length, between the twelfth and the
fifteenth day, all that remains of the larva of the mason bee is a white
granule, hardly as large as a pin's head.

This granule is the water bottle drained to the last drop, is the
nurse's breast emptied of all its contents. I soften the meager remnant
in water; then, keeping it still immersed, I blow into it through
an extremely attenuated glass tube. The skin fills out, distends and
resumes the shape of the larva, without there being an outlet anywhere
for the compressed air. It is intact, therefore; it is free of any
perforation, which would be forthwith revealed under the water by an
escape of gas. And so, under the Anthrax' cupping glass, the oily bottle
has been drained by a simple transpiration through the membrane; the
substance of the nurse grub has been transfused into the body of the
nursling by a process akin to that known in physics as endosmosis. What
should we say to a method of being suckled by the mere application of
the mouth to a teatless breast? What we see here may be compared with
that: without any outlet, the milk of the Chalicodoma grub passes into
the stomach of the Anthrax' larva.

Is it really an instance of endosmosis? Might it not rather be
atmospheric pressure that stimulates the flow of nourishing fluids and
distils them into the Anthrax' cup-shaped mouth, working, in order to
create a vacuum, almost like the suckers of the Cuttlefish? All this
is possible, but I shall refrain from deciding, preferring to assign a
large share to the unknown in this extraordinary method of nutrition.
It ought, I think, to provide physiologists with a field of research
in which new views on the hydrodynamics of live fluids might well be
gleaned; and this field trenches upon others that would also yield
rich harvests. The brief span of my days compels me to set the problem
without seeking to solve it.

And the second problem is this: the Chalicodoma grub destined to feed
the Anthrax is without a wound of any kind. The mother of the tiny larva
is a feeble Fly deprived of whatsoever weapon capable of injuring her
offspring's prey. Moreover, she is absolutely powerless to penetrate the
mason bee's fortress, powerless as a fluff of down against a rock. On
this point there is no doubt: the future wet nurse of the Anthrax has
not been paralyzed as are the live provisions collected by the Hunting
Wasps; she has received no bite nor scratch nor contusion of any sort;
she has experienced nothing out of the common: in short, she is in her
normal state. The billeted nursling arrives, we shall presently see how;
he arrives, scarcely visible, almost defying the scrutiny of the lens;
and, having made his preparations, he installs himself, he, the atom,
upon the monstrous nurse, whom he is to drain to the very husk. And she,
not paralyzed by a preliminary vivisection, endowed with all her normal
vitality, lets him have his way, lets herself be sucked dry, with the
utmost apathy. Not a tremor in her outraged flesh, not a quiver of
resistance. No corpse could show greater indifference to the bite which
it receives.

Ah, but the maggot has chosen the hour of attack with traitorous
cunning! Had it appeared upon the scene earlier, when the larva was
consuming its store of honey, things of a surety would have gone badly
with it. The assaulted one, feeling herself bled to death by that
ravenous kiss, would have protested with much wriggling of body and
grinding of mandibles. The position would have ceased to be tenable
and the intruder would have perished. But at this hour all danger has
disappeared. Enclosed in its silken tent, the larva is seized with the
lethargy that precedes the metamorphosis. Its condition is not death,
but neither is it life. It is an intermediary condition; it is almost
the latent vitality of grain or egg. Therefore there is no sign of
irritation on the larva's part under the needle with which I stir it and
still less under the sucker of the Anthrax grub, which is able to drain
the affluent breast in perfect safety.

This lack of resistance, induced by the torpor of the transformation,
appears to me necessary, in view of the weakness of the nursling as it
leaves the egg, whenever the mother is herself incapable of depriving
the victim of the power of self defense. And so the nonparalyzed larvae
are attacked during the period of the nymphosis. We shall soon see other
instances of this.

Motionless though it be, the Chalicodoma grub is none the less alive.
The primrose tint and the glossy skin are unequivocal signs of health:
Were it really dead, it would, in less than twenty-four hours, turn a
dirty brown and, soon after, decompose into a fluid putrescence. Now
here is the marvelous thing: during the fortnight, roughly, that the
Anthrax' meal lasts, the butter color of the larva, an unfailing symptom
of the presence of life, continues unaltered and does not change into
brown, the sign of putrefaction, until hardly anything remains; and even
then the brown hue is often absent. As a rule, the look of live flesh is
preserved until the final pellet, formed of the skin, the sole residue,
makes its appearance. This pellet is white, with not a speck of tainted
matter, proving that life persists until the body is reduced to nothing.

We here witness the transfusion of one animal into another, the change
of Chalicodoma substance into Anthrax substance; and, as long as the
transfusion is not complete, as long as the eaten has not disappeared
altogether and become the eater, the ruined organism fights against
destruction. What manner of life is this, which may be compared with
the life of a night light whose extinction is not accomplished until
the last drop of oil has burnt away? How is any creature able to fight
against the final tragedy of corruption up to the last moment in which a
nucleus of matter remains as the seat of vital energy? The forces of the
living creature are here dissipated not through any disturbance of
the equilibrium of those forces, but for the want of any point of
application for them: the larva dies because materially there is no more
of it.

Can we be in the presence of the diffusive life of the plant, a life
which persists in a fragment? By no means: the grub is a more delicate
organic structure. There is unity between the several parts; and none of
them can be jeopardized without involving the ruin of the others. If I
myself give the larva a wound, if I bruise it, the whole body very soon
turns brown and begins to rot. It dies and decomposes by the mere prick
of a needle; it keeps alive, or at least preserves the freshness of
the live tissues, so long as it is not entirely emptied by the Anthrax'
sucker. A nothing kills it; an atrocious wasting does not. No, I fail to
understand the problem; and I bequeath it to others.

All that I can see by way of a glimpse--and even then I put forward my
suspicions with extreme reserve--all that I am permitted to surmise is
reduced to this: the substance of the sleeping larva as yet has no very
definite static existence; it is like the raw materials collected for a
building; it is waiting for the elaboration that is to make a bee of it.
To mould those shapeless lumps of the future insect, the air, that prime
adjuster of living things, circulates among them, passing through a
network of ducts. To organize them, to direct the placing of them, the
nervous system, the embryo of the animal, distributes its ramifications
over them. Nerve and air duct, therefore, are the essentials; the rest
is so much material in reserve for the process of the metamorphosis. As
long as that material is not employed, as long as it has not acquired
its final equilibrium, it can grow less and less; and life, though
languishing, will continue all the same on the express condition that
the respiratory organs and the nervous filaments be respected. It is as
it were the flame of the lamp, which, whether full or empty, continues
to give light so long as the wick is soaked in oil. Nothing but fluids,
the plastic materials held in reserve, can be distilled by the
Anthrax' sucker through the unpierced skin of the grub; no part of the
respiratory and nervous systems passes. As the two essential functions
remain unscathed, life goes on until exhaustion is completed. On the
other hand, if I myself injure the larva, I disturb the nervous or air
conducting filaments; and the bruised part spreads a taint, followed by
putrefaction, all over the body.

I have elsewhere, speaking of the Scolia [a digger wasp] devouring the
Cetonia grub, enlarged upon this refined art of eating which consists
in consuming the prey while killing it only at the last mouthfuls. The
Anthrax has the same requirements as his competitors who dine off fresh
viands. He needs meat of that day, taken from a single joint that has to
last a fortnight without going bad. His method of consuming reaches the
highest level of art: he does not cut into his prey, he sips it little
by little through his sucker. In this way, any dangerous risk is
averted. Whether he imbibe at this spot or at that, even if he abandon
the sucking process and resume it later, by no accident can he ever
attack that which it is incumbent upon him to respect lest corruption
supervene. The others have a fixed position on the victim, a place at
which their mandibles have to bite and enter. If they move away from
it, if they miss the appointed path, they imperil their existence. The
Anthrax, more highly favored, puts his mouth where it suits him; he
leaves off when he pleases and when he pleases starts again.

Unless I labor under a delusion, I think that I see the necessity for
this privilege. The egg of the carnivorous burrower is firmly fixed on
the victim at a point which varies considerably, it is true, according
to the nature of the prey, but which is uniform for the same species
of prey; moreover--and this is an important condition--the point of
adhesion of that egg is always the head, whereas the egg of a bee, of
the Osmia, for instance, is fixed to the mess of honey by the hinder
end. When hatched, the new born Wasp grub has not to choose for itself,
at its risk and peril, the suitable point at which to take the first cut
in the quarry without fear of killing it too quickly: all that it need
do is to bite at the spot where it has just been born. The mother, with
her unfailing instinct, has already made the dangerous choice; she has
stuck her egg on the propitious spot and, by the very act of doing so,
marked out the course for the inexperienced grub to follow. The tact of
ripe age here guides the young larva's behavior at table.

The conditions are very different in the Anthrax' case. The egg is not
placed upon the victuals, it is not even laid in the mason bee's cell.
This is the natural consequence of the mother's feeble frame and of her
lack of any instrument, such as a probe or auger, capable of piercing
the mortar wall. It is for the newly hatched grub to make its own way
into the dwelling. It enters, finds itself in the presence of ample
provisions, the larva of the mason bee. Free of its actions, it is at
liberty to attack the prey where it chooses; or rather the attacking
point will be decided at haphazard by the first contact of the mouth
in quest of food. Grant this mouth a set of carving tools, jaws and
mandibles; in short, suppose the grub of the Fly to possess a manner of
eating similar to that of the other carnivorous larvae; and the nursling
is at once threatened with a speedy death. He will split open his
nurse's belly, he will dig without any rule to guide him, he will bite
at random, essentials as well as accessories; and, from one day to the
next, he will set up gangrene in the violated mass, even as I myself do
when I give it a wound. For the lack of an attacking point prescribed
for him at birth, he will perish on the damaged provisions. His freedom
of action will have killed him.

Certainly, liberty is a noble attribute, even in an insignificant grub;
but it also has its dangers everywhere. The Anthrax escapes the peril
only on the condition of being, so to speak, muzzled. His mouth is not a
fierce forceps that tears asunder; it is a sucker that exhausts but does
not wound. Thus restrained by this safety appliance, which changes the
bite into a kiss, the grub has fresh victuals until it has finished
growing, although it knows nothing of the rules of methodical
consumption at a fixed point and in a predetermined direction.

The considerations which I have set forth seem to me strictly logical:
the Anthrax, owing to the very fact that he is free to take his
nourishment where he pleases on the body of the fostering larva, must,
for his own protection, be made incapable of opening his victim's body.
I am so utterly convinced of this harmonious relation between the eater
and the eaten that I do not hesitate to set it up as a principle. I
will therefore say this: whenever the egg of any kind of insect is not
fastened to the larva destined for its food, the young grub, free to
select the attacking point and to change it at will, is as it were
muzzled and consumes its provisions by a sort of suction, without
inflicting any appreciable wound. This restriction is essential to the
maintenance of the victuals in good condition. My principle is already
supported by examples many and various, whose depositions are all to the
same effect. The witnesses include, after the Anthrax, the Leucospis
[a parasitic insect] and his rivals, whose evidence we shall hear
presently; the Ephialtes mediator [an Ichneumon fly], who feeds, in
the dry brambles, on the larva of the Black Psen [a digger wasp]; the
Myodites, that strange, fly-shaped beetle whose grub consumes the larva
of the cockchafer. All--flies, ichneumon flies and beetles--scrupulously
spare their foster mother; they are careful not to tear her skin, so
that the vessel may keep its liquid good to the last.

The wholesomeness of the victuals is not the only condition imposed:
I find a second, which is no less essential. The substance of the
fostering larva must be sufficiently fluid to ooze through the unbroken
skin under the action of the sucker. Well, the necessary fluidity is
realized as the time of the metamorphosis draws near. When they wished
Medea to restore Pelias to the vigor of youth, his daughters cut the old
king's body to pieces and boiled it in a cauldron, for there can be no
new existence without a prior dissolution. We must pull down before
we can rebuild; the analysis of death is the first step towards the
synthesis of life. The substance of the grub that is to be transformed
into a bee begins, therefore, by disintegrating and dissolving into
a fluid broth. The materials of the future insect are obtained by a
general recasting. Even as the founder puts his old bronzes into the
melting pot in order afterwards to cast them in a mould whence the metal
will issue in a different shape, so life liquefies the grub, a mere
digesting machine, now thrown aside, and out of its running matter
produces the perfect insect, bee, butterfly or beetle, the final
manifestation of the living creature.

Let us open a Chalicodoma grub under the microscope, during the period
of torpor. Its contents consists almost entirely of a liquid broth, in
which swim numberless oily globules and a fine dust of uric acid, a sort
of off-throw of the oxidized tissues. A flowing thing, shapeless and
nameless, is all that the animal is, if we add abundant ramified air
ducts, some nervous filaments and, under the skin, a thin layer
of muscular fibers. A condition of this kind accounts for a fatty
transpiration through the skin when the Anthrax' sucker is at work. At
any other time, when the larva is in the active period or else when the
insect has reached the perfect stage, the firmness of the tissues would
resist the transfusion and the suckling of the Anthrax would become a
difficult matter, or even impossible. In point of fact, I find the grub
of the fly established, in the vast majority of cases, on the sleeping
larva and sometimes, but rarely, on the pupa. Never do I see it on the
vigorous larva eating its honey; and hardly ever on the insect brought
to perfection, as we find it enclosed in its cell all through the autumn
and winter. And we can say the same of the other grub eaters that drain
their victims without wounding them: all are engaged in their death
dealing work during the period of torpor, when the tissues are
fluidified. They empty their patient, who has become a bag of running
grease with a diffused life; but not one, among those I know, reaches
the Anthrax' perfection in the art of extraction.

Nor can any be compared with the Anthrax as regards the means brought
into play in order to leave the cell. These others, when they become
perfect insects, have implements for sapping and demolishing, stout
mandibles, capable of digging the ground, of pulling down clay partition
walls and even of reducing the mason bee's tough cement to powder. The
Anthrax, in her final form, has nothing like this. Her mouth is a short,
soft proboscis, good at most for soberly licking the sugary exudations
of the flowers; her slim legs are so feeble that to move a grain of
sand were an excessive task for them, enough to strain every joint; her
great, stiff wings, which must remain full spread, do not allow her to
slip through a narrow passage; her delicate suit of downy velvet, from
which you take the bloom by merely breathing on it, could not withstand
the rough contact of the gallery of a mine. Unable herself to enter the
Mason bee's cell to lay her egg, she cannot leave it either, when the
time comes to free herself and appear in broad daylight in her wedding
dress. The larva, on its side, is powerless to prepare the way for
the coming flight. That buttery little cylinder, owning no tools but a
sucker so flimsy that it barely arrives at substance and so small that
it is almost a geometrical point, is even weaker than the adult insect,
which at least flies and walks. The Mason bee's cell represents to it
a granite cave. How to get out? The problem would be insoluble to those
two incapables, if nothing else played its part.

Among insects, the nymph, or pupa, the transition stage between the
larval and the adult form, is generally a striking picture of every
weakness of a budding organism. A sort of mummy tight bound in swaddling
clothes, motionless and impassive, it awaits the resurrection. Its
tender tissues flow in every direction; its limbs, transparent as
crystal, are held fixed in their place, along the side, lest a
movement should disturb the exquisite delicacy of the work in course
of accomplishment. Even so, to secure his recovery, is a broken boned
patient held captive in the surgeon's bandages. Absolute stillness is
necessary in both cases, lest they be crippled or even die.

Well, here, by a strange inversion that confuses all our views on life,
a Cyclopean task is laid upon the nymph of the Anthrax. It is the nymph
that has to toil, to strive, to exhaust itself in efforts to burst the
wall and open the way out. To the embryo falls the desperate duty, which
shows no mercy to the nascent flesh; to the adult insect the joy of
resting in the sun. This transposition of functions has as its result
a well sinker's equipment in the nymph, an eccentric, complicated
equipment which nothing suggested in the larva and which nothing recalls
in the perfect insect. The set of tools includes an assortment of
plowshares, gimlets, hooks and spears and of other implements that are
not found in our trades nor named in our dictionaries. Let us do our
best to describe the strange piercing gear.

In a fortnight at most, the Anthrax has consumed the Chalicodoma grub,
whereof naught remains but the skin, gathered into a white granule. By
the time that July is nearly over, it becomes rare to find any nurslings
left upon their nurses. From this period until the following May,
nothing fresh happens. The Anthrax retains its larval shape without any
appreciable change and lies motionless in the mason bee's cocoon, beside
the pellet remains. When the fine days of May arrive, the grub shrivels
and casts its skin and the nymph appears, fully clad in a stout,
reddish, horny hide.

The head is round and large, separated from the thorax by a strangulated
furrow, crowned on top and in front with a sort of diadem of six hard,
sharp, black spikes, arranged in a semicircle whose concave side faces
downward. These spikes decrease slightly in length from the summit to
the ends of the arch. Taken together, they suggest the radial crowns
which we see the Roman emperors of the Decadence wear on the medals.
This six-fold plowshare is the chief excavating tool. Lower down, on the
median line, the instrument is finished off with a separate group of two
small black spikes, placed close together.

The thorax is smooth, the wing cases large, folded under the body like
a scarf and coming almost to the middle of the abdomen. This has nine
segments, of which four, starting with the second, are armed, on the
back, down the middle, with a belt of little horny arches, pale brown in
color, drawn up parallel to one another, set in the skin by their
convex surfaces and finishing at both ends with a hard, black point.
Altogether, the belt thus forms a double row of little thorns, with a
hollow in between. I count about twenty-five twin-toothed arches to one
segment, which gives a total of two hundred spikes for the four rings
thus armed.

The use of this rasp, or grater, is obvious: it gives the nymph a
purchase on the wall of its gallery as the work proceeds. Thus anchored
on a host of points, the stern pioneer is able to hit the obstacle
harder with its diadem of awls. Moreover, to make it more difficult for
the instrument to recoil, long, stiff bristles, pointing backwards,
are scattered here and there among the climbing belts. There are some
besides on the other segments, both on the ventral and the dorsal
surface. On the flanks, they are thicker and arranged as it were in
clusters.

The sixth segment carries a similar belt, but a much less powerful one,
consisting of a single row of unassuming thorns. The belt is weaker
still on the seventh segment; lastly, on the eighth, it is reduced to a
mere rough brown shading. Commencing with the sixth, the rings decrease
in width and the abdomen ends in a cone, the extremity of which, formed
of the ninth segment, constitutes a weapon of a new kind. It is a sheaf
of eight brown spikes. The last two exceed the others in length and
stand out from the group in a double terminal plowshare.

There is a round air hole in front, on either side of the thorax, and
similar stigmata on the flanks of each of the first seven abdominal
segments. When at rest, the nymph is curved into a bow. When about to
act, it suddenly unbends and straightens itself. It measures 15 to 20
millimeters long and 4 to 5 millimeters across.

Such is the strange perforating machine that is to prepare an outlet
for the feeble Anthrax through the Mason bee's cement. The structural
details, so difficult to explain in words, may be summed up as follows:
in front, on the forehead, a diadem of spikes, the ramming and digging
tool; behind, a many bladed plowshare which fits into a socket and
allows the pupa to slacken suddenly in readiness for an attack on the
barrier which has to be demolished; on the back, four climbing belts, or
graters, which keep the animal in position by biting on the walls of the
tunnel with their hundreds of teeth; and, all over the body, long, stiff
bristles, pointing backwards, to prevent falls or recoils.

A similar structure exists in the other species of Anthrax with slight
variations of detail. I will confine myself to one instance, that of
Anthrax sinuata, who thrives at the cost of Osmia tricornis. Her nymph
differs from that of Anthrax trifasciata, the Anthrax of the mason bee,
in possessing less powerful armor. Its four climbing belts consist of
only fifteen to seventeen double spiked arches, instead of twenty-five;
also, the abdominal segments, from the sixth onwards, are supplied
merely with stiff bristles, without a trace of horny spikes. If the
evolution of the various Anthrax flies were better known to us,
the number of these arches would, I believe, be of great service
to entomology in the differentiation of species. I see it remaining
constant for any given species, with marked variations between one
species and another. But this is not my business: I merely call the
attention of the classifiers to this field of study and pass on.

About the end of May, the coloring of the nymph, hitherto a light red,
alters greatly and forecasts the coming transformation. The head, the
thorax and the scarf formed by the wings become a handsome, shiny black.
A dark band shows on the back of the four segments with their two rows
of spikes; three spots appear on the two next rings; the anal armor
becomes darker. In this manner we foresee the black livery of the coming
insect. The time has arrived for the pupa to work at the exit gallery.

I was anxious to see it in action, not under natural conditions, which
would be impracticable, but in a glass tube in which I confine it
between two thick stoppers of sorghum pith. The space thus marked off
is about the same size as the natal cell. The partitions front and back,
although not so stout as the Chalicodoma's masonry, are nevertheless
firm enough not to yield except to prolonged efforts; on the other hand,
the side walls are smooth and the toothed belts will not be able to grip
them: a most unfavorable condition for the worker. No matter: in the
space of a single day, the pupa pierces the front partition, three
quarters of an inch thick. I see it fixing its double plowshare against
the back partition, arching into a bow and then suddenly releasing
itself and striking the plug in front of it with its barbed forehead.
Under the impact of the spikes, the sorghum slowly crumbles to pieces.
It is slow in coming away; but it comes away all the same, atom by atom.
At long intervals, the method changes. With its crown of awls driven
into the pith, the animal frets and fidgets, sways on the pivot of its
anal armor. The work of the auger follows that of the pickaxe. Then the
blows recommence, interspersed with periods of rest to recover from the
fatigue. At last, the hole is made. The pupa slips into it, but does not
pass through entirely: the head and thorax appear outside; the abdomen
remains held in the gallery.

The glass cell, with its lack of supports at the side, has certainly
perplexed my subject, which does not seem to have made use of all its
methods. The hole through the sorghum is wide and irregular; it is
a clumsy breach and not a gallery. When made through the mason bee's
walls, it is cylindrical, fairly neat and exactly of the animal's
diameter. So I hope that, under natural conditions, the pupa does not
give quite so many blows with the pickaxe and prefers to work with the
drill.

Narrowness and evenness in the exit tunnel are necessary to it. It
always remains half caught in it and even pretty securely fixed by the
graters on its back. Only the head and thorax emerge into the outer air.
This is a last precaution for the final deliverance. A fixed support is,
in fact, indispensable to the Anthrax for issuing from her horny sheath,
unfurling her great wings and extricating her slender legs from their
scabbards. All this very delicate work would be endangered by any lack
of steadiness.

The pupa, therefore, remains fixed by the graters of its back in the
narrow exit gallery and thus supplies the stable equilibrium essential
to the new birth. All is ready. It is time now for the great act. A
transversal cleft makes its appearance on the forehead, at the bottom
of the perforating diadem; a second, but longitudinal slit divides the
skull in two and extends down the thorax. Through this cross-shaped
opening, the Anthrax suddenly appears, all moist with the humors of
life's laboratory. She steadies herself upon her trembling legs, dries
her wings and takes to flight, leaving at the window of the cell
her nymphal slough, which keeps intact for a very long period. The
sand-colored fly has five or six weeks before her, wherein to explore
the clay nests amid the thyme and to take her small share of the joys
of life. In July, we shall see her once more, busy this time with the
entrance into the cell, which is even stranger than the exit.




CHAPTER III. ANOTHER PROBER (PERFORATOR)

What can he be called, this creature whose style and title I dare not
inscribe at the head of the chapter? His name is Monodontomerus cupreus,
SM. Just try it, for fun: Mo-no-don-to-me-rus. What a gorgeous mouthful!
What an idea it gives one of some beast of the Apocalypse! We think,
when we pronounce the word, of the prehistoric monsters: the mastodon,
the mammoth, the ponderous megatherium. Well, we are misled by the
scientific label: we have to do with a very paltry insect, smaller than
the common gnat.

There are good people like that, only too happy to serve science with
resounding appellations that might come from Timbuktu; they cannot name
you a midge without striking terror into you. O ye wise and revered
ones, ye christeners of animals, I am willing, in my study, to
make use--but not undue use--of your harsh terminology, with its
conglomeration of syllables; but there is a danger of their leaving the
sanctum and appearing before the public, which is always ready to show
its lack of deference for terms that do not respect its ears. I, wishing
to speak like everybody else, so that I may be understood by all, and
persuaded that science has no need of this Brobdignagian jargon, make a
point of avoiding technical nomenclature when it becomes too barbarous,
when it threatens to lumber the page the moment my pen attempts it. And
so I abandon Monodontomerus.

It is a puny little insect, almost as tiny as the midges whom we see
eddying in a ray of sunshine at the end of autumn. Its dress is golden
bronze; its eyes are coral red. It carries a naked sword, that is to
say, the sheath of its drill stands out slantwise at the tip of its
belly, instead of lying in a hollow groove along the back, as it
does with the Leucospis. This scabbard holds the latter half of the
inoculating filament, which extends below the animal to the base of
the abdomen. In short, its utensil is that of the Leucospis, with this
difference, that its lower half sticks out like a rapier.

This mite that bears a sword upon her rump is yet another persecutor of
the mason bees and not one of the least formidable. She exploits their
nests at the same time as the Leucospis. I see her, like the Leucospis,
slowly explore the ground with her antennae; I see her, like the
Leucospis, bravely drive her dagger into the stone wall. More taken up
with her work, less conscious perhaps of danger, she pays no heed to the
man who is observing her so closely. Where the Leucospis flies, she does
not budge. So great is her assurance that she comes right into my study,
to my work table, and disputes my ownership of the nests whose occupants
I am examining. She operates under my lens, she operates just beside
my forceps. What risk does she run? What can one do to a thing so very
small? She is so certain of her safety that I can take the Mason's
nest in my hand, move it, put it down and take it up again without
the insect's raising any objection: it continues its work even when my
magnifying glass is placed over it.

One of these heroines has come to inspect a nest of the Chalicodoma of
the Walls, most of whose cells are occupied by the numerous cocoons of
a parasite, the Stelis. The contents of these cells, which have been
partially ripped up to satisfy my curiosity, are very much exposed to
view. The windfall appears to be appreciated, for I see the dwarf ferret
about from cell to cell for four days on end, see her choose her cocoon
and insert her awl in the most approved fashion. I thus learn that
sight, although an indispensable guide in searching, does not decide
upon the proper spot for the operation. Here is an insect exploring not
the stony exterior of the mason's dwelling, but the surface of cocoons
woven of silk. The explorer has never found herself placed in such
circumstances, nor has any of her race before her, every cocoon, under
normal conditions, being protected by a surrounding wall. No matter:
despite the profound difference in the surfaces, the insect does not
waver. Warned by a special sense, an undecipherable riddle to ourselves,
it knows that the object of its search lies hidden under this unfamiliar
casing. The sense of smell has already been shown to be out of the
question; that of sight is now eliminated in its turn.

That she should bore through the cocoons of the Stelis, a parasite of
the mason bee, does not surprise me at all: I know how indifferent my
bold visitor is to the nature of the victuals destined for her family. I
have noticed her presence in the homes of bees differing greatly in
size and habits: Anthophorae, Osmiae, Chalicodomae, Anthidia. The Stelis
exploited on my table is one victim more; and that is all. The interest
does not lie there. The interest lies in the maneuvers of the insect,
which I am able to follow under the most favorable conditions.

Bent sharply at right angles, like a couple of broken matches, the
antennae feel the cocoon with their tips alone. The terminal joint is
the home of this strange sense which discerns from afar what no eye
sees, no scent distinguishes and no ear hears. If the point explored be
found suitable, the insect hoists itself on tiptoe so as to give full
scope to the play of its mechanism; it brings the tip of the belly
a little forward; and the entire ovipositor--inoculating-needle and
scabbard--stands perpendicular to the cocoon, in the center of the
quadrilateral described by the four hind legs, an eminently favorable
position for obtaining the maximum effect. For some time, the whole of
the awl bears on the cocoon, feeling all round with its point, groping
about; then, suddenly, the boring needle is released from its sheath,
which falls back along the body, while the needle strives to make its
entrance. The operation is a difficult one. I see the insect make a
score of attempts, one after the other, without succeeding in piercing
the tough wrapper of the Stelis. Should the instrument not penetrate,
it retreats into its sheath and the insect resumes its scrutiny of the
cocoon, sounding it point by point with the tips of its antennae. Then
further thrusts are tried until one succeeds.

The eggs are little spindles, white and gleaming like ivory, about
two-thirds of a millimeter in length. They have not the long, curved
peduncle of the Leucospis' eggs; they are not suspended from the
ceiling of the cocoon like these, but are laid without order around
the fostering larva. Lastly, in a single cell and with a single mother,
there is always more than one laying; and the number of eggs varies
considerably in each. The Leucospis, because of her great size, which
rivals that of her victim, the Bee, finds in each cell provisions enough
for one and one alone. When, therefore, there is more than one set of
eggs in any one cell, this is due to a mistake on her part and not a
premeditated result. Where the whole ration is required for the meals
of a single grub, she would take good care not to install several if
she could help it. Her competitor is not called upon to observe the
same discretion. A Chalicodoma grub gives the dwarf the wherewithal to
portion a score of her little ones, who will live in common and in all
comfort on what a single son of the giantess would eat up by himself.
The tiny boring engineer, therefore, always settles a numerous family
at the same banquet. The bowl, ample for a dozen or two, is emptied in
perfect harmony.

Curiosity made me count the brood, to see if the mother was able to
estimate the victuals and to proportion the number of guests to the
sumptuousness of the fare provided. My notes mention fifty-four larvae
in the cell of a masked Anthophora (Anthophora personata). No other
census attained this figure. Possibly, two different mothers had laid
their eggs in this crowded habitation. With the Mason bee of the Walls,
I see the number of larvae vary, in different cells, between four
and twenty-six; with the mason bee of the Sheds, between five and
thirty-six; with the three-horned Osmia, who supplied me with the
largest number of records, between seven and twenty-five; with the
blue Osmia (Osmia cyanea, KIRB.), between five and six; with the Stelis
(Stelis nasuta), between four and twelve.

The first return and the last two seem to point to some relation between
the abundance of provisions and the number of consumers. When the mother
comes upon the bountiful larva of the masked Anthophora, she gives it
half-a-hundred to feed; with the Stelis and the blue Osmia, niggardly
rations both, she contents herself with half-a-dozen. To introduce into
the dining room only the number of boarders that the bill of fare will
allow would certainly be a most deserving performance, especially as the
insect is placed under very difficult conditions to judge the contents
of the cell. These contents, which lie hidden under the ceiling, are
invisible; and the insect can derive its information only from the
outside of the nest, which varies in the different species. We
should therefore have to admit the existence of a particular power
of discrimination, a sort of discernment of the species, which is
recognized as large or small from the outward aspect of its house. I
refuse to go to this length in my conjectures, not that instinct seems
to me incapable of such feats, but because of the particulars obtained
from the three-horned Osmia and the two mason bees.

In the cells of these three species, I see the number of larvae put out
to nurse vary in so elastic a fashion that I must abandon all idea of
proportionate adjustment. The mother, without troubling unduly whether
there be an excess or a dearth of provisions for her family, has filled
the cells as her fancy prompted, or rather according to the number of
ripe ovules contained in her ovaries at the time of the laying. If food
be over-plentiful, the brood will be all the better for it and will grow
bigger and stronger; if food be scarce, the famished youngsters will not
die, but will remain smaller. Indeed, with both the larva and the full
grown insect, I have often observed a difference in size which varies
according to the density of the population, the members of a small
colony being double the size of their overcrowded neighbors.

The grubs are white, tapering at both ends, sharply segmented and
covered all over their bodies with a coat of fine, soft hairs which is
invisible except under the lens. The head consists of a little knob much
smaller in diameter than the body. In this head, the microscope reveals
mandibles consisting of fine spikes of a tawny red, which spread into a
wide, colorless base. Deprived of any indentation, incapable of chewing
anything between their awl-shaped ends, these two tools serve at best to
fix the grub slightly at some point of the fostering larva. Useless for
carving, therefore, the mouth is a pure osculatory sucker, which drains
the provisions by a process of exudation through the skin. We see here
repeated what the Anthrax and the Leucospis have already shown us:
the gradual exhaustion of a victim which the parasite consumes without
killing it.

It is a curious spectacle even after that of the Anthrax. We have here
twenty or thirty starvelings, all with their mouths pressed, as for a
kiss, to the body of the plump larva, which, from day to day, fades and
shrinks without the least appreciable wound, thus keeping fresh until
reduced to a shriveled slough. If I disturb the gluttonous swarm, all,
with a sudden recoil, let go, drop off and flounder around the foster
mother. They are no less prompt in resuming their savage kisses. I need
not add that neither at the point where they leave off nor at the point
where they recommence is there the faintest trace of liquid. The oily
exudation occurs only when the pump is at work. To linger over this
strange method of feeding is superfluous after what I have said about
the Anthrax.

The appearance of the full grown insect takes place at the beginning of
summer, after nearly a whole year's stay in the invaded dwelling. The
large number of inhabitants of one and the same cell led me to think
that the work of deliverance ought to present a certain interest. They
are all equally anxious to clear the walls of the prison at the earliest
possible moment and to come forth into the great festival of the sun: do
they all at the same time, in a confused horde, attack the ceiling which
has to be pierced? Is the work of deliverance arranged in the general
interest? Or is individual selfishness the only rule? These are the
questions which observation will answer.

A little in advance of the proper season, I transfer each family into
a short glass tube, which will represent the natal cell. A good, thick
cork, quite a centimeter deep, is the obstacle to be pierced for
an outlet. Well, instead of the mad haste and the ruinous lack of
organization which I expected to find, my broods show me in their glass
prison an exceedingly well regulated workshop. One insect, one only,
works at perforating the cork. Patiently, with its mandibles, grain by
grain, it digs a tunnel the width of its body. The gallery is so narrow
that, in order to return to the tube, the worker has to move backwards.
It is a slow process; and it takes hours and hours to dig the hole, a
hard job for the frail miner.

Should her fatigue become too great, the excavator leaves the forefront
and mingles with the crowd, to polish and dust herself. Another, the
first neighbor at hand, at once takes her place and is herself relieved
by a third when her task is done. Others again take their turn, always
one at a time, so much so that the works are never at a standstill
and never overcrowded. Meanwhile, the multitude keeps out of the way,
quietly and patiently. There is no anxiety as to the deliverance.
Success will come: of that they are all convinced. While waiting, one
washes her antennae by passing them through her mouth, another polishes
her wings with her hind legs, another frisks about to while away the
period of inaction. Some are making love, a sovran means of killing
time, whether one be born that day or twenty years ago.

Some, I said, make love. These favored ones are rare; they hardly count.
Is it through indifference? No, but the gallants are lacking. The sexes
are very unequally represented in the population of a cell: the males
are in a wretched minority and sometimes even completely absent. This
poverty did not escape the older observers. Brulle [Gaspard August
Brulle (1809-1873)], the author of many works on natural history and one
of the founders of the Societe entomologique de France, the only author
whom I am able to consult in my hermitage, says, literally: 'The males
do not appear to be known.'

I, for my part, know them; but, considering their feeble number, I keep
asking myself what part they play in a harem so disproportionate to
their forces. A few figures will show us what my hesitations are based
upon.

In twenty-two Osmia cocoons (Osmia tricornis), the total census of the
inmates yields three hundred and fifty-four, of whom forty-seven
are males and three hundred and seven females. The average number of
inmates, therefore, is sixteen individuals; and there are six females at
least to one male. This disparity is maintained, in more or less marked
proportions, whatever the species of the bee invaded. In the cocoons of
the Mason bee of the Sheds, I discover the average proportion to be six
females to one male; in those of the Mason bee of the Walls, I find one
male to fifteen females.

These facts, which I am unable to state with any greater precision, are
enough to give rise to the suspicion that the males, who are even tinier
dwarfs than the females and who, moreover, like all insects, are injured
by a single act of pairing, must, in most cases, remain strangers to
the females. Can the mothers, in fact, dispense with their assistance,
without being deprived of offspring on that account? I do not say yes,
but I do not say no. The duality of the sexes is a hard problem. Why
two sexes? Why not just one? It would have been much simpler and saved
a great deal of foolery. Why such a thing as sex, when the tuber of the
Jerusalem artichoke can do without it? These are the pregnant questions
suggested to me, in the end, by Monodontomerus cupreus, the insect so
infinitesimal in body and so overpowering in name that I had really
vowed never to speak of it again by its official designation.




CHAPTER IV. LARVAL DIMORPHISM

If the reader has paid any attention to the story of the Anthrax, he
must have perceived that my narrative is incomplete. The fox in the
fable saw how the lion's visitors entered his den, but did not see how
they went out. With us, it is the converse: we know the way out of the
mason bee's fortress, but we do not know the way in. To leave the cell
of which he has eaten the owner, the Anthrax becomes a perforating
machine, a living tool from which our own industry might take a hint if
it required new drills for boring rocks. When the exit tunnel is opened,
this tool splits like a pod bursting in the sun; and from the stout
framework there escapes a dainty fly, a velvety flake, a soft fluff that
astounds us by its contrast with the roughness of the depths whence it
ascends. On this point, we know pretty well what there is to know. There
remains the entrance into the cell, a puzzle that has kept me on the
alert for a quarter of a century.

To begin with, it is evident that the mother cannot lodge her egg in the
cell of the mason bee, which has been long closed and barricaded with
a cement wall by the time that the Anthrax makes her appearance. To
penetrate it, she would have to become an excavating tool once more and
resume the cast-off rags which she left behind in the exit window; she
would have to retrace her steps, to be reborn a pupa; and life knows
none of these retrogressions. The full grown insect, if endowed with
claws, mandibles and plenty of perseverance, might at a pinch force the
mortar casket; but the fly is not so endowed. Her slender legs would be
strained and deformed by merely sweeping away a little dust; her mouth
is a sucker for gathering the sugary exudations of the flowers and not
the solid pincers needed for the crumbling of cement. There is no auger
either, no bore copied from that of the Leucospis, no implement of any
kind that can work its way into the thickness of the wall and dispatch
the egg to its destination. In short, the mother is absolutely incapable
of settling her eggs in the chamber of the Mason bee.

Can it be the grub that makes its own way into the storeroom, that same
grub which we have seen draining the Chalicodoma with its leech-like
kisses? Let us call the creature to mind: a little oily sausage, which
stretches and curls up just where it lies, without being able to shift
its position. Its body is a smooth cylinder; its mouth simply a
circular lip. Not one ambulatory organ does it possess; not even hairs,
protuberances or wrinkles to enable it to crawl. The animal is made
for digestion and immobility. Its organization is incompatible with
movement; everything tells us so in the clearest fashion. No, this
grub is even less able than the mother to make its way unaided into the
mason's dwelling. And yet the provisions are there; those provisions
must be reached: it is a matter of life or death; to be or not to be.
Then how does the fly set about it? It would be vain for me to question
probabilities, too often illusory; to obtain a reply of any value, I
have but one resource; I must attempt the nearly impossible and watch
the Anthrax from the egg onwards.

Although Anthrax flies are fairly common, in the sense of there being
several different species, they are not plentiful when it is a case of
wanting a colony populous enough to admit of continuous observation.
I see them, now here, now there, in the fiercely sun-scorched places,
flitting hither and thither on the old walls, the slopes and the sand,
sometimes in small platoons, most often singly. I can expect nothing
of those vagabonds, who are here today and gone tomorrow, for I know
nothing of their settlements. To keep a watch on them, one by one,
in the blazing heat, is very painful and very unfruitful, as the
swift-winged insect has a habit of disappearing one knows not whither
just when a prospect of capturing its secret begins to offer. I have
wasted many a patient hour at this pursuit, without the least result.

There might be some chance of success with Anthrax flies whose home was
known to us beforehand, especially if insects of the same species
formed a pretty numerous colony. The inquiries begun with one would
be continued with a second and with more, until a complete verdict was
forthcoming. Now, in the course of my long entomological career, I have
met with but two species of Anthrax that fulfilled this condition and
were to be found regularly: one at Carpentras; the other at Serignan.
The first, Anthrax sinuata, FALLEN, lives in the cocoons of Osmia
tricornis, who herself builds her nest in the old galleries of the
hairy-footed Anthophora; the second, Anthrax trifasciata, MEIGEN,
exploits the Chalicodoma of the Sheds. I will consult both.

Once more, here am I, somewhat late in life, at Carpentras, whose rude
Gallic name sets the fool smiling and the scholar thinking. Dear little
town where I spent my twentieth year and left the first bits of my
fleece upon life's bushes, my visit of today is a pilgrimage; I have
come to lay my eyes once more upon the place which saw the birth of the
liveliest impressions of my early days. I bow, in passing, to the old
college where I tried my prentice hand as a teacher. Its appearance is
unchanged; it still looks like a penitentiary. Those were the views of
our mediaeval educational system. To the gaiety and activity of boyhood,
which were considered unwholesome, it applied the remedy of narrowness,
melancholy and gloom. Its houses of instruction were, above all, houses
of correction. The freshness of Virgil was interpreted in the stifling
atmosphere of a prison. I catch a glimpse of a yard between four high
walls, a sort of bear pit, where the scholars fought for room for their
games under the spreading branches of a plane tree. All around were
cells that looked like horse boxes, without light or air; those were the
classrooms. I speak in the past tense, for doubtless the present day has
seen the last of this academic destitution.

Here is the tobacco shop where, on Wednesday evening, coming out of the
college, I would buy on credit the wherewithal to fill my pipe and thus
to celebrate on the eve the joys of the morrow, that blessed Thursday
[the weekly half-holiday in French schools] which I considered so well
employed in solving hard equations, experimenting with new chemical
reagents, collecting and identifying my plants. I would make my timid
request, pretending to have come out without my money, for it is hard
for a self-respecting man to admit that he is penniless. My candor
appears to have inspired some little confidence; and I obtained credit,
an unprecedented thing, with the representative of the revenue. [The
government in France has the sole control of the tobacco trade, which
forms an important branch of the inland revenue.] Ah, why did not I open
a shop and expose for sale some packets of candles, a dozen dried cod,
a barrel of sardines and a few cakes of soap! I am no more of a fool nor
any less industrious than another; and I should have made my way. But,
as it was, what could I expect? As an accoucheur of brains, a molder of
intellects, I had no claim even to bread and cheese.

Here is my former habitation, occupied since by droning monks. In the
embrasure of that window, sheltered from profane hands, between the
closed outer shutters and the panes, I used to keep my chemicals, bought
for a few sous cheated out of the weekly budget in the early days of our
housekeeping. The bowl of a pipe was my crucible, a sweet jar my retort,
mustard pots my receptacles for oxides and sulfides. My experiments,
harmless or dangerous, were made on a corner of the fire beside the
simmering broth.

How I should love to see that room again where I pored over
differentials and integrals, where I calmed my poor burning head
by gazing at Mont Ventoux, whose summit held in store for my coming
expedition' those denizens of arctic climes, the saxifrage and the
poppy! And to see my familiar friend, the blackboard which I hired at
five francs a year from a crusty joiner, that board whose value I paid
many times over, though I. could never buy it outright, for want of the
necessary cash! The conic sections which I described on that blackboard,
the learned hieroglyphics!

Though all my efforts, which were the more deserving because I had to
work alone, led to almost nothing in that congenial calling, I would
begin it all over again if I could. I should love to be conversing for
the first time with Leibnitz and Newton, with Laplace and Lagrange, with
Cuvier and Jussieu, even if I had afterwards to solve that other arduous
problem: how to procure one's daily bread. Ah, young men, my successors,
what an easy time you have of it today! If you don't know it, then let
me tell you so by means of these few pages from the life of one of your
elders.

But let us not forget our insects, while listening to the echoes of
illusions and difficulties roused in my memories by the cupboard window
and the hired blackboard. Let us go back to the sunken roads of the
Legue, which have become classic, so they say, since the appearance of
my notes on the Oil beetles. Ye illustrious ravines, with your sun-baked
slopes, if I have contributed a little to your fame, you, in your turn,
have given me many fair hours of forgetfulness in the happiness of
learning. You, at least, did not lure me with vain hopes; all that you
promised you gave me and often a hundredfold. You are my promised land,
where I would have sought at the last to pitch my observer's tent. My
wish was not to be realized. Let me, at least, in passing, greet my
beloved animals of the old days.

I raise my hat to Cerceris tuberculata, whom I see engaged on that
slant, storing her Cleonus [a large species of weevil]. As I saw her
then, so I see her now: the same staggering attempts to hoist the prey
to the mouth of the burrow; the same brawls between males watching in
the brushwood of the kermes oak. The sight of them sends a younger blood
coursing through my veins; I receive as it were the breath of a new
springtime of life. Time presses; let us pass on.

Another bow on this side. I hear buzzing up above, on that ledge, a
colony of Sphex wasps, stabbing their crickets. We will give them a
friendly glance, but no more. My acquaintances here are too numerous;
I have not the leisure to renew my former relations with all of them.
Without stopping, a wave of the hat to the Philanthi [bee-hunting wasps]
who send the long avalanches of rubbish streaming down from their
nests; and to Stizus ruficornis, [a hunting wasp] who stacks her praying
mantises between two flakes of sandstone; and to the silky Ammophila
[a digger wasp] with the red legs, who collects an underground store of
loopers [also known as measuring worms, the larvae or caterpillars of
the geometrid moth] and to the Tachtyti [hunting wasps], devourers of
locusts; and to the Eumenes, builders of clay cupolas on a bough.

Here we are at last. This high, perpendicular rock, facing the south
to a length of some hundreds of yards and riddled with holes like a
monstrous sponge, is the time-honored dwelling place of the hairy-footed
Anthophora and of her rent free tenant, the three-horned Osmia. Here
also swarm their exterminators: the Sitaris beetle, the parasite of the
Anthophora; the Anthrax fly, the murderer of the Osmia. Ill informed as
to the proper period, I have come rather late, on the 10th of September.
I should have been here a month ago, or even by the end of July, to
watch the fly's operations. My journey threatens to be fruitless: I see
but a few rare Anthrax flies, hovering round the face of the cliff. We
will not despair, however, and we will begin by consulting the locality.

The Anthophora's cells contain this bee in the larval stage. Some of
them provide me with the oil beetle and the Sitaris, rare finds at one
time, today of no use to me. Others contain the Melecta [a parasitic
bee] in the form of a highly colored pupa, or even in that of the full
grown insect. The Osmia, still more precocious, though dating from the
same period, shows herself exclusively in the adult form, a bad omen for
my investigations, for what the Anthrax demands is the larva and not the
perfect insect. The fly's grub doubles my apprehensions. Its development
is complete, the larva on which it feeds is consumed, perhaps several
weeks ago. I no longer doubt but that I have come too late to see what
happens in the Osmia's cocoons.

Is the game lost? Not yet. My notes contain evidence of Anthrax flies
hatching in the latter half of September. Besides, those whom I now see
exploring the rock are not there to take exercise: their preoccupation
is the settling of the family. These belated ones cannot tackle the
Osmia, who, with her firm, adult flesh, would not suit the nursling's
delicate needs and who, moreover, powerful as she is, would offer
resistance. But in autumn a less numerous colony of honey gatherers
takes the place, upon the slope, of the spring colony, from which
it differs in species. In particular, I see the Diadem Anthidium [a
clothier bee who lines her nest with wool and cotton] at work, entering
her galleries at one time with her harvest of pollen dust and at
another with her little bale of cotton. Might not these autumnal Bees be
themselves exploited by the Anthrax, the same that selected the Osmia as
her victim a couple of months earlier? This would explain the presence
of the Anthrax flies whom I now see fussing about.

A little reassured by this conjecture, I take my stand at the foot
of the rock, under a broiling sun; and, for half a day, I follow the
evolutions of my flies. They flit quietly in front of the slope, at a
few inches from the earthy covering. They go from one orifice to the
next, but without even penetrating. For that matter, their big wings,
extended crosswise even when at rest, would resist their entrance into a
gallery, which is too narrow to admit those spreading sails. And so they
explore the cliff, going to and fro and up and down, with a flight that
is now sudden, now smooth and slow. From time to time, I see the Anthrax
quickly approach the wall and lower her abdomen as though to touch the
earth with the end of her ovipositor. This proceeding takes no longer
than the twinkling of an eye. When it is done, the insect alights
elsewhere and rests. Then it resumes its sober flight, its long
investigations and its sudden blows with the tip of its belly against
the layer of earth. The Bombylii [bee flies] observe similar tactics
when soaring at a short height above the ground.

I at once rushed to the spot touched, lens in hand, in the hope of
finding the egg which everything told me was laid during that tap of the
abdomen. I could distinguish nothing, in spite of the closest attention.
It is true that my exhaustion, together with the blinding light and
scorching heat, made examination very difficult. Afterwards, when I made
the acquaintance of the tiny thing that issues from that egg, my failure
no longer surprised me. In the leisure of my study, with my eyes rested
and with my most powerful glasses held in a hand no longer shaking with
excitement and fatigue, I have the very greatest difficulty in finding
the infinitesimal creature, though I know exactly where it lies. Then
how could I see the egg, worn out as I was under the sun-baked cliff,
how discover the precise spot of a laying performed in a moment by an
insect seen only at a distance? In the painful conditions wherein I
found myself, failure was inevitable.

Despite my negative attempts, therefore, I remain convinced that the
Anthrax flies strew their eggs one by one, on the spots frequented by
those bees who suit their grubs. Each of their sudden strokes with the
tip of the abdomen represents a laying. They take no precaution to place
the germ under cover; for that matter, any such precaution would be
rendered impossible by the mother's structure. The egg, that delicate
object, is laid roughly in the blazing sun, between grains of sand,
in some wrinkle of the calcined chalk. That summary installation is
sufficient, provided the coveted larva be near at hand. It is for the
young grub now to manage as best it can at its own risk and peril.

Though the sunken roads of the Legue did not tell me all that I wished
to know, they at least made it very probable that the coming grub must
reach the victualled cell by its own efforts. But the grub which we
know, the one that drains the bag of fat which may be a Chalicodoma
larva or an Osmia larva, cannot move from its place, still less indulge
in journeys of discovery through the thickness of a wall and the web
of a cocoon. So an imperative necessity presents itself: there must
perforce be an initial larva form, capable of moving and organized for
searching, a form under which the grub would attain its end. The
Anthrax would thus possess two larval states: one to penetrate to the
provisions; the other to consume them. I allow myself to be convinced
by the logic of it all; I already see in my mind's eye the wee animal
coming out of the egg, endowed with sufficient power of motion not to
dread a walk and with sufficient slenderness to glide into the smallest
crevices. Once in the presence of the larva on which it is to feed, it
doffs its travelling dress and becomes the obese animal whose one duty
it is to grow big and fat in immobility. This is all very coherent;
it is all deduced like a geometrical proposition. But to the wings of
imagination, however smooth their flight, we must prefer the sandals
of observed facts, the slow sandals with the leaden soles. Thus shod, I
proceed.

Next year, I resume my investigations, this time on the Anthrax of the
Chalicodoma, who is my neighbor in the surrounding wastelands and will
allow me to repeat my visits daily, morning and evening if need be.
Taught by my earlier studies, I now know the exact period of the Bee's
hatching and therefore of the Anthrax' laying, which must take place
soon after. Anthrax trifasciata settles her family in July, or in August
at latest. Every morning, at nine o'clock, when the heat begins to
be unendurable and when, to use [the author's gardener and factotum]
Favier's expression, an extra log is flung on the bonfire of the sun,
I take the field, prepared to come back with my head aching from the
glare, provided that I bring home the solution of my puzzle. A man must
have the devil in him to leave the shade at this time of the year. And
what for, pray? To write the story of a fly! The greater the heat, the
better my chance of success. What causes me to suffer torture fills the
insect with delight; what prostrates me braces the fly. Come along!

The road shimmers like a sheet of molten steel. From the dusty and
melancholy olive trees rises a mighty, throbbing hum, a great andante
whose executants have the whole sweep of woods for their orchestra. 'Tis
the concert of the Cicada, whose bellies sway and rustle with increasing
frenzy as the temperature rises. The strident scrapings of the Cicada of
the Ash, the Carcan of the district, lend their rhythm to the one note
symphony of the common cicada. This is the moment: come along! And, for
five or six weeks, oftenest in the morning, sometimes in the afternoon,
I set myself to explore the flinty plateau.

The Chalicodoma's nests abound, but I cannot see a single Anthrax make
a black speck upon their surface. Not one, busy with her laying, settles
in front of me. At most, from time to time, I can just see one passing
far away, with an impetuous rush. I lose her in the distance; and that
is all. It is impossible to be present at the laying of the egg. I know
the little that I learnt from the cliffs in the Legue and nothing more.

As soon as I recognize the difficulty, I hasten to enlist assistants.
Shepherds--mere small boys--keep the sheep in these stony meadows,
where the flocks graze, to the greater glory of our local mutton, on the
camphor saturated badafo, that is to say, spike lavender. I explain as
well as I can the object of my search; I talk to them of a big black Fly
and the nests on which she ought to settle, the clay nests so well
known to those who have learnt how to extract the honey with a straw in
springtime and spread it on a crust of bread. They are to watch that fly
and take good note of the nests on which they may see her alight; and,
on the same evening, when they bring their flocks back to the village,
they are to tell me the result of their day's work. On receiving
their favorable report, I will go with them, next day, to continue the
observations. They shall be paid for their trouble, of course. These
latter day Corydons have not the manners of antiquity: they reck little
of the seven holed flute cemented with wax, or of the beechen bowl,
preferring the coppers that will take them to the village inn on Sunday.
A reward in ready money is promised for each nest that fulfils the
desired conditions; and the bargain is enthusiastically accepted.

There are three of them; and I make a fourth. Shall we manage it, among
us all? I thought so. By the end of August, however, my last illusions
were dispelled. Not one of us had succeeded in seeing the big black Fly
perching on the dome of the mason bee.

Our failure, it seems to me, can be explained thus: outside the spacious
front of the Anthophora's settlement, the Anthrax is in permanent
residence. She visits, on the wing, every nook and corner, without
moving away from the native cliff, because it would be useless to go
farther. There is board and lodging here, indefinitely, for all her
family. When some spot is deemed favorable, she hovers round inspecting
it, then comes up suddenly and strikes it with the tip of her abdomen.
The thing is done, the egg is laid. So I picture it, at least. Within a
radius of a few yards and in a flight broken by short intervals of rest
in the sun, she carries on her search of likely places for the laying
and dissemination of her eggs. The insect's assiduous attendance upon
the same slope is caused by the inexhaustible wealth of the locality
exploited.

The Anthrax of the Chalicodoma labors under very different conditions.
Stay-at-home habits would be detrimental to her. With her rushing
flight, made easy by the long and powerful spread of her wings, she must
travel far and wide if she would found a colony. The bee's nests are not
discovered in groups, but occur singly on their pebbles, scattered more
or less everywhere over acres of ground. To find a single one is not
enough for the fly: on account of the many parasites, not all the cells,
by a long way, contain the desired larva; others, too well protected,
would not allow of access to the provisions. Very many nests are
necessary, perhaps, for the eggs of one alone; and the finding of them
calls for long journeys.

I therefore picture the Anthrax coming and going in every direction
across the stony plain. Her practiced eye requires no slackened flight
to distinguish the earthen dome which she is seeking. Having found it,
she inspects it from above, still on the wing; she taps it once and
yet once again with the tip of her ovipositor and forthwith makes off,
without having set foot on the ground. Should she take a rest, it will
be elsewhere, no matter where, on the soil, on a stone, on a tuft
of lavender or thyme. Given these habits--and my observations in the
Carpentras roads make them seem exceedingly probable--it is small wonder
that the perspicacity of my young shepherds and myself should have come
to naught. I was expecting the impossible: the Anthrax does not halt on
the mason bee's nest to proceed with her laying in a methodical fashion;
she merely pays a flying visit.

And so I develop my theory of a primary larval form, differing in every
way from the one which I know. The organization of the Anthrax must be
such, at the beginning, as to permit of its moving on the surface of the
dome where the egg has been dropped so carelessly; the nascent grub must
be supplied with tools to pierce the concrete wall and enter the Bee's
cell through some cranny. The fly grub, perhaps dragging the remnants of
the egg behind it, must set out in quest of board and lodging almost as
soon as it is born. It will succeed under the guidance of instinct, that
faculty which waits not to number the days and which is as far seeing at
the moment of hatching as after the trials of a busy life. This primary
grub does not seem to me outside the limits of possibility; I see it, if
not in the body, at least in its actions, as plainly as though it were
really under the lens. It exists, if reason be not a vain and empty
guide; I must find it; I shall find it. Never in the history of my
investigations has the logic of things been more insistent; never has
it directed me with greater certainty towards a magnificent biological
theory.

While vainly trying to witness the laying of the eggs, I inquire, at the
same time, into the contents of the Mason bee's nests, in quest of
the grub just issued from the egg. My own harvest and that of my young
shepherds, whose zeal I employ in a task less difficult than the first,
procure me heaps of nests, enough to fill baskets and baskets. These are
all inspected at leisure, on my work table, with the excitement which
the certainty of an approaching fine discovery never fails to give. The
Mason's cocoons are taken from the cells, inspected without, opened and
inspected within. My lens explores their innermost recesses; speck by
speck, it explores the Chalicodoma's slumbering larva; it explores the
inner walls of the cells. Nothing, nothing, nothing! For a fortnight
and more, nests were rejected and heaped up in a corner; my study was
crammed with them. What hecatombs of unfortunate sleepers removed from
their silken bags and doomed, for the most part, to a wretched end,
despite the care which I took to put them in a place of safety, where
the work of the transformation might be pursued! Curiosity makes us
cruel. I continue to rip up cocoons. And nothing, nothing! It needed the
sturdiest faith to make me persevere. That faith I possessed; and well
for me that I did.

On the 25th of July--the date deserves to be recorded--I saw, or rather
seemed to see, something move on the Chalicodoma's larva. Was it an
illusion born of my hopes? Was it a bit of diaphanous down stirred by my
breath? It was not an illusion, it was not a bit of down, it was really
and truly a grub. What a moment, followed by what perplexities! The
thing has nothing in common with the larva of the Anthrax, it suggests
rather some microscopic Thread worm that, by accident, has made its way
through the skin of its host and come to enjoy itself outside. I do not
reckon my discovery as of much value, because I am so greatly puzzled
by the creature's appearance. No matter: we will take a small glass
tube and place inside it the Chalicodoma grub and the mysterious thing
wriggling on the surface. Suppose it should be what I am looking for?
Who knows?

Once warned of the probable difficulty of seeing the animalcule for
which I am hunting, I redouble my attention, so much so that, in a
couple of days, I am the owner of half a score of tiny worms similar
to the one which caused me such excitement. Each of them is lodged in
a glass tube with its Chalicodoma grub. The infinitesimal thing is so
small, so diaphanous, blends to such good purpose with its host that the
least fold of skin conceals it from my view. After watching it one day
through the lens, I sometimes fail to find it again on the morrow. I
think that I have lost it, that it has perished under the weight of the
overturned larva and returned to that nothing to which it was so closely
akin. Then it moves and I see it again. For a whole fortnight, there
was no limit to my perplexity. Was it really the original larva of the
Anthrax? Yes, for I at last saw my bantlings transform themselves into
the larva previously described and make their first start at draining
their victims with kisses. A few moments of satisfaction like those
which I then enjoyed make up for many a weary hour.

Let us resume the story of the wee animal, now recognized as the genuine
origin of the Anthrax. It is a tiny worm about a millimeter long and
almost as slender as a hair. It is very difficult to see because of its
transparency. When tucked away in a fold of the skin of its fostering
larva, an excessively fine skin, it remains undiscoverable to the lens.
But the feeble creature is very active: it tramps over the sides of the
rich morsel, walks all round it. It covers the ground pretty quickly,
buckling and unbuckling by turns, very much after the manner of the
looper caterpillar. Its two extremities are its chief points of support.
When at a standstill, it moves its front half in every direction, as
though to explore the space around it; when walking, it swells out,
magnifies its segments and then looks like a bit of knotted string.

The microscope shows us thirteen rings, including the head. This head is
small, slightly horny, as is proved by its amber color, and bristles in
front with a small number of short, stiff hairs. On each of the three
segments of the thorax there are two long hairs, fixed to the lower
surface; and there are two similar and still longer hairs at the end of
the terminal ring. These four pairs of bristles, three in front and one
behind, are the locomotory organs, to which we must add the hairy edge
of the head and also the anal button, a sustaining base which might
very well work with the aid of a certain stickiness, as happens with
the primary larva of the Sitaris [a Parasitic Beetle noted for the
multiplicity of transformations undergone by the grub]. We see, through
the transparent skin, two long air tubes running parallel to each other
from the first thoracic segment to the last abdominal segment but one.
They ought to end in two pairs of breathing holes which I have not
succeeded in distinguishing quite plainly. Those two big respiratory
vessels are characteristic of the grubs of flies. Their mouths
correspond exactly with the points at which the two sets of stigmata
open in the Anthrax larva in its second form.

For a fortnight, the feeble grub remains in the condition which I have
described, without growing and very probably also without nourishment.
Assiduous though my visits be, I never perceive it taking any
refreshment. Besides, what would it eat? In the cocoon invaded there is
nothing but the larva of the mason bee; and the worm cannot make use
of this before acquiring the sucker that comes with the second form.
Nevertheless, this life of abstinence is not a life of idleness. The
animalcule explores its dish, now here, now elsewhere; it runs all over
it with looper strides; it pries into the neighborhood by lifting and
shaking its head.

I see a need for this long wait under a transitory form that requires
no feeding. The egg is laid by the mother on the surface of the nest,
somewhere near a suitable cell, I dare say, but still at a distance from
the fostering larva, which is protected by a thick rampart. It is for
the new born grub to make its own way to the provisions, not by violence
and house breaking, of which it is incapable, but by patiently slipping
through a maze of cracks, first tried, then abandoned, then tried again.
It is a very difficult task, even for this most slender worm, for the
bee's masonry is exceedingly compact. There are no chinks due to bad
building; no fissures due to the weather; nothing but an apparently
impenetrable homogeneity. I see but one weak part and that only in a few
nests: it is the line where the dome joins the surface of the stone. An
imperfect soldering between two materials of different nature, cement
and flint, may leave a breach wide enough to admit besiegers as thin as
a hair. Nevertheless, the lens is far from always finding an inlet of
this kind on the nests occupied by Anthrax flies.

And so I am ready to allow that the animalcule wandering in search of
its cell has the whole area of the dome at its disposal when selecting
an entrance. Where the line auger of the Leucospis can enter, is there
not room enough for the even slimmer Anthrax grub? True, the Leucospis
possesses muscular force and a hard boring tool. The Anthrax is
extremely weak and has nothing but invincible patience. It does at
great length of time what the other, furnished with superior implements,
accomplishes in three hours. This explains the fortnight spent by the
Anthrax under the initial form, the object of which is to overcome
the obstacle of the mason's wall, to pierce through the texture of the
cocoon and to reach the victuals.

I even believe that it takes longer. The work is so laborious and
the worker so feeble! I cannot tell how long it is since my bantlings
attained their object. Perhaps, aided by easy roads, they had reached
their fostering larvae long before the completion of their first
babyhood, the end of which they were spending before my eyes, with no
apparent purpose, in exploring their provisions. The time had not yet
come for them to change their skins and take their seats at the table.
Their fellows must still, for the most part, be wandering through the
pores of the masonry; and this was what made my search so vain at the
start.

A few facts seem to suggest that the entrance into the cell may be
delayed for several months by the difficulty of the passages. There are
a few Anthrax grubs beside the remains of pupae not far removed from the
final metamorphosis; there are others, but very rarely, on Mason bees
already in the perfect state. These grubs are sickly and appear to be
ailing; the provisions are too solid and do not lend themselves to
the delicate suckling of the worms. Who can these laggards be but
animalcules that have roamed too long in the walls of the nest? Failing
to make their entrance at the proper time, they no longer find viands to
suit them. The primary larva of the Sitaris continues from the autumn to
the following spring. Even so the initial form of the Anthrax might well
continue, not in inactivity, but in stubborn attempts to overcome the
thick bulwark.

My young worms, when transferred with their provisions into tubes,
remained stationary, on the average, for a couple of weeks. At last, I
saw them shrink and then rid themselves of their epidermis and become
the grub which I was so anxiously expecting as the final reply to all
my doubts. It was indeed, from the first, the grub of the Anthrax, the
cream-colored cylinder with the little button of a head, followed by
a hump. Applying its cupping glass to the mason bee, the worm, without
delay, began its meal, which lasts another fortnight. The reader knows
the rest.

Before taking leave of the animalcule, let us devote a few lines to its
instinct. It has just awakened to life under the fierce kisses of the
sun. The bare stone is its cradle, the rough clay its welcomer, as it
makes its entrance into the world, a poor thread of scarce cohering
albumen. But safety lies within; and behold the atom of animated glair
embarking on its struggle with the flint. Obstinately, it sounds each
pore; it slips in, crawls on, retreats, begins again. The radical of the
germinating seed is no more persevering in its efforts to descend into
the cool earth than is the Anthrax grub in creeping into the lump of
mortar. What inspiration urges it towards its food at the bottom of the
clod, what compass guides it? What does it know of those depths, of what
lies therein or where? Nothing. What does the root know of the earth's
fruitfulness? Again nothing. Yet both make for the nourishing spot.
Theories are put forward, most learned theories, introducing capillary
action, osmosis and cellular imbibition, to explain why the caulicle
ascends and the radical descends. Shall physical or chemical forces
explain why the animalcule digs into the hard clay? I bow profoundly,
without understanding or even trying to understand. The question is far
above, our inane means.

The biography of the Anthrax is now complete, save for the details
relating to the egg, as yet unknown. In the vast majority of insects
subject to metamorphoses, the hatching yields the larval form which
will remain unchanged until the nymphosis. By virtue of a remarkable
variation, revealing a new vein of observation to the entomologist,
the Anthrax flies, in the larval state, assume two successive shapes,
differing greatly one from the other, both in structure and in the part
which they are called upon to play. I will describe this double stage of
the organism by the phrase 'larval dimorphism.' The initial form, that
issuing from the egg, I will call 'the primary larva;' the second form
shall be 'the secondary larva.' Among the Anthrax flies, the function
of the primary larva is to reach the provisions, on which the mother
is unable to lay her egg. It is capable of moving and endowed with
ambulatory bristles, which allow the slim creature to glide through the
smallest interstices in the wall of a Bee's nest, to slip through the
woof of the cocoon and to make its way to the larva intended for its
successor's food. When this object is attained, its part is played.
Then appears the secondary larva, deprived of any means of progression.
Relegated to the inside of the invaded cell, as incapable of leaving
it by its own efforts as it was of entering, this one has no mission in
life but that of eating. It is a stomach that loads itself, digests and
goes on adding to its reserves. Next comes the pupa, armed for the
exit even as the primary larva was equipped for entering. When the
deliverance is accomplished, the perfect insect appears, busy with its
laying. The Anthrax cycle is thus divided into four periods, each of
which corresponds with special forms and functions. The primary larva
enters the casket containing provisions; the secondary larva consumes
these provisions; the pupa brings the insect to light by boring through
the enclosing wall; the perfect insect strews its eggs; and the cycle
starts afresh.




CHAPTER V. HEREDITY

Facts which I have set forth elsewhere prove that certain dung beetles'
make an exception to the rule of paternal indifference--a general rule
in the insect world--and know something of domestic cooperation. The
father works with almost the same zeal as the mother in providing for
the settlement of the family. Whence do these favored ones derive a gift
that borders on morality?

One might suggest the cost of installing the youngsters. Once they have
to be furnished with a lodging and to be left the wherewithal to live,
is it not an advantage, in the interests of the race, that the father
should come to the mother's assistance? Work divided between the two
will ensure the comfort which solitary work, its strength overtaxed,
would deny. This seems excellent reasoning; but it is much more often
contradicted than confirmed by the facts. Why is the Sisyphus a hard
working paterfamilias and the sacred beetle an idle vagabond? And yet
the two pill rollers practice the same industry and the same method
of rearing their young. Why does the Lunary Copris know what his near
kinsman, the Spanish Copris, does not? The first assists his mate, never
forsakes her. The second seeks a divorce at an early stage and leaves
the nuptial roof before the children's rations are massed and kneaded
into shape. Nevertheless, on both sides, there is the same big outlay
on a cellarful of egg-shaped pills, whose neat rows call for long and
watchful supervision. The similarity of the produce leads one to believe
in similarity of manners; and this is a mistake.

Let us turn elsewhere, to the wasps and bees, who unquestionably come
first in the laying up of a heritage for their offspring. Whether the
treasure hoarded for the benefit of the sons be a pot of honey or a bag
of game, the father never takes the smallest part in the work. He does
not so much as give a sweep of the broom when it comes to tidying the
outside of the dwelling. To do nothing is his invariable rule. The
bringing up of the family, therefore, however expensive it may be in
certain cases, has not given rise to the instinct of paternity. Then
where are we to look for a reply?

Let us make the question a wider one. Let us leave the animal, for a
moment, and occupy ourselves with man. We have our own instincts, some
of which take the name of genius when they attain a degree of might
that towers over the plain of mediocrity. We are amazed by the unusual,
springing out of flat commonplaces; we are spellbound by the luminous
speck shining in the wonted darkness. We admire; and, failing to
understand whence came those glorious harvests in this one or in that,
we say of them: "They have the gift."

A goatherd amuses himself by making combinations with heaps of little
pebbles. He becomes an astoundingly quick and accurate reckoner without
other aid than a moment's reflection. He terrifies us with the conflict
of enormous numbers which blend in an orderly fashion in his mind, but
whose mere statement overwhelms us by its inextricable confusion. This
marvelous arithmetical juggler has an instinct, a genius, a gift for
figures.

A second, at the age when most of us delight in tops and marbles, leaves
the company of his boisterous playmates and listens to the echo of
celestial harps singing within him. His head is a cathedral filled with
the strains of an imaginary organ. Rich cadences, a secret concert heard
by him and him alone, steep him in ecstasy. All hail to that predestined
one who, some day, will rouse our noblest emotions with his musical
chords. He has an instinct, a genius, a gift for sounds.

A third, a brat who cannot yet eat his bread and jam without smearing
his face all over, takes a delight in fashioning clay into little
figures that are astonishingly lifelike for all their artless
awkwardness. He takes a knife and makes the briar root grin into all
sorts of entertaining masks; he carves boxwood in the semblance of a
horse or sheep; he engraves the effigy of his dog on sandstone. Leave
him alone; and, if Heaven second his efforts, he may become a famous
sculptor. He has an instinct, a gift, a genius for form.

And so with others in every branch of human activity: art and science,
industry and commerce, literature and philosophy. We have within us,
from the start, that which will distinguish us from the vulgar herd.
Now to what do we owe this distinctive character? To some throwback of
atavism, men tell us. Heredity, direct in one case, remote in another,
hands it down to us, increased or modified by time. Search the records
of the family and you will discover the source of the genius, a mere
trickle at first, then a stream, then a mighty river.

The darkness that lies behind that word heredity! Metaphysical science
has tried to throw a little light upon it and has succeeded only in
making unto itself a barbarous jargon, leaving obscurity more obscure
than before. As for us, who hunger after lucidity, let us relinquish
abstruse theories to whoever delights in them and confine our ambition
to observable facts, without pretending to explain the quackery of
the plasma. Our method certainly will not reveal to us the origin of
instinct; but it will at least show us where it would be waste of time
to look for it.

In this sort of research, a subject known through and through, down to
its most intimate peculiarities, is indispensable. Where shall we find
that subject? There would be a host of them and magnificent ones, if it
were possible to read the sealed pages of others' lives; but no one can
sound an existence outside his own and even then he can think himself
lucky if a retentive memory and the habit of reflection give his
soundings the proper accuracy. As none of us is able to project himself
into another's skin, we must needs, in considering this problem, remain
inside our own.

To talk about one's self is hateful, I know. The reader must have the
kindness to excuse me for the sake of the study in hand. I shall take
the silent beetle's place in the witness box, cross-examining myself
in all simplicity of soul, as I do the animal, and asking myself whence
that one of my instincts which stands out above the others is derived.


Since Darwin bestowed upon me the title of 'incomparable observer,' the
epithet has often come back to me, from this side and from that, without
my yet understanding what particular merit I have shown. It seems to me
so natural, so much within everybody's scope, so absorbing to interest
one's self in everything that swarms around us! However, let us pass on
and admit that the compliment is not unfounded.

My hesitation ceases if it is a question of admitting my curiosity in
matters that concern the insect. Yes, I possess the gift, the instinct
that impels me to frequent that singular world; yes, I know that I am
capable of spending on those studies an amount of precious time which
would be better employed in making provision, if possible, for the
poverty of old age; yes, I confess that I am an enthusiastic observer of
the animal. How was this characteristic propensity, at once the torment
and delight of my life, developed? And, to begin with, how much does it
owe to heredity?

The common people have no history: persecuted by the present, they
cannot think of preserving the memory of the past. And yet what
surpassingly instructive records, comforting too and pious, would be the
family papers that should tell us who our forebears were and speak to
us of their patient struggles with harsh fate, their stubborn efforts to
build up, atom by atom, what we are today. No story would come up with
that for individual interest. But by the very force of things the home
is abandoned; and, when the brood has flown, the nest is no longer
recognized.

I, a humble journeyman in the toilers' hive, am therefore very poor in
family recollections. In the second degree of ancestry, my facts become
suddenly obscured. I will linger over them a moment for two reasons:
first, to inquire into the influence of heredity; and, secondly, to
leave my children yet one more page concerning them.

I did not know my maternal grandfather. This venerable ancestor was, I
have been told, a process server in one of the poorest parishes of the
Rouergue. He used to engross on stamped paper in a primitive spelling.
With his well-filled pen case and ink horn, he went drawing out deeds up
hill and down dale, from one insolvent wretch to another more insolvent
still. Amid his atmosphere of pettifoggery, this rudimentary scholar,
waging battle on life's acerbities, certainly paid no attention to the
insect; at most, if he met it, he would crush it under foot. The
unknown animal, suspected of evil doing, deserved no further enquiry.
Grandmother, on her side, apart from her housekeeping and her beads,
knew still less about anything. She looked on the alphabet as a set of
hieroglyphics only fit to spoil your sight for nothing, unless you were
scribbling on paper bearing the government stamp. Who in the world, in
her day, among the small folk, dreamt of knowing how to read and write?
That luxury was reserved for the attorney, who himself made but a
sparing use of it. The insect, I need hardly say, was the least of her
cares. If sometimes, when rinsing her salad at the tap, she found a
caterpillar on the lettuce leaves, with a start of fright she would
fling the loathsome thing away, thus cutting short relations reputed
dangerous. In short, to both my maternal grandparents, the insect was a
creature of no interest whatever and almost always a repulsive object,
which one dared not touch with the tip of one's finger. Beyond a doubt,
my taste for animals was not derived from them.

I have more precise information regarding my grandparents on the
father's side, for their green old age allowed me to know them both.
They were people of the soil, whose quarrel with the alphabet was so
great that they had never opened a book in their lives; and they kept
a lean farm on the cold granite ridge of the Rouergue tableland. The
house, standing alone among the heath and broom, with no neighbor for
many a mile around and visited at intervals by the wolves, was to them
the hub of the universe. But for a few surrounding villages, whither the
calves were driven on fair days, the rest was only very vaguely known
by hearsay. In this wild solitude, the mossy fens, with their quagmires
oozing with iridescent pools, supplied the cows, the principal source
of wealth, with rich, wet grass. In summer, on the short swards of the
slopes, the sheep were penned day and night, protected from beasts of
prey by a fence of hurdles propped up with pitchforks. When the grass
was cropped close at one spot, the fold was shifted elsewhere. In the
center was the shepherd's rolling hut, a straw cabin. Two watchdogs,
equipped with spiked collars, were answerable for tranquillity if the
thieving wolf appeared in the night from out the neighboring woods.

Padded with a perpetual layer of cow dung, in which I sank to my knees,
broken up with shimmering puddles of dark brown liquid manure, the
farmyard also boasted a numerous population. Here the lambs skipped, the
geese trumpeted, the fowls scratched the ground and the sow grunted with
her swarm of little pigs hanging to her dugs.

The harshness of the climate did not give husbandry the same chances.
In a propitious season, they would set fire to a stretch of moorland
bristling with gorse and send the swing plow across the ground enriched
with the cinders of the blaze. This yielded a few acres of rye, oats
and potatoes. The best corners were kept for hemp, which furnished the
distaffs and spindles of the house with the material for linen and was
looked upon as grandmother's private crop.

Grandfather, therefore, was, before all, a herdsman versed in matters of
cows and sheep, but completely ignorant of aught else. How dumbfounded
he would have been to learn that, in the remote future, one of his
family would become enamoured of those insignificant animals to which
he had never vouchsafed a glance in his life! Had he guessed that that
lunatic was myself, the scapegrace seated at the table by his side, what
a smack I should have caught in the neck, what a wrathful look!

"The idea of wasting one's time with that nonsense!" he would have
thundered.

For the patriarch was not given to joking. I can still see his serious
face, his unclipped head of hair, often brought back behind his ears
with a flick of the thumb and spreading its ancient Gallic mane over
his shoulders. I see his little three-cornered hat, his small clothes
buckled at the knees, his wooden shoes, stuffed with straw, that echoed
as he walked. Ah, no! Once childhood's games were past, it would never
have done to rear the Grasshopper and unearth the Dung beetle from his
natural surroundings.

Grandmother, pious soul, used to wear the eccentric headdress of the
Rouergue highlanders: a large disk of black felt, stiff as a plank,
adorned in the middle with a crown a finger's breadth high and hardly
wider across than a six franc piece. A black ribbon fastened under the
chin maintained the equilibrium of this elegant, but unsteady circle.
Pickles, hemp, chickens, curds and whey, butter; washing the clothes,
minding the children, seeing to the meals of the household: say that
and you have summed up the strenuous woman's round of ideas. On her left
side, the distaff, with its load of flax; in her right hand, the spindle
turning under a quick twist of her thumb, moistened at intervals with
her tongue: so she went through life, unwearied, attending to the order
and the welfare of the house. I see her in my mind's eye particularly on
winter evenings, which were more favorable to family talk. When the hour
came for meals, all of us, big and little, would take our seats round
a long table, on a couple of benches, deal planks supported by four
rickety legs. Each found his wooden bowl and his tin spoon in front of
him. At one end of the table always stood an enormous rye loaf, the
size of a cartwheel, wrapped in a linen cloth with a pleasant smell
of washing, and remained until nothing was left of it. With a vigorous
stroke, grandfather would cut off enough for the needs of the moment;
then he would divide the piece among us with the one knife which he
alone was entitled to wield. It was now each one's business to break up
his bit with his fingers and to fill his bowl as he pleased.

Next came grandmother's turn. A capacious pot bubbled lustily and sang
upon the flames in the hearth, exhaling an appetizing savor of bacon and
turnips. Armed with a long metal ladle, grandmother would take from it,
for each of us in turn, first the broth, wherein to soak the bread,
and next the ration of turnips and bacon, partly fat and partly lean,
filling the bowl to the top. At the other end of the table was the
pitcher, from which the thirsty were free to drink at will. What
appetites we had and what festive meals those were, especially when a
cream cheese, homemade, was there to complete the banquet!

Near us blazed the huge fireplace, in which whole tree trunks were
consumed in the extreme cold weather. From a corner of that monumental,
soot-glazed chimney, projected, at a convenient height, a bracket with
a slate shelf, which served to light the kitchen when we sat up late. On
this we burnt chips of pine wood, selected among the most translucent,
those containing the most resin. They shed over the room a lurid red
light, which saved the walnut oil in the lamp.

When the bowls were emptied and the last crumb of cheese scraped up,
grandam went back to her distaff, on a stool by the chimney corner. We
children, boys and girls, squatting on our heels and putting out our
hands to the cheerful fire of furze, formed a circle round her and
listened to her with eager ears. She told us stories, not greatly
varied, it is true, but still wonderful, for the wolf often played a
part in them. I should have very much liked to see this wolf, the hero
of so many tales that made our flesh creep; but the shepherd always
refused to take me into his straw hut, in the middle of the fold, at
night. When we had done talking about the horrid wolf, the dragon and
the serpent and when the resinous splinters had given out their last
gleams, we went to sleep the sweet sleep that toil gives. As the
youngest of the household, I had a right to the mattress, a sack stuffed
with oat chaff. The others had to be content with straw.

I owe a great deal to you, dear grandmother: it was in your lap that
I found consolation for my first sorrows. You have handed down to me,
perhaps, a little of your physical vigor, a little of your love of
work; but certainly you were no more accountable than grandfather for my
passion for insects.

Nor was either of my own parents. My mother, who was quite illiterate,
having known no teacher than the bitter experience of a harassed life,
was the exact opposite of what my tastes required for their development.
My peculiarity must seek its origin elsewhere: that I will swear. But
I do not find it in my father, either. The excellent man, who was hard
working and sturdily built like granddad, had been to school as a
child. He knew how to write, though he took the greatest liberties with
spelling; he knew how to read and understood what he read, provided the
reading presented no more serious literary difficulties than occurred
in the stories in the almanac. He was the first of his line to allow
himself to be tempted by the town and he lived to regret it. Badly off,
having but little outlet for his industry, making God knows what shifts
to pick up a livelihood, he went through all the disappointments of the
countryman turned townsman. Persecuted by bad luck, borne down by
the burden, for all his energy and good will, he was far indeed from
starting me in entomology. He had other cares, cares more direct and
more serious. A good cuff or two when he saw me pinning an insect to a
cork was all the encouragement that I received from him. Perhaps he was
right.

The conclusion is positive: there is nothing in heredity to explain my
taste for observation. You may say that I do not go far enough back.
Well, what should I find beyond the grandparents where my facts come to
a stop? I know, partly. I should find even more uncultured ancestors:
sons of the soil, plowmen, sowers of rye, neat herds; one and all, by
the very force of things, of not the least account in the nice matters
of observation.

And yet, in me, the observer, the inquirer into things began to take
shape almost in infancy. Why should I not describe my first discoveries?
They are ingenuous in the extreme, but will serve notwithstanding to
tell us something of the way in which tendencies first show themselves.
I was five or six years old. That the poor household might have one
mouth less to feed, I had been placed in grandmother's care, as I have
just been saying. Here, in solitude, my first gleams of intelligence
were awakened amidst the geese, the calves and the sheep. Everything
before that is impenetrable darkness. My real birth is at that
moment when the dawn of personality rises, dispersing the mists of
unconsciousness and leaving a lasting memory. I can see myself plainly,
clad in a soiled frieze frock flapping against my bare heels; I
remember the handkerchief hanging from my waist by a bit of string, a
handkerchief often lost and replaced by the back of my sleeve.

There I stand one day, a pensive urchin, with my hands behind my back
and my face turned to the sun. The dazzling splendor fascinates me. I am
the Moth attracted by the light of the lamp. With what am I enjoying the
glorious radiance: with my mouth or my eyes? That is the question put
by my budding scientific curiosity. Reader, do not smile: the future
observer is already practicing and experimenting. I open my mouth wide
and close my eyes: the glory disappears. I open my eyes and shut my
mouth: the glory reappears. I repeat the performance, with the same
result. The question's solved: I have learnt by deduction that I see the
sun with my eyes. Oh, what a discovery! That evening, I told the whole
house all about it. Grandmother smiled fondly at my simplicity: the
others laughed at it. 'Tis the way of the world.

Another find. At nightfall, amidst the neighboring bushes, a sort of
jingle attracted my attention, sounding very faintly and softly through
the evening silence. Who is making that noise? Is it a little bird
chirping in his nest? We must look into the matter and that quickly.
True, there is the wolf, who comes out of the woods at this time, so
they tell me. Let's go all the same, but not too far: just there, behind
that clump of groom. I stand on the look out for long, but all in vain.
At the faintest sound of movement in the brushwood, the jingle ceases.
I try again next day and the day after. This time, my stubborn watch
succeeds. Whoosh! A grab of my hand and I hold the singer. It is not a
bird; it is a kind of Grasshopper whose hind legs my playfellows have
taught me to like: a poor recompense for my prolonged ambush. The best
part of the business is not the two haunches with the shrimpy flavor,
but what I have just learnt. I now know, from personal observation, that
the Grasshopper sings. I did not publish my discovery, for fear of the
same laughter that greeted my story about the sun.

Oh, what pretty flowers, in a field close to the house! They seem to
smile to me with their great violet eyes. Later on, I see, in their
place, bunches of big red cherries. I taste them. They are not nice
and they have no stones. What can those cherries be? At the end of the
summer, grandfather comes with a spade and turns my field of observation
topsy-turvy. From under ground there comes, by the basketful and
sackful, a sort of round root. I know that root; it abounds in the
house; time after time I have cooked it in the peat stove. It is the
potato. Its violet flower and its red fruit are pigeonholed for good and
all in my memory.

With an ever watchful eye for animals and plants, the future observer,
the little six-year-old monkey, practiced by himself, all unawares.
He went to the flower, he went to the insect, even as the large white
butterfly goes to the cabbage and the red admiral to the thistle. He
looked and inquired, drawn by a curiosity whereof heredity did not know
the secret. He bore within him the germ of a faculty unknown to his
family; he kept alive a glimmer that was foreign to the ancestral
hearth. What will become of that infinitesimal spark of childish fancy?
It will die out, beyond a doubt, unless education intervene, giving it
the fuel of example, fanning it with the breath of experience. In that
case, schooling will explain what heredity leaves unexplained. This is
what we will examine in the next chapter.




CHAPTER VI. MY SCHOOLING

I am back in the village, in my father's house. I am now seven years
old; and it is high time that I went to school. Nothing could have
turned out better: the master is my godfather. What shall I call the
room in which I was to become acquainted with the alphabet? It would
be difficult to find the exact word, because the room served for every
purpose. It was at once a school, a kitchen, a bedroom, a dining room
and, at times, a chicken house and a piggery. Palatial schools were not
dreamt of in those days; any wretched hovel was thought good enough.

A broad fixed ladder led to the floor above. Under the ladder stood
a big bed in a boarded recess. What was there upstairs? I never quite
knew. I would see the master sometimes bring down an armful of hay for
the ass, sometimes a basket of potatoes which the housewife emptied into
the pot in which the little porkers' food was cooked. It must have been
a loft of sorts, a storehouse of provisions for man and beast. Those two
apartments composed the whole building.

To return to the lower one, the schoolroom: a window faces south, the
only window in the house, a low, narrow window whose frame you can touch
at the same time with your head and both your shoulders. This sunny
aperture is the only lively spot in the dwelling, it overlooks the
greater part of the village, which straggles along the slopes of a
slanting valley. In the window recess is the master's little table.

The opposite wall contains a niche in which stands a gleaming copper
pail full of water. Here the parched children can relieve their thirst
when they please, with a cup left within their reach. At the top of the
niche are a few shelves bright with pewter plates, dishes and drinking
vessels, which are taken down from their sanctuary on great occasions
only.

More or less everywhere, at any spot which the light touches, are
crudely colored pictures, pasted on the walls. Here is Our Lady of the
Seven Dolours, the disconsolate Mother of God opening her blue cloak
to show her heart pierced with seven daggers. Between the sun and moon,
which stare at you with their great, round eyes, is the Eternal Father,
whose robe swells as though puffed out with the storm. To the right
of the window, in the embrasure, is the Wandering Jew. He wears a
three-cornered hat, a large, white leather apron, hobnailed shoes and a
stout stick. 'Never was such a bearded man seen before or after,' says
the legend that surrounds the picture. The draftsman has not forgotten
this detail: the old man's beard spreads in a snowy avalanche over the
apron and comes down to his knees. On the left is Genevieve of Brabant,
accompanied by the roe, with fierce Golo hiding in the bushes, sword in
hand. Above hangs The Death of Mr. Credit, slain by defaulters at the
door of his inn; and so on and so on, in every variety of subject, at
all the unoccupied spots of the four walls.

I was filled with admiration of this picture gallery, which held one's
eyes with its great patches of red, blue, green and yellow. The master,
however, had not set up his collection with a view to training our minds
and hearts. That was the last and least of the worthy man's ambitions.
An artist in his fashion, he had adorned his house according to his
taste; and we benefited by the scheme of decoration.

While the gallery of halfpenny pictures made me happy all the year
round, there was another entertainment which I found particularly
attractive in winter, in frosty weather, when the snow lay long on the
ground. Against the far wall stands the fireplace, as monumental in size
as at my grandmother's. Its arched cornice occupies the whole width of
the room, for the enormous redoubt fulfils more than one purpose. In the
middle is the hearth, but, on the right and left, are two breast-high
recesses, half wood and half stone. Each of them is a bed, with a
mattress stuffed with chaff of winnowed corn. Two sliding planks serve
as shutters and close the chest if the sleeper would be alone. This
dormitory, sheltered under the chimney mantel, supplies couches for the
favored ones of the house, the two boarders. They must lie snug in there
at night, with their shutters closed, when the north wind howls at the
mouth of the dark valley and sends the snow awhirl. The rest is occupied
by the hearth and its accessories: the three-legged stools; the salt
box, hanging against the wall to keep its contents dry; the heavy shovel
which it takes two hands to wield; lastly, the bellows similar to those
with which I used to blow out my cheeks in grandfather's house. They
consist of a mighty branch of pine, hollowed throughout its length with
a red-hot iron. By means of this channel, one's breath is applied, from
a convenient distance, to the spot which is to be revived. With a couple
of stones for supports, the master's bundle of sticks and our own logs
blaze and flicker, each of us having to bring a log of wood in the
morning, if he would share in the treat.

For that matter, the fire was not exactly lit for us, but, above all, to
warm a row of three pots in which simmered the pigs' food, a mixture
of potatoes and bran. That, despite the tribute of a log, was the real
object of the brushwood fire. The two boarders, on their stools, in
the best places, and we others sitting on our heels formed a semicircle
around those big cauldrons, full to the brim and giving off little jets
of steam, with puff-puff-puffing sounds. The bolder among us, when the
master's eyes were engaged elsewhere, would dig a knife into a well
cooked potato and add it to their bit of bread; for I must say that, if
we did little work in my school, at least we did a deal of eating. It
was the regular custom to crack a few nuts and nibble at a crust while
writing our page or setting out our rows of figures.

We, the smaller ones, in addition to the comfort of studying with our
mouths full, had every now and then two other delights, which were quite
as good as cracking nuts. The back door communicated with the yard where
the hen, surrounded by her brood of chicks, scratched at the dung hill,
while the little porkers, of whom there were a dozen, wallowed in their
stone trough. This door would open sometimes to let one of us out, a
privilege which we abused, for the sly ones among us were careful not to
close it on returning. Forthwith, the porkers would come running in,
one after the other, attracted by the smell of the boiled potatoes. My
bench, the one where the youngsters sat, stood against the wall, under
the copper pail to which we used to go for water when the nuts had made
us thirsty, and was right in the way of the pigs. Up they came trotting
and grunting, curling their little tails; they rubbed against our legs;
they poked their cold pink snouts into our hands in search of a scrap
of crust; they questioned us with their sharp little eyes to learn if we
happened to have a dry chestnut for them in our pockets. When they
had gone the round, some this way and some that, they went back to the
farmyard, driven away by a friendly flick of the master's handkerchief.
Next came the visit of the hen, bringing her velvet-coated chicks to see
us. All of us eagerly crumbled a little bread for our pretty visitors.
We vied with one another in calling them to us and tickling with our
fingers their soft and downy backs. No, there was certainly no lack of
distractions.

What could we learn in such a school as that! Let us first speak of the
young ones, of whom I was one. Each of us had, or rather was supposed
to have, in his hands a little penny book, the alphabet, printed on gray
paper. It began, on the cover, with a pigeon, or something like it. Next
came a cross, followed by the letters in their order. When we turned
over, our eyes encountered the terrible ba, be, bi, bo, bu, the
stumbling block of most of us. When we had mastered that formidable
page, we were considered to know how to read and were admitted among the
big ones. But, if the little book was to be of any use, the least that
was required was that the master should interest himself in us to some
extent and show us how to set about things. For this, the worthy man,
too much taken up with the big ones, had not the time. The famous
alphabet with the pigeon was thrust upon us only to give us the air of
scholars. We were to contemplate it on our bench, to decipher it with
the help of our next neighbor, in case he might know one or two of the
letters. Our contemplation came to nothing, being every moment disturbed
by a visit to the potatoes in the stew pots, a quarrel among playmates
about a marble, the grunting invasion of the porkers or the arrival of
the chicks. With the aid of these distractions, we would wait patiently
until it was time for us to go home. That was our most serious work.

The big ones used to write. They had the benefit of the small amount
of light in the room, by the narrow window where the Wandering Jew and
ruthless Golo faced each other, and of the large and only table with its
circle of seats. The school supplied nothing, not even a drop of ink;
every one had to come with a full set of utensils. The inkhorn of those
days, a relic of the ancient pen case of which Rabelais speaks, was a
long cardboard box divided into two stages. The upper compartment held
the pens, made of goose or turkey quills trimmed with a penknife; the
lower contained, in a tiny well, ink made of soot mixed with vinegar.

The master's great business was to mend the pens--a delicate work, not
without danger for inexperienced fingers--and then to trace at the head
of the white page a line of strokes, single letters or words, according
to the scholar's capabilities. When that is over, keep an eye on the
work of art which is coming to adorn the copy! With what undulating
movements of the wrist does the hand, resting on the little finger,
prepare and plan its flight! All at once, the hand starts off, flies,
whirls; and, lo and behold, under the line of writing is unfurled
a garland of circles, spirals and flourishes, framing a bird with
outspread wings, the whole, if you please, in red ink, the only kind
worthy of such a pen. Large and small, we stood awestruck in the
presence of these marvels. The family, in the evening, after supper,
would pass from hand to hand the masterpiece brought back from school:
'What a man!' was the comment. 'What a man, to draw you a Holy Ghost
with a stroke of the pen!'

What was read at my school? At most, in French, a few selections from
sacred history. Latin recurred oftener, to teach us to sing vespers
properly. The more advanced pupils tried to decipher manuscript, a deed
of sale, the hieroglyphics of some scrivener.

And history, geography? No one ever heard of them. What difference did
it make to us whether the earth was round or square! In either case, it
was just as hard to make it bring forth anything.

And grammar? The master troubled his head very little about that; and we
still less. We should have been greatly surprised by the novelty and the
forbidding look of such words in the grammatical jargon as substantive,
indicative and subjunctive. Accuracy of language, whether of speech
or writing, must be learnt by practice. And none of us was troubled
by scruples in this respect. What was the use of all these subtleties,
when, on coming out of school, a lad simply went back to his flock of
sheep!

And arithmetic? Yes, we did a little of this but not under that learned
name. We called it sums. To put down rows of figures, not too long,
add them and subtract them one from the other was more or less familiar
work. On Saturday evenings, to finish up the week, there was a general
orgy of sums. The top boy stood up and, in a loud voice, recited the
multiplication table up to twelve times. I say twelve times, for in
those days, because of our old duodecimal measures, it was the custom to
count as far as the twelve times table, instead of the ten times of the
metric system. When this recital was over, the whole class, the little
ones included, took it up in chorus, creating such an uproar that chicks
and porkers took to flight if they happened to be there. And this went
on to twelve times twelve, the first in the row starting the next table
and the whole class repeating it as loud as it could yell. Of all that
we were taught in school, the multiplication table was what we knew
best, for this noisy method ended by dinning the different numbers
into our ears. This does not mean that we became skilful reckoners. The
cleverest of us easily got muddled with the figures to be carried in a
multiplication sum. As for division, rare indeed were they who reached
such heights. In short, the moment a problem, however insignificant, had
to be solved, we had recourse to mental gymnastics much rather than to
the learned aid of arithmetic.

When all is said, our master was an excellent man who could have kept
school very well but for his lack of one thing; and that was time. He
devoted to us all the little leisure which his numerous functions
left him. And, first of all, he managed the property of an absentee
landowner, who only occasionally set foot in the village. He had under
his care an old castle with four towers, which had become so many pigeon
houses; he directed the getting in of the hay, the walnuts, the apples
and the oats. We used to help him during the summer, when the school,
which was well attended in winter, was almost deserted. All that
remained, because they were not yet big enough to work in the fields,
were a few children, including him who was one day to set down these
memorable facts. Lessons at that time were less dull. They were often
given on the hay or on the straw; oftener still, lesson time was spent
in cleaning out the dovecote or stamping on the snails that had sallied
in rainy weather from their fortresses, the tall box borders of the
garden belonging to the castle.

Our master was a barber. With his light hand, which was so clever at
beautifying our copies with curlicue birds, he shaved the notabilities
of the place: the mayor, the parish priest, the notary. Our master was a
bell ringer. A wedding or a christening interrupted the lessons: he had
to ring a peal. A gathering storm gave us a holiday: the great bell must
be tolled to ward off the lightning and the hail. Our master was a choir
singer. With his mighty voice, he filled the church when he led the
Magnificat at vespers. Our master wound up and regulated the village
clock. This was his proudest function. Giving a glance at the sun, to
ascertain the time more or less nearly, he would climb to the top of
the steeple, open a huge cage of rafters and find himself in a maze of
wheels and springs whereof the secret was known to him alone.

With such a school and such a master and such examples, what will become
of my embryo tastes, as yet so imperceptible? In that environment, they
seem bound to perish, stifled for ever. Yet no, the germ has life;
it works in my veins, never to leave them again. It finds nourishment
everywhere, down to the cover of my penny alphabet, embellished with
a crude picture of a pigeon which I study and contemplate much more
zealously than the A B C. Its round eye, with its circlet of dots, seems
to smile upon me. Its wing, of which I count the feathers one by one,
tells me of flights on high, among the beautiful clouds; it carries me
to the beeches raising their smooth trunks above a mossy carpet studded
with white mushrooms that look like eggs dropped by some vagrant hen; it
takes me to the snow-clad peaks where the birds leave the starry print
of their red feet. He is a fine fellow, my pigeon friend: he consoles
me for the woes hidden behind the cover of my book. Thanks to him, I sit
quietly on my bench and wait more or less till school is over.

School out of doors has other charms. When the master takes us to kill
the snails in the box borders, I do not always scrupulously fulfil my
office as an exterminator. My heel sometimes hesitates before coming
down upon the handful which I have gathered. They are so pretty! Just
think, there are yellow ones and pink, white ones and brown, all with
dark spiral streaks. I fill my pockets with the handsomest, so as to
feast my eyes on them at my leisure.

On hay making days in the master's field, I strike up an acquaintance
with the frog. Flayed and stuck at the end of a split stick, he serves
as bait to tempt the crayfish to come out of his retreat by the brook
side. On the alder trees I catch the Hoplia, the splendid scarab who
pales the azure of the heavens. I pick the narcissus and learn to
gather, with the tip of my tongue, the tiny drop of honey that lies
right at the bottom of the cleft corolla. I also learn that too long
indulgence in this feast brings a headache; but this discomfort in no
way impairs my admiration for the glorious white flower, which wears a
narrow red collar at the throat of its funnel.

When we go to beat the walnut trees, the barren grass plots provide me
with locusts spreading their wings, some into a blue fan, others into a
red. And thus the rustic school, even in the heart of winter, furnished
continuous food for my interest in things. There was no need for precept
and example: my passion for animals and plants made progress of itself.

What did not make progress was my acquaintance with my letters, greatly
neglected in favor of the pigeon. I was still at the same stage,
hopelessly behindhand with the intractable alphabet, when my father, by
a chance inspiration, brought me home from the town what was destined to
give me a start along the road of reading. Despite the not insignificant
part which it played in my intellectual awakening, the purchase was
by no means a ruinous one. It was a large print, price six farthings,
colored and divided into compartments in which animals of all sorts
taught the A B C by means of the first letters of their names.

Where should I keep the precious picture? As it happened, in the room
set apart for the children at home, there was a little window like the
one in the school, opening in the same way out of a sort of recess and
in the same way overlooking most of the village. One was on the right,
the other on the left of the castle with the pigeon house towers; both
afforded an equally good view of the heights of the slanting valley.
I was able to enjoy the school window only at rare intervals, when the
master left his little table; the other was at my disposal as often as I
liked. I spent long hours there, sitting on a little fixed window seat.

The view was magnificent. I could see the ends of the earth, that is
to say, the hills that blocked the horizon, all but a misty gap through
which the brook with the crayfish flowed under the alders and willows.
High up on the skyline, a few wind-battered oaks bristled on the ridges;
and beyond there lay nothing but the unknown, laden with mystery.

At the back of the hollow stood the church, with its three steeples and
its clock; and, a little higher, the village square, where a spring,
fashioned into a fountain, gurgled from one basin into another, under a
wide arched roof. I could hear from my window the chatter of the women
washing their clothes, the strokes of their beaters, the rasping of the
pots scoured with sand and vinegar. Sprinkled over the slopes are little
houses with their garden patches in terraces banked up by tottering
walls, which bulge under the thrust of the earth. Here and there are
very steep lanes, with the dents of the rock forming a natural pavement.
The mule, sure-footed though he be, would hesitate to enter these
dangerous passes with his load of branches.

Further on, beyond the village, half-way up the hills, stood the great
ever-so-old lime tree, the Tel, as we used to call it, whose sides,
hollowed out by the ages, were the favorite hiding places of us children
at play. On fair days, its immense, spreading foliage cast a wide shadow
over the herds of oxen and sheep. Those solemn days, which only came
once a year, brought me a few ideas from without: I learnt that the
world did not end with my amphitheater of hills. I saw the inn keeper's
wine arrive on mule back and in goat skin bottles. I hung about the
market place and watched the opening of jars full of stewed pears, the
setting out of baskets of grapes, an almost unknown fruit, the object
of eager covetousness. I stood and gazed in admiration at the roulette
board on which, for a sou, according to the spot at which its needle
stopped on a circular row of nails, you won a pink poodle made of barley
sugar, or a round jar of aniseed sweets, or, much oftener, nothing at
all. On a piece of canvas on the ground, rolls of printed calico with
red flowers, were displayed to tempt the girls. Close by rose a pile of
beechwood clogs, tops and boxwood flutes. Here the shepherds chose their
instruments, trying them by blowing a note or two. How new it all was
to me! What a lot of things there were to see in this world! Alas,
that wonderful time was of but short duration! At night, after a little
brawling at the inn, it was all over; and the village returned to
silence for a year.

But I must not linger over these memories of the dawn of life. We were
speaking of the memorable picture brought from town. Where shall I keep
it, to make the best use of it? Why, of course, it must be pasted on
the embrasure of my window. The recess, with its seat, shall be my study
cell; here I can feast my eyes by turns on the big lime tree and the
animals of my alphabet. And this was what I did.

And now, my precious picture, it is our turn, yours and mine. You began
with the sacred beast, the ass, whose name, with a big initial, taught
me the letter A. The boeuf, the ox, stood for B; the canard, the duck,
told me about C; the dindon, the turkey, gave me the letter D. And so
on with the rest. A few compartments, it is true, were lacking in
clearness. I had no friendly feeling for the hippopotamus, the kamichi,
or horned screamer, and the zebu, who aimed at making me say H, K and
Z. Those outlandish beasts, which failed to give the abstract letter the
support of a recognized reality, caused me to hesitate for a time over
their recalcitrant consonants. No matter: father came to my aid in
difficult cases; and I made such rapid progress that, in a few days,
I was able to turn in good earnest the pages of my little pigeon book,
hitherto so undecipherable. I was initiated; I knew how to spell. My
parents marveled. I can explain this unexpected progress today. Those
speaking pictures, which brought me amongst my friends the beasts, were
in harmony with my instincts. If the animal has not fulfilled all that
it promised in so far as I am concerned, I have at least to thank it for
teaching me to read. I should have succeeded by other means, I do not
doubt, but not so quickly nor so pleasantly. Animals forever!

Luck favored me a second time. As a reward for my prowess, I was
given La Fontaine's Fables, in a popular, cheap edition, crammed with
pictures, small, I admit, and very inaccurate, but still delightful.
Here were the crow, the fox, the wolf, the magpie, the frog, the rabbit,
the ass, the dog, the cat: all persons of my acquaintance. The glorious
book was immensely to my taste, with its skimpy illustrations on which
the animal walked and talked. As to understanding what it said, that
was another story! Never mind, my lad! Put together syllables that say
nothing to you as yet; they will speak to you later and La Fontaine will
always remain your friend.

I come to the time when I was ten years old and at Rodez College. My
functions as a serving boy in the chapel entitled me to free instruction
as a day boarder. There were four of us in white surplices and red
skull-caps and cassocks. I was the youngest of the party and did little
more than walk on. I counted as a unit; and that was about all, for I
was never certain when to ring the bell or move the missal. I was all
of a tremble when we gathered two on this side and two on that, with
genuflection's, in the middle of the sanctuary, to intone the Domine,
salvum fac regern at the end of mass. Let me make a confession:
tongue-tied with shyness, I used to leave it to the others.

Nevertheless, I was well thought of, for, in the school, I cut a good
figure in composition and translation. In that classical atmosphere,
there was talk of Procas, King of Alba, and of his two sons, Numitor and
Amulius. We heard of Cynoegirus, the strong jawed man, who, having
lost his two hands in battle, seized and held a Persian galley with
his teeth, and of Cadmus the Phoenician, who sowed a dragon's teeth as
though they were beans and gathered his harvest in the shape of a host
of armed men, who killed one another as they rose up from the ground.
The only one who survived the slaughter was one as tough as leather,
presumably the son of the big back grinder.

Had they talked to me about the man in the moon, I could not have been
more startled. I made up for it with my animals, which I was far from
forgetting amid this phantasmagoria of heroes and demigods. While
honoring the exploits of Cadmus and Cynoegirus, I hardly ever failed, on
Sundays and Thursdays [the weekly half-holiday in French schools], to go
and see if the cowslip or the yellow daffodil was making its appearance
in the meadows, if the Linnet was hatching on the juniper bushes, if the
Cockchafers were plopping down from the wind shaken poplars. Thus was
the sacred spark kept aglow, ever brighter than before.

By easy stages, I came to Virgil and was very much smitten with
Meliboeus, Corydon, Menalcas, Damoetas and the rest of them. The
scandals of the ancient shepherds fortunately passed unnoticed; and
within the frame in which the characters moved were exquisite details
concerning the bee, the cicada, the turtle dove, the crow, the nanny
goat and the golden broom. A veritable delight were these stories of
the fields, sung in sonorous verse; and the Latin poet left a lasting
impression on my classical recollections.

Then, suddenly, goodbye to my studies, goodbye to Tityrus and Menalcas.
Ill luck is swooping down on us, relentlessly. Hunger threatens us
at home. And now, boy, put your trust in God; run about and earn your
penn'orth of potatoes as best you can. Life is about to become a hideous
inferno. Let us pass quickly over this phase. Amid this lamentable
chaos, my love for the insect ought to have gone under. Not at all. It
would have survived the raft of the Medusa. I still remember a certain
pine cockchafer met for the first time. The plumes on her antennae, her
pretty pattern of white spots on a dark brown ground were as a ray of
sunshine in the gloomy wretchedness of the day.

To cut a long story short: good fortune, which never abandons the brave,
brought me to the primary normal school at Vaucluse where I was assured
food: dried chestnuts and chickpeas. The principal, a man of broad
views, soon came to trust his new assistant. He left me practically a
free hand, so long as I satisfied the school curriculum, which was very
modest in those days. Possessing a smattering of Latin and grammar, I
was a little ahead of my fellow pupils. I took advantage of this to
get some order into my vague knowledge of plants and animals. While a
dictation lesson was being corrected around me, with generous assistance
from the dictionary, I would examine, in the recesses of my desk, the
oleander's fruit, the snapdragon's seed vessel, the wasp's sting and the
ground beetle's wing-case.

With this foretaste of natural science, picked up haphazard and by
stealth, I left school more deeply in love than ever with insects and
flowers. And yet I had to give it all up. That wider education, which
would have to be my source of livelihood in the future, demanded this
imperiously. What was I to take in hand to raise me above the primary
school, whose staff could barely earn their bread in those days? Natural
history could not bring me anywhere. The educational system of the time
kept it at a distance, as unworthy of association with Latin and Greek.
Mathematics remained, with its very simple equipment: a blackboard, a
bit of chalk and a few books.

So I flung myself with might and main into conic sections and the
calculus: a hard battle, if ever there was one, without guides or
counselors, face to face for days on end with the abstruse problem which
my stubborn thinking at last stripped of its mysteries. Next came
the physical sciences, studied in the same manner, with an impossible
laboratory, the work of my own hands.

The reader can imagine the fate of my favorite branch of science in
this fierce struggle. At the faintest sign of revolt, I lectured myself
severely, lest I should let myself be seduced by some new grass, some
unknown Beetle. I did violence to my feelings. My natural history books
were sentenced to oblivion, relegated to the bottom of a trunk.

And so, in the end, I am sent to teach physics and chemistry at Ajaccio
College. This time, the temptation is too much for me. The sea, with its
wonders, the beach, whereon the tide casts such beautiful shells,
the maquis of myrtles, arbutus and mastic trees: all this paradise of
gorgeous nature has too much on its side in the struggle with the sine
and the cosine. I succumb. My leisure time is divided into two parts.
One, the larger, is allotted to mathematics, the foundation of my
academical future, as planned by myself; the other is spent, with much
misgiving, in botanizing and looking for the treasures of the sea. What
a country and what magnificent studies to be made, if, unobsessed by x
and y, I had devoted myself wholeheartedly to my inclinations!

We are the wisp of straw, the plaything of the winds. We think that we
are making for a goal deliberately chosen; destiny drives us towards
another. Mathematics, the exaggerated preoccupation of my youth, did
me hardly any service; and animals, which I avoided as much as ever I
could, are the consolation of my old age. Nevertheless, I bear no
grudge against the sine and the cosine, which I continue to hold in high
esteem. They cost me many a pallid hour at one time, but they always
afforded me some first rate entertainment: they still do so, when my
head lies tossing sleeplessly on its pillow.

Meanwhile, Ajaccio received the visit of a famous Avignon botanist,
Requien by name, who, with a box crammed with paper under his arm, had
long been botanizing all over Corsica, pressing and drying specimens
and distributing them to his friends. We soon became acquainted. I
accompanied him in my free time on his explorations and never did the
master have a more attentive disciple. To tell the truth, Requien was
not a man of learning so much as an enthusiastic collector. Very few
would have felt capable of competing with him when it came to giving the
name or the geographical distribution of a plant. A blade of grass, a
pad of moss, a scab of lichen, a thread of seaweed: he knew them all.
The scientific name flashed across his mind at once. What an unerring
memory, what a genius for classification amid the enormous mass of
things observed! I stood aghast at it. I owe much to Requien in the
domain of botany. Had death spared him longer, I should doubtless
have owed more to him, for his was a generous heart, ever open to the
troubles of novices.

In the following year, I met Moquin-Tandon, with whom, thanks
to Requien, I had already exchanged a few letters on botany. The
illustrious Toulouse professor came to study on the spot the flora which
he proposed to describe systematically. When he arrived, all the hotel
bedrooms were reserved for the members of the general council which had
been summoned; and I offered him board and lodging: a shakedown in a
room overlooking the sea; fare consisting of lampreys, turbot and sea
urchins: common enough dishes in that land of Cockayne, but possessing
no small attraction for the naturalist, because of their novelty. My
cordial proposal tempted him; he yielded to my blandishments; and there
we were for a fortnight chatting at table de omni re scibili after the
botanical excursion was over.

With Moquin-Tandon, new vistas opened before me. Here it was no longer
the case of a nomenclator with an infallible memory: he was a naturalist
with far-reaching ideas, a philosopher who soared above petty details to
comprehensive views of life, a writer, a poet who knew how to clothe the
naked truth in the magic mantle of the glowing word. Never again shall
I sit at an intellectual feast like that: 'Leave your mathematics,' he
said. 'No one will take the least interest in your formula. Get to the
beast, the plant; and, if, as I believe, the fever burns in your veins,
you will find men to listen to you.'

We made an expedition to the center of the island, to Monte Renoso,
with which I was already familiar. I made the scientist pick the hoary
everlasting (Helichrysum frigidum), which makes a wonderful patch of
silver; the many-headed thrift, or mouflon grass (Armeria multiceps),
which the Corsicans call erba muorone; the downy marguerite
(Leucanthemum tomosum), which, clad in wadding, shivers amid the
snows; and many other rarities dear to the botanist. Moquin-Tandon was
jubilant. I, on my side, was much more attracted and overcome by his
words and his enthusiasm than by the hoary everlasting. When we came
down from the cold mountaintop, my mind was made up: mathematics would
be abandoned.

On the day before his departure, he said to me: 'You interest yourself
in shells. That is something, but it is not enough. You must look into
the animal itself. I will show you how it's done.'

And, taking a sharp pair of scissors from the family work-basket and
a couple of needles stuck into a bit of vine shoot which served as a
makeshift handle, he showed me the anatomy of a snail in a soup plate
filled with water. Gradually he explained and sketched the organs which
he spread before my eyes. This was the only, never-to-be-forgotten
lesson in natural history that I ever received in my life.

It is time to conclude. I was cross-examining myself, being unable to
cross-examine the silent Beetle. As far as it is possible to read within
myself, I answer as follows: 'From early childhood, from the moment
of my first mental awakening, I have felt drawn towards the things of
nature, or, to return to our catchword, I have the gift, the bump of
observation.'

After the details which I have already given about my ancestors, it
would be ridiculous to look to heredity for an explanation of the fact.
Nor would any one venture to suggest the words or example of my masters.
Of scientific education, the fruit of college training, I had none
whatever. I never set foot in a lecture hall except to undergo the
ordeal of examinations. Without masters, without guides, often without
books, in spite of poverty, that terrible extinguisher, I went ahead,
persisted, facing my difficulties, until the indomitable bump ended by
shedding its scanty contents. Yes, they were very scanty, yet possibly
of some value, if circumstances had come to their assistance. I was a
born animalist. Why and how? No reply.

We thus have, all of us, in different directions and in a greater
or lesser degree, characteristics that brand us with a special mark,
characteristics of an unfathomable origin. They exist because they
exist; and that is all that any one can say. The gift is not handed
down: the man of talent has a fool for a son. Nor is it acquired; but it
is improved by practice. He who has not the germ of it in his veins will
never possess it, in spite of all the pains of a hothouse education.

That to which we give the name of instinct when speaking of animals is
something similar to genius. It is, in both cases, a peak that rises
above the ordinary level. But instinct is handed down, unchanged and
undiminished, throughout the sequence of a species; it is permanent
and general and in this it differs greatly from genius, which is not
transmissible and changes in different cases. Instinct is the inviolable
heritage of the family and falls to one and all, without distinction.
Here the difference ends. Independent of similarity of structure, it
breaks out like genius, here or elsewhere, for no perceptible reason.
Nothing causes it to be foreseen, nothing in the organization explains
it. If cross-examined on this point, the Dung beetles and the rest, each
with his own peculiar talent, would answer, were we able to understand
them: 'Instinct is the animal's genius.'




CHAPTER VII. THE POND

The pond, the delight of my early childhood, is still a sight whereof my
old eyes never tire. What animation in that verdant world! On the warm
mud of the edges, the frog's little tadpole basks and frisks in its
black legions; down in the water, the orange-bellied newt steers his
way slowly with the broad rudder of his flat tail; among the reeds are
stationed the flotillas of the caddis worms, half protruding from their
tubes, which are now a tiny bit of stick and again a turret of little
shells.

In the deep places, the water beetle dives, carrying with him his
reserves of breath: an air bubble at the tip of the wing cases and,
under the chest, a film of gas that gleams like a silver breastplate;
on the surface, the ballet of those shimmering pearls, the whirligigs,
turns and twists about; hard by there skims the unsubmersible troop of
the pond skaters, who glide along with side strokes similar to those
which the cobbler makes when sewing.

Here are the water boatmen, who swim on their backs with two oars spread
cross-wise, and the flat water scorpions; here, squalidly clad in mud,
is the grub of the largest of our dragonflies, so curious because of its
manner of progression: it fills its hinder parts, a yawning funnel, with
water, spurts it out again and advances just so far as the recoil of its
hydraulic cannon.

The mollusks abound, a peaceful tribe. At the bottom, the plump river
snails discreetly raise their lid, opening ever so little the shutters
of their dwelling; on the level of the water, in the glades of the
aquatic garden, the pond snails--Physa, Limnaea and Planorbis--take
the air. Dark leeches writhe upon their prey, a chunk of earthworm;
thousands of tiny, reddish grubs, future mosquitoes, go spinning around
and twist and curve like so many graceful dolphins.

Yes, a stagnant pool, though but a few feet wide, hatched by the sun, is
an immense world, an inexhaustible mine of observation to the studious
man and a marvel to the child who, tired of his paper boat, diverts his
eyes and thoughts a little with what is happening in the water. Let me
tell what I remember of my first pond, at a time when ideas began to
dawn in my seven-year-old brain.

How shall a man earn his living in my poor native village, with its
inclement weather and its niggardly soil? The owner of a few acres of
grazing land rears sheep. In the best parts, he scrapes the soil with
the swing plow; he flattens it into terraces banked by walls of broken
stones. Pannierfuls of dung are carried up on donkey-back from the
cowshed. Then, in due season, comes the excellent potato, which, boiled
and served hot in a basket of plaited straw, is the chief stand-by in
winter.

Should the crop exceed the needs of the household, the surplus goes to
feed a pig, that precious beast, a treasure of bacon and ham. The ewes
supply butter and curds; the garden boasts cabbages, turnips and even a
few hives in a sheltered corner. With wealth like that one can look fate
in the face.

But we, we have nothing, nothing but the little house inherited by my
mother and its adjoining patch of garden. The meager resources of the
family are coming to an end. It is time to see to it and that quickly.
What is to be done? That is the stern question which father and mother
sat debating one evening.

Hop-o'-my-Thumb, hiding under the woodcutter's stool, listened to his
parents overcome by want. I also, pretending to sleep, with my elbows on
the table, listen not to blood curdling designs, but to grand plans that
set my heart rejoicing. This is how the matter stands: at the bottom of
the village, near the church, at the spot where the water of the large
roofed spring escapes from its underground weir and joins the brook in
the valley, an enterprising man, back from the war, has set up a small
tallow factory. He sells the scrapings of his pans, the burnt fat,
reeking of candle grease, at a low price. He proclaims these wares to be
excellent for fattening ducks.

"Suppose we bred some ducks," says mother. "They sell very well in town.
Henri would mind them and take them down to the brook."

"Very well," says father, "let's breed some ducks. There may be
difficulties in the way; but we'll have a try."

That night, I had dreams of paradise: I was with my ducklings, clad in
their yellow suits; I took them to the pond, I watched them have their
bath, I brought them back again, carrying the more tired ones in a
basket.

A month or two after, the little birds of my dreams were a reality.
There were twenty-four of them. They had been hatched by two hens, of
whom one, the big, black one, was an inmate of the house, while the
other was borrowed from a neighbor.

To bring them up, the former is sufficient, so careful is she of her
adopted family. At first, everything goes perfectly: a tub with two
fingers' depth of water serves as a pond. On sunny days, the ducklings
bathe in it under the anxious eye of the hen.

A fortnight later, the tub is no longer enough. It contains neither
cresses crammed with tiny shellfish nor worms and tadpoles, dainty
morsels both. The time has come for dives and hunts amid the tangle of
the water weeds; and for us the day of trouble has also come. True, the
miller, down by the brook, has fine ducks, easy and cheap to bring up;
the tallow smelter, who has extolled his burnt fat so loudly, has some
as well, for he has the advantage of the waste water from the spring at
the bottom of the village; but how are we, right up there, at the top,
to procure aquatic sports for our broods? In summer, we have hardly
water to drink!

Near the house, in a freestone recess, a scanty source trickles into a
basin made in the rock.. Four or five families have, like ourselves,
to draw their water there with copper pails. By the time that the
schoolmaster's donkey has slaked her thirst and the neighbors have
taken their provision for the day, the basin is dry. We have to wait for
four-and-twenty hours for it to fill. No, this is not the hole in which
the ducks would delight nor indeed in which they would be tolerated.

There remains the brook. To go down to it with the troop of ducklings is
fraught with danger. On the way through the village, we might meet cats,
bold ravishers of small poultry; some surly mongrel might frighten and
scatter the little band; and it would be a hard puzzle to collect it in
its entirety. We must avoid the traffic and take refuge in peaceful and
sequestered spots.

On the hills, the path that climbs behind the chateau soon takes a
sudden turn and widens into a small plain beside the meadows. It skirts
a rocky slope whence trickles, level with the ground, a streamlet,
forming a pond of some size. Here profound solitude reigns all day long.
The ducklings will be well off; and the journey can be made in peace by
a deserted footpath.

You, little man, shall take them to that delectable spot. What a day
it was that marked my first appearance as a herdsman of ducks! Why
must there be a jar to the even tenor of such joys? The too frequent
encounter of my tender skin with the hard ground had given me a large
and painful blister on the heel. Had I wanted to put on the shoes stowed
away in the cupboard for Sundays and holidays, I could not. There was
nothing for it but to go barefoot over the broken stones, dragging my
leg and carrying high the injured heel.

Let us make a start, hobbling along, switch in hand, behind the ducks.
They too, poor little things, have sensitive soles to their feet; they
limp, they quack with fatigue. They would refuse to go any farther if I
did not, from time to time, call a halt under the shelter of an ash.

We are there at last. The place could not be better for my birdlets;
shallow, tepid water, interspersed with muddy knolls and green eyots.
The diversions of the bath begin forthwith. The ducklings clap their
beaks and rummage here, there and everywhere; they sift each mouthful,
rejecting the clear water and retaining the good bits. In the deeper
parts, they point their sterns into the air and stick their heads under
water. They are happy; and it is a blessed thing to see them at work. We
will let them be. It is my turn to enjoy the pond.

What is this? On the mud lie some loose, knotted, soot-colored cords.
One could take them for threads of wool like those which you pull out of
an old ravelly stocking. Can some shepherdess, knitting a black sock and
finding her work turn out badly, have begun all over again and, in her
impatience, have thrown down the wool with all the dropped stitches? It
really looks like it.

I take up one of those cords in my hand. It is sticky and extremely
slack; the thing slips through the fingers before they can catch hold of
it. A few of the knots burst and shed their contents. What comes out is
a black globule, the size of a pin's head, followed by a flat tail. I
recognize, on a very small scale, a familiar object: the tadpole, the
frog's baby. I have seen enough. Let us leave the knotted cords alone.

The next creatures please me better. They spin round on the surface of
the water and their black backs gleam in the sun. If I lift a hand to
seize them, that moment they disappear, I know not where. It's a pity: I
should have much liked to see them closer and to make them wriggle in a
little bowl which I should have put ready for them.

Let us look at the bottom of the water, pulling aside those bunches of
green string whence beads of air are rising and gathering into foam.
There is something of everything underneath. I see pretty shells with
compact whorls, flat as beans; I notice little worms carrying tufts and
feathers; I make out some with flabby fins constantly flapping on their
backs. What are they all doing there? What are their names? I do not
know. And I stare at them for ever so long, held by the incomprehensible
mystery of the waters.

At the place where the pond dribbles into the adjoining field are some
alder trees; and here I make a glorious find. It is a scarab--not a
very large one, oh no! He is smaller than a cherry-stone, but of an
unutterable blue. The angels in paradise must wear dresses of that
color. I put the glorious one inside an empty snail-shell, which I plug
up with a leaf. I shall admire that living jewel at my leisure, when I
get back. Other distractions summon me away.

The spring that feeds the pond trickles from the rock, cold and clear.
The water first collects into a cup, the size of the hollow of one's two
hands, and then runs over in a stream. These falls call for a mill: that
goes without saying. Two bits of straw, artistically crossed upon
an axis, provide the machinery; some flat stones set on edge afford
supports. It is a great success: the mill turns admirably. My triumph
would be complete, could I but share it. For want of other playmates, I
invite the ducks.

Everything palls in this poor world of ours, even a mill made of two
straws. Let us think of something else: let us contrive a dam to hold
back the waters and form a pool. There is no lack of stones for the
brickwork. I pick the most suitable; I break the larger ones. And, while
collecting these blocks, suddenly I forget all about the dam which I
meant to build.

On one of the broken stones, in a cavity large enough for me to put my
fist in, something gleams like glass. The hollow is lined with facets
gathered in sixes which flash and glitter in the sun. I have seen
something like this in church, on the great saints' days, when the light
of the candles in the big chandelier kindles the stars in its hanging
crystal.

We children, lying, in summer, on the straw of the threshing floor,
have told one another stories of the treasures which a dragon guards
underground. Those treasures now return to my mind: the names of
precious stones ring out uncertainly but gloriously in my memory. I
think of the king's crown, of the princesses' necklaces. In breaking
stones, can I have found, but on a much richer scale, the thing that
shines quite small in my mother's ring? I want more such.

The dragon of the subterranean treasures treats me generously. He gives
me his diamonds in such quantities that soon I possess a heap of broken
stones sparkling with magnificent clusters. He does more: he gives me
his gold. The trickle of water from the rock falls on a bed of fine sand
which it swirls into bubbles. If I bent over towards the light, I see
something like gold filings whirling where the fall touches the bottom.
Is it really the famous metal of which twenty-franc pieces, so rare with
us at home, are made? One would think so, from the glitter.

I take a pinch of sand and place it in my palm. The brilliant particles
are numerous, but so small that I have to pick them up with a straw
moistened in my mouth. Let us drop this: they are too tiny and too
bothersome to collect. The big, valuable lumps must be farther on,
in the thickness of the rock. We'll come back later; we'll blast the
mountain.

I break more stones. Oh, what a queer thing has just come loose, all in
one piece! It is turned spiral-wise, like certain flat snails that come
out of the cracks of old walls in rainy weather. With its gnarled sides,
it looks like a little ram's horn. Shell or horn, it is very curious.
How do things like that find their way into the stone?

Treasures and curiosities make my pockets bulge with pebbles. It is
late and the little ducklings have had all they want to eat. Come
along, youngsters, let's go home. My blistered heel is forgotten in
my excitement. The walk back is a delight. A voice sings in my ear,
an untranslatable voice, softer than any language and bewildering as a
dream. It speaks to me for the first time of the mysteries of the pond;
it glorifies the heavenly insect which I hear moving in the empty snail
shell, its temporary cage; it whispers the secrets of the rock, the gold
filings, the faceted jewels, the ram's horn turned to stone.

Poor simpleton, smother your joy! I arrive. My parents catch sight of
my bulging pockets, with their disgraceful load of stones. The cloth has
given way under the rough and heavy burden.

"You rascal!" says father, at sight of the damage. "I send you to mind
the ducks and you amuse yourself picking up stones, as though there
weren't enough of them all round the house! Make haste and throw them
away!"

Broken hearted, I obey. Diamonds, gold dust, petrified ram's horn,
heavenly beetle are all flung on a rubbish heap outside the door.

Mother bewails her lot: "A nice thing, bringing up children to see them
turn out so badly! You'll bring me to my grave. Green stuff I don't
mind: it does for the rabbits. But stones, which ruin your pockets;
poisonous animals, which'll sting your hand: what good are they to you,
silly? There's no doubt about it: some one has thrown a spell over you!"

Yes, my poor mother, you were right, in your simplicity: a spell had
been cast upon me; I admit it today. When it is hard enough to earn
one's bit of bread, does not improving one's mind but render one more
meet for suffering? Of what avail is the torment of learning to the
derelicts of life?

A deal better off am I, at this late hour, dogged by poverty and knowing
that the diamonds of the duck pool were rock crystal, the gold dust
mica, the stone horn an Ammonite and the sky-blue beetle a Hoplia! We
poor men would do better to mistrust the joys of knowledge: let us dig
our furrow in the fields of the commonplace, flee the temptations of the
pond, mind our ducks and leave to others, more favored by fortune, the
job of explaining the world's mechanism, if the spirit moves them.

And yet no! Alone among living creatures, man has the thirst for
knowledge; he alone pries into the mysteries of things. The least among
us will utter his whys and his wherefores, a fine pain unknown to
the brute beast. If these questionings come from us with greater
persistence, with a more imperious authority, if they divert us from
the quest of lucre, life's only object in the eyes of most men, does it
become us to complain? Let us be careful not to do so, for that would be
denying the best of all our gifts.

Let us strive, on the contrary, within the measure of our capacity,
to force a gleam of light from the vast unknown; let us examine and
question and, here and there, wrest a few shreds of truth. We shall sink
under the task; in the present ill ordered state of society, we shall
end, perhaps, in the workhouse. Let us go ahead for all that: our
consolation shall be that we have increased by one atom the general mass
of knowledge, the incomparable treasure of mankind.

As this modest lot has fallen to me, I will return to the pond,
notwithstanding the wise admonitions and the bitter tears which I once
owed to it. I will return to the pond, but not to that of the small
ducks, the pond aflower with illusions: those ponds do not occur twice
in a lifetime. For luck like that, you must be in all the new glory of
your first breeches and your first ideas.

Many another have I come upon since that distant time, ponds very much
richer and, moreover, explored with the ripened eye of experience.
Enthusiastically I searched them with the net, stirred up their mud,
ransacked their trailing weeds. None in my memories comes up to the
first, magnified in its delights and mortifications by the marvelous
perspective of the years.

Nor would any of them suit my plans of today. Their world is too vast. I
should lose myself in their immensities, where life swarms freely in the
sun. Like the ocean, they are infinite in their fruitfulness. And then
any assiduous watching, undisturbed by passers by, is an impossibility
on the public way. What I want is a pond on an extremely reduced
scale, sparingly stocked in my own fashion an artificial pond standing
permanently on my study table.

A louis has been overlooked in a corner of the drawer. I can spend it
without seriously jeopardizing the domestic balance. Let me make this
gift to science, who, I fear, will be none too much obliged to me. A
gorgeous equipment may be all very well for laboratories wherein the
cells and fibers of the dead are consulted at great expense; but such
magnificence is of doubtful utility when we have to study the actions
of the living. It is the humble makeshift, of no value, that stumbles on
the secrets of life.

What did the best results of my studies of instinct cost me? Nothing
but time and, above all, patience. My extravagant expenditure of
twenty francs, therefore, will be a risky speculation if devoted to the
purchase of an apparatus of study. It will bring me in nothing in the
way of fresh views, of that I am convinced. However, let us try.

The blacksmith makes me the framework of a cage out of a few iron rods.
The joiner, who is also a glazier on occasion--for, in my village, you
have to be a Jack-of-all-trades if you would make both ends meet--sets
the framework on a wooden base and supplies it with a movable board as
a lid; he fixes thick panes of glass in the four sides. Behold the
apparatus, complete, with a bottom of tarred sheet iron and a trap to
let the water out.

The makers express themselves satisfied with their work, a singular
novelty in their respective shops, where many an inquisitive caller has
wondered what use I intend to make of my little glass trough. The thing
creates a certain stir. Some insist that it is meant to hold my supplies
of oil and to take the place of the receptacle in general use in
our parts, the urn dug out of a block of stone. What would those
utilitarians have thought of my crazy mind, had they known that my
costly gear would merely serve to let me watch some wretched animals
kicking about in the water!

Smith and glazier are content with their work. I myself am pleased. For
all its rustic air, the apparatus does not lack elegance. It looks very
well, standing on a little table in front of a window visited by the
sun for the greater part of the day. Its holding capacity is some ten
or eleven gallons. What shall we call it? An aquarium? No, that would be
too pretentious and would, very unjustly, suggest the aquatic toy filled
with rock work, waterfalls and goldfish beloved of the dwellers in
suburbia. Let us preserve the gravity of serious things and not treat my
learned trough as though it were a drawing room futility. We will call
it the glass pond.

I furnish it with a heap of those limy incrustations wherewith certain
springs in the neighborhood cover the dead clump of rushes. It is light,
full of holes and gives a faint suggestion of a coral reef. Moreover,
it is covered with a short, green, velvety moss, a downy sward of
infinitesimal pond weed. I count on this modest vegetation to keep the
water in a reasonably wholesome state, without driving me to frequent
renewals which would disturb the work of my colonies. Sanitation and
quiet are the first conditions of success. Now the stocked pond will
not be long in filling itself with gases unfit to breathe, with putrid
effluvia and other animal refuse; it will become a sink in which life
will have killed life. Those dregs must disappear as soon as they are
formed, must be burnt and purified; and from their oxidized ruins there
must even rise a perfect life-giving gas, so that the water may retain
an unchangeable store of the breathable element. The plant effects this
purification in its sewage farm of green cells.

When the sun beats upon the glass pond, the work of the water weeds is
a sight to behold. The green-carpeted reef is lit up with an infinity
of scintillating points and assumes the appearance of a fairy lawn
of velvet, studded with thousands of diamond pin's heads. From this
exquisite jewelry pearls break loose continuously and are at once
replaced by others in the generating casket; slowly they rise, like tiny
globes of light. They spread on every side. It is a constant display of
fireworks in the depths of the water.

Chemistry tells us that, thanks to its green matter and the stimulus of
the sun's rays, the weeds decompose the carbonic acid gas wherewith
the water is impregnated by the breathing of its inhabitants and the
corruption of the organic refuse; it retains the carbon, which is
wrought into fresh tissues; it exhales the oxygen in tiny bubbles. These
partly dissolve in the water and partly reach the surface, where their
froth supplies the atmosphere with an excess of breathable gas. The
dissolved portion keeps the colonists of the pond alive and causes the
unhealthy products to be oxidized and disappear.

Old hand though I be, I take an interest in this trite marvel of a
bundle of weeds perpetuating hygienic principles in a stagnant pool;
I look with a delighted eye upon the inexhaustible spray of spreading
bubbles; I see in imagination the prehistoric times when seaweed, the
first-born of plants, produced the first atmosphere for living things
to breathe at the time when the silt of the continents was beginning to
emerge. What I see before my eyes, between the glass panes of my trough,
tells me the story of the planet surrounding itself with pure air.




CHAPTER VIII. THE CADDIS WORM

Whom shall I lodge in my glass trough, kept permanently wholesome by
the action of the water weeds? I shall keep caddis worms, those expert
dressers. Few of the self-clothing insects surpass them in ingenious
attire. The ponds in my neighborhood supply me with five or six species,
each possessing an art of its own. Today, but one of these shall receive
historical honors.

I obtain it from the muddy bottomed, stagnant pools crammed with small
reeds. As far as one can judge from the habitation merely, it should be,
according to the specialists, Limnophilus flavicornis, whose work has
earned for the whole corporation the pretty name of Phryganea, a Greek
term meaning a bit of wood, a stick. In a no less expressive fashion,
the Provencal peasant calls it lou portofais, lou porto-caneu. This is
the little grub that carries through the still waters a faggot of tiny
fragments fallen from the reeds.

Its sheath, a travelling house, is a composite and barbaric piece of
work, a megalithic pile wherein art, retires in favor of amorphous
strength. The materials are many and sundry, so much so that we might
imagine that we had the work of dissimilar builders before our eyes, if
frequent transitions did not tell us the contrary.

With the young ones, the novices, it starts with a sort of deep basket
in rustic wicker-work. The twigs employed present nearly always the same
characteristics and are none other than bits of small, stiff roots, long
steeped and peeled under water. The grub that has made a find of these
fibers saws them with its mandibles and cuts them into little straight
sticks, which it fixes one by one to the edge of its basket, always
crosswise, perpendicular to the axis of the work.

Picture a circle surrounded by a bristling mass of tangents, or rather a
polygon with its sides extended in all directions. On this assemblage
of straight lines we place repeated layers of others, without troubling
about similarity of position, thus obtaining a sort of ragged fascine,
whose sticks project on every side. Such is the bastion of the child
grub, an excellent system of defense, with its continuous pile of
spikes, but difficult to steer through the tangle of aquatic plants.

Sooner or later, the worm forsakes this kind of caltrop which catches on
to everything. It was a basket maker, it now turns carpenter; it builds
with little beams and joists--that is to say, with round bits of
wood, browned by the water, often as wide as a thick straw and a
finger's-breadth long, more or less--taking them as chance supplies
them.

For the rest, there is something of everything in this rag bag: bits of
stubble, fag ends of rushes, scraps of plants, fragments of some tiny
twig or other, chips of wood, shreds of bark, largish grains, especially
the seeds of the yellow iris, which were red when they fell from their
capsules and are now black as jet.

The heterogeneous collection is piled up anyhow. Some pieces are fixed
lengthwise, others across, others aslant. There are angles in this
direction and angles in the other, resulting in sharp little turns and
twists; the big is mixed with the little, the correct rubs
shoulders with the shapeless. It is not an edifice, it is a frenzied
conglomeration. Sometimes, a fine disorder is an effect of art. This
is not so here: the work of the Caddis worm is not a masterpiece worth
signing.

And this mad heaping up follows straight upon the regular basket work
of the start. The young grub's fascine did not lack a certain elegance,
with its dainty laths, all stacked crosswise, methodically; and, lo
and behold, the builder, grown larger, more experienced and, one would
think, more skilful, abandons the orderly plan to adopt another which
is wild and incoherent! There is no transition stage between the two
systems. The extravagant pile rises abruptly from the original basket.
But that we often find the two kinds of work placed one above the other,
we would not dare ascribe to them a common origin. The fact of their
being joined together is the only thing that makes them one, in spite of
the incongruity.

But the two storeys do not last indefinitely. When the worm has grown
slightly and is housed to its satisfaction in a heap of joists, it
abandons the basket of its childhood, which has become too narrow and is
now a troublesome burden. It cuts through its sheath, lops off and lets
go the stern, the original work. When moving to a higher and roomier
flat, it understands how to lighten its portable house by breaking off
a part of it. All that remains is the upper floor, which is enlarged
at the aperture, as and when required, by the same architecture of
disordered beams.

Side by side with these cases, which are mere ugly faggots, we find
others just as often of exquisite beauty and composed entirely of tiny
shells. Do they come from the same workshop? It takes very convincing
proofs to make us believe this. Here is order with its charm, there
disorder with its hideousness; on the one hand a dainty mosaic of
shells, on the other a clumsy heap of sticks. And yet it is all produced
by the same laborer.

Proofs abound. On some case which offends the eye with the want of
arrangement in its bits of wood, patches are apt to appear which are
quite regular and made of shells; in the same way, it is not unusual to
see a horrid tangle of joists braced to a masterpiece of shell work.
One feels a certain annoyance at seeing the pretty sheath so barbarously
spoilt.

This mixed construction tells us that the rustic stacker of wooden beams
excels, when occasion offers, in making elegant shell pavements and that
it practices rough carpentry and delicate mosaic work indifferently.
In the latter instance, the scabbard is made, above all, of Planorbes,
selected among the smaller of these pond snails and laid flat. Without
being scrupulously regular, the work, at its best, does not lack merit.
The pretty, close-whorled spirals, placed one against the other on the
same level, have a very pleasing general effect. No pilgrim returning
from Santiago de Compostella ever slung handsomer tippet from his
shoulders.

But only too often the caddis worm dashes ahead, regardless of
proportion. The big is joined to the small, the exaggerated suddenly
stands out, to the great detriment of order. Side by side with tiny
Planorbes, each at most the size of a lentil, others are fixed as large
as one's fingernail; and these cannot possibly be fitted in correctly.
They overlap the regular parts and spoil their finish.

To crown the disorder, the caddis worm adds to the flat spirals any dead
shell that comes handy, without distinction of species, provided it be
not excessively large. I notice, in its collection of bric-a-brac, the
Physa, the Paludina, the Limnaea, the Amber snail [all pond snails] and
even the Pisidium [a bivalve], that little twin-valved casket.

Land shells, swept into the ditches by the rains after the inmate's
death, are accepted quite as readily. In the work made of the Mollusk's
cast-off clothing, I find encrusted the spindle shell of the Clausilium,
the key shell of the pupa, the spiral of the smaller Helix, the yawning
volute of the Vitrina, or glass snail, the turret shell of the Bulimus
[all land snails], denizens all of the fields. In short, the caddis worm
builds with more or less everything that comes from the plant or
the dead mollusk. Among the diversified refuse of the pond, the only
materials rejected are those of a gravelly nature. Stone and pebble are
excluded from the building with a care that is very rarely absent. This
is a question of hydrostatics to which we will return presently. For the
moment, let us try to follow the construction of the scabbard.

In a tumbler small enough to allow of easy and precise observation, I
install three or four caddis worms, extracted this moment from their
sheaths with every possible precaution. After a number of attempts which
have at last shown me the right road, I place at their disposal two
kinds of materials, possessing opposite qualities; the supple and the
firm, the soft and the hard. On the one hand, we have a live aquatic
plant, such as watercress, for instance, or ombrelle d'eau, having
at its base a tufty bunch of fine white roots about as thick as a
horsehair. In these soft tresses, the caddis worm, which observes a
vegetarian diet, will find at one and the same time the wherewithal to
build and eat. On the other hand, we have a little faggot of bits of
wood, very dry, equal in length and each possessing the thickness of
a good sized pin. The two sorts of building material lie side by side,
mingling their threads and sticks. The animal can make its choice from
the lump.

A few hours later, having recovered from the shock of losing its sheath,
the caddis worm sets to work to manufacture a new one. It settles across
a bunch of tangled rootlets, which are brought together by the builder's
legs and more or less arranged by the undulating movement of the hinder
part. This gives a kind of incoherent and ill defined suspended belt, a
narrow hammock with a number of loose catches; for the various bits of
which it is made up are respected by the teeth and extended from place
to place beyond the main cords of the roots. Here, without much trouble,
is the support, suitably fixed by natural moorings. A few threads of
silk, casually distributed, make the frail combination a trifle more
secure.

And now to the work of building. Supported by the suspended belt, the
caddis worm stretches itself and thrusts out its middle legs, which,
being longer than the others, are the grapnels intended to seize things
at a distance. It meets a bit of root, fastens on to it, climbs above
the point gripped, as though it were measuring the piece to a requisite
length, and then, with the fine scissors of its mandibles, cuts the
string.

There is at once a brief recoil, which brings the animal back to the
level of the hammock. The bit detached lies across the worm's chest,
held in its forelegs, which turn it, twist it, wave it about, lay it
down, lift it up, as though trying for the best position. Those forelegs
make admirably dexterous arms. Being less long than the other two
pairs, they are brought into immediate contact with those primordial
implements, the mandibles and the spinneret. Their delicate terminal
jointing, with a movable and crooked finger, is the caddis worm's
equivalent of our hand. They are the working legs. The second pair,
which are exceptionally long, serve to spear distant materials and to
give the worker a firm footing when measuring a piece and cutting it
with the pliers. Lastly, the hind legs, of medium length, afford a
support when the others are busy.

The caddis worm, I was saying, with the piece which it has removed
held crosswise to its chest, retreats a little way along its suspended
hammock until the spinneret is level with the support furnished by the
close tangle of rootlets. With a quick movement, it shifts its burden,
gets it as nearly by the middle as it can, so that the two ends stick
out equally on either side, and chooses the spot to place it, whereupon
the spinneret sets to work at once, while the little fore legs hold the
scrap of root motionless in its transversal position. The soldering
is effected with a touch of silk in the middle of the bit and along a
certain distance to the right and left, as far as the bending of the
head permits.

Without delay, other sticks are speared in like manner at a distance,
cut off and placed in position. As the immediate neighborhood is
stripped, the material is gathered at a yet greater distance and the
caddis worm bends even farther from its support, which now holds only
its last few segments. It is a curious gymnastic display, that of this
soft, hanging spine turning and swaying, while the grapnels feel in
every direction for a thread.

All this labor results in a sort of casing of little white cords.
The work lacks firmness and regularity. Nevertheless, judging by the
builder's methods, I can see that the building would not be devoid
of merit if the materials gave it a better chance. The caddis worm
estimates the size of its pieces very fairly; it cuts them all to nearly
the same length; it always arranges them crosswise on the margin of the
case; it fixes them by the middle.

Nor is this all: the manner of working helps the general arrangement
considerably. When the bricklayer is building the narrow shaft of a
factory chimney, he stands in the center of his turret and turns round
and round while gradually laying new rows. The caddis worm acts in the
same way. It twists round in its sheath; it adopts without inconvenience
whatever position it pleases, so as to bring its spinneret full face
with the point to be gummed. There is no straining of the neck to left
or right, no throwing back of the head to reach points behind.
The animal has constantly before it, within the exact range of its
implements, the place at which the bit is to be fixed. When the piece
is soldered, the worm turns a little aside, to a length equal to that of
the last soldering, and here, along an extent which hardly ever varies,
an extent determined by the swing which its head is able to give, it
fixes the next piece.

These several conditions ought to result in a geometrically ordered
dwelling, having a regular polygon as an opening. Then how comes it that
the cylinder of bits of root is so confused, so clumsily fashioned? The
reason is this: the worker possesses talent, but the materials do not
lend themselves to accurate work. The rootlets supply stumps of very
uneven shape and thickness. They include big and small ones, straight
and bent, simple and ramified. To combine all these dissimilar pieces
into an orderly whole is hardly possible, all the more so as the caddis
worm does not appear to attach very much importance to its cylinder,
which is a temporary work, hurriedly constructed to afford a speedy
shelter. Matters are urgent; and very soft fibers, clipped with a bite
of the mandibles, are more quickly gathered and more easily put together
than joists, which require the patient work of the saw. The inaccurate
cylinder, in short, held in position by numerous guy ropes, is a base
upon which a solid and definite structure will rise before long. Soon,
the original work will crumble to ruins and disappear, whereas the new
one, a permanent structure, will even outlast the owner.

The insects reared in a tumbler show yet another method of building the
first dwelling. This time, the caddis worm is given a few very leafy
stalks of pond weed (Potamogeton densum) and a bundle of small dry
twigs. It perches on a leaf, which the nippers of the mandibles cut half
across. The portion left untouched will act as a lanyard and give the
necessary steadiness to the early operations.

From an adjoining leaf a section is cut out entirely, an angular and
good sized piece. There is plenty of material and no need for economy.
The piece is soldered with silk to the strip which was not wholly cut
off. The result of three or four similar operations is to surround
the Caddis worm with a conical bag, whose wide mouth is scalloped with
pointed and very irregular notches. The work of the nippers continues;
fresh pieces are fixed, from one to another, inside the funnel, not far
from the edge, so that the bag lengthens, tapers and ends by wrapping
the animal in a light and floating drapery.

Thus clad for the time being, either in the fine silk of the pond weed
or in the linsey-woolsey supplied by the roots of the watercress, the
caddis worm begins to think of building a more solid sheath. The present
casing will serve as a foundation for the stronger building. But the
necessary materials are seldom near at hand: you have to go and fetch
them, you have to move your position, an effort which has been avoided
until now. With this object, the caddis worm cuts its moorings, that
is to say, the rootlets which keep the cylinder fixed, or else the
half-severed leaf of pond weed on which the cone-shaped bag has come
into being.

The worm is now free. The smallness of the artificial pond, the tumbler,
soon brings it into touch with what it is seeking. This is a little
faggot of dry twigs, which I have selected of equal length and of slight
thickness. Displaying greater care than it did when treating the slender
roots, the carpenter measures out the requisite length on the joist. The
distance to which it has to extend its body in order to reach the point
where the break will be made tells it pretty accurately what length of
stick it wants.

The piece is patiently sawn off with the mandibles; it is next taken in
the fore legs and held crosswise below the neck. The backward movement
which brings the caddis worm home also brings the bit of twig to the
edge of the tube. Thereupon, the methods employed in working with the
scraps of root are renewed in precisely the same manner. The sticks are
scaffolded to the regulation height, all alike in length, amply soldered
in the middle and free at either end.

With the picked materials provided, the carpenter has turned out a work
of some elegance. The joists are all arranged crosswise, because
this way is the handiest for carrying the sticks and putting them in
position; they are fixed by the middle, because the two arms that hold
the stick while the spinneret does its work require an equal grasp
on either side; each soldering covers a length which is seen to be
practically invariable, because it is equal to the width described by
the head in bending first to this side and then to that when the silk
is emitted; the whole assumes a polygonal shape, not far removed from
a rectilinear pentagon, because, between laying one piece and the next,
the caddis worm turns by the width of an arc corresponding with the
length of a soldering. The regularity of the method produces the
regularity of the work; but it is essential, of course, that the
materials should lend themselves to precise coordination.

In its natural pond, the caddis worm does not often have at its disposal
the picked joists which I give it in the tumbler. It comes across
something of everything; and that something of everything it employs as
it finds it. Bits of wood, large seeds, empty shells, stubble stalks,
shapeless fragments are used in the building for better or for worse,
just as they occur, without being trimmed by the saw; and this jumble,
the result of chance, results in a shockingly faulty structure.

The caddis worm does not forget its talents; but it lacks choice
pieces. Give it a proper timber yard and it at once reverts to correct
architecture, of which it carries the plans within itself. With small,
dead pond snails, all of the same size, it fashions a splendid patchwork
scabbard; with a cluster of slender roots, reduced by rotting to their
stiff, straight, woody axis, it manufactures pretty specimens of wicker
work which could serve as models to our basket makers.

Let us watch it at work when it is unable to use its favorite joist.
There is no point in giving it clumsy building stones; that would only
bring us back to the uncouth sheaths. Its propensity to make use of
soaked seeds, those of the iris, for instance, suggests that I might
try grains. I select rice, which, because of its hardness, will be
tantamount to wood and, because of its clean whiteness and its oval
shape, will lend itself to artistic masonry.

Obviously, my denuded caddis worms cannot start their work with bricks
of this kind. Where would they fix their first layer? They must have
a foundation, quick and easy to build. This is once more supplied by
a temporary cylinder of watercress roots. On this support follow the
grains of rice, which, grouped one atop the other, straight or slanting,
end by giving a magnificent turret of ivory. Next to the sheaths made
of tiny snail shells, this is the prettiest thing with which the caddis
worm's industry has furnished me. A fine sense of order has returned,
because the materials, regular and of identical character, have
cooperated with the correct method of the worker.

The two demonstrations are enough. Sticks and grains of rice make it
plain that the caddis worm is not the bungler that one would expect from
the monstrous buildings in the pond. Those Cyclopean piles, those mad
conglomerations, are the inevitable results of chance finds, which are
used for the best because there is no choice. The water carpenter has
an art of its own, has method and rules of symmetry. When well served
by fortune, it is quite able to turn out good work; when ill-served, it
acts like others: the work which it turns out is bad. Poverty makes for
ugliness.

There is another matter wherein the caddis worm deserves our attention.
With a perseverance which repeated trials do not tire, it makes itself
a new tube when I strip it. This is opposed to the habits of the
generality of insects, which do not recommence the thing once done, but
simply continue it according to the usual rules, taking no account
of the ruined or vanished portions. The caddis worm is a striking
exception: it starts again. Whence does it derive this capacity?

I begin by learning that, given a sudden alarm, it readily leaves its
scabbard. When I go fishing for caddis worms, I put them in tin boxes,
containing no other moisture than that wherewith my catches are soaked.
I heap them up loosely, to avoid any grievous tumult and to fill the
space at my disposal as best I may. I take no further precaution. This
is enough to keep the caddis worms in good condition during the two or
three hours which I devote to fishing and to walking home.

On my return, I find that a number of them have left their houses. They
are swarming naked among the empty scabbards and those still occupied
by their inhabitants. It is a pitiful sight to see these evicted ones
dragging their bare abdomens and their frail respiratory threads over
the bristling sticks. There is no great harm done, however; and I empty
the whole lot into the glass pond.

Not one resumes possession of an unoccupied sheath. Perhaps it would
take them too long to find one of the exact size. They think it better
to abandon the old clouts and to manufacture cases new from top to
bottom. The process is a rapid one. By the next day, with the materials
wherein the glass trough abounds--bundles of twigs and tufts of
watercress--all the denuded worms have made themselves at least a
temporary home in the form of a tube of rootlets.

The lack of water, combined with the excitement of the crowding in the
boxes, has upset my captives greatly; and, scenting a grave peril,
they have made off hurriedly, doffing the cumbersome jacket, which is
difficult to carry. They have stripped themselves so as to flee with
greater ease. The alarm cannot have been due to me: there are not many
simpletons like myself who are interested in the affairs of the pond;
and the caddis worm has not been cautioned against their tricks. The
sudden desertion of the crib has certainly some other reason than man's
molestations.

I catch a glimpse of this reason, the real one. The glass pond was
originally occupied by a dozen Dytisci, or water beetles, whose diving
performances are so curious to watch. One day, meaning no harm and for
want of a better receptacle, I fling among them a couple of handfuls
of caddis worms. Blunderer that I am, what have I done! The corsairs,
hiding in the rugged corners of the rock work, at once perceive the
windfall. They rise to the surface with great strokes of their oars;
they hasten and fling themselves upon the crowd of carpenters. Each
pirate grabs a sheath by the middle and strives to rip it open by
tearing off shells and sticks. While this ferocious enucleation
continues with the object of reaching the dainty morsel contained
within, the caddis worm, close pressed, appears at the mouth of the
sheath, slips out and quickly decamps under the eyes of the Dytiscus,
who appears to notice nothing.

I have said before that the trade of killing can dispense with
intelligence. The brutal ripper of sheaths does not see the little white
sausage that slips between his legs, passes under his fangs and madly
flees. He continues to tear away the outer case and to tug at the silken
lining. When the breach is made, he is quite crestfallen at not finding
what he expected.

Poor fool! Your victim went out under your nose and you never saw it.
The worm has sunk to the bottom and taken refuge in the mysteries of the
rock work. If things were happening in the large expanse of a pond, it
is clear that, with their system of expeditious removals, most of the
lodgers would escape scot-free. Fleeing to a distance and recovering
from the sharp alarm, they would build themselves a new scabbard and all
would be over until the next attack, which would be baffled afresh by
the selfsame trick.

In my narrow trough, things take a more tragic turn. When the sheaths
are done for, when the caddis worms that are too slow in making off have
been eaten up, the Water beetles return to the rockery at the bottom.
Here, sooner or later, there are lamentable happenings. The naked
fugitives are discovered and, succulent morsels that they are, are
forthwith torn to pieces and devoured. Within twenty-four hours, not
one of my band of caddis worms is left alive. In order to continue my
studies, I had to lodge the water beetles elsewhere.

Under natural conditions, the caddis worm has its persecutors, the most
formidable of whom appears to be the Water beetle. When we consider
that, to thwart the brigand's attacks, it has invented the idea of
quitting its scabbard with all speed, its tactics are certainly most
appropriate; but, in that case, an exceptional condition becomes
obligatory, namely, the capacity for recommencing the work. This most
unusual gift of recommencing it possesses in a high measure. I am ready
to see its origin in the persecutions of the Dytiscus and other pirates.
Necessity is the mother of industry.

Certain caddis worms, of the Sericostoma and Leptocerus species, clothe
themselves in grains of sand and do not leave the bed of the stream. On
a clear bottom, swept by the current, they walk about from one bank of
verdure to the other and do not think of coming to the surface to float
and sail in the sunlight. The collectors of sticks and shells are
more highly privileged. They can remain on the level of the water
indefinitely, with no other support than their skiff, can rest in
unsubmersible flotillas and can even shift their place by working the
rudder.

To what do they owe this privilege? Are we to look upon the bundle of
sticks as a sort of raft whose density is less than that of the water?
Can the shells, which are always empty and able to contain a few bubbles
of air in their spiral, he floats? Can the big joists, which break in so
ugly a fashion the none too great regularity of the work, serve to buoy
up the over-heavy raft? In short, is the caddis worm versed in the
laws of equilibrium and does it choose its pieces, now lighter and now
heavier as the case may be, so as to constitute a whole that is
capable of floating? The following facts are a refutation of any such
hydrostatic calculations in the animal.

I remove a number of caddis worms from their sheaths and submit these,
as they are, to the test of water. Whether formed wholly of fibrous
remnants or of mixed materials, not one of them floats. The scabbards
made of shells go to the bottom with the swiftness of a bit of gravel;
the others sink gently. I experiment with the separate materials one
by one. No shell remains on the surface, not even among the Planorbes,
which a many-whorled spiral ought, one would think, to keep afloat.
The fibrous remnants must be divided into two categories. The first,
darkened by time and soaked with moisture, sink to the bottom. These are
the most plentiful. The second, considerably fewer in number, of more
recent date and less saturated with water, float very well. The general
result is immersion, as in the case of the intact scabbards. I may add
that the animal, when removed from its tube, is also unable to float.

Then how does the caddis worm manage to remain on the surface without
the support of the grasses, considering that itself and its sheath are
both heavier than water? Its secret is soon revealed. I place a few high
and dry on a sheet of blotting paper, which will absorb the excess
of liquid unfavorable to successful observation. Outside its natural
environment, the animal moves about violently and restlessly. With its
body half out of the scabbard, this time composed entirely of fibrous
matter, it clutches with its feet at the supporting plane. Then,
contracting itself, it draws the scabbard towards it, half-raising it
and sometimes even making it assume a vertical position. Even so do the
Bulimi move along, lifting their shell as they complete each crawling
step.

After a couple of minutes in the free air, I replace the caddis worm
in the water. This time, it floats, but like a cylinder with too much
weight below. The sheath remains vertical, with its hinder orifice level
with the water. Soon, an air bubble escapes from the orifice. Deprived
of this buoy, the skiff at once goes down.

The result is the same with the caddis worms in shell casings. At first,
they float, straight up on end, and then dip under and sink, faster
than the others, after sending out an air bubble or two through the back
window.

That is enough: the secret is out. When cased in wood or in shells, the
caddis worms, which are always heavier than water, are able to keep
on the surface by means of a temporary air balloon which decreases the
density of the whole structure.

This apparatus works in the simplest manner. Consider the rear of
the sheath. It is truncated, wide open and supplied with a membranous
partition, the work of the spinneret. A round hole occupies the center
of this screen. Beyond it lies the interior of the scabbard, which is
smoothly lined and wadded with satin, however rough the exterior may be.
Armed at the stern with two hooks which bite into the silky lining,
the animal is able to move backwards and forwards at will inside the
cylinder, to fix its grapnels at whatever point it pleases and thus to
keep a hold on the cylinder while the six legs and the fore part are
outside.

When at rest, the body remains indoors entirely and the grub occupies
the whole of the tube. But let it contract ever so little towards the
front, or, better still, let it stick out a part of its body: a vacuum
is formed behind this sort of piston, which may be compared with that of
a pump. Thanks to the rear window, a valve without a plug, this vacuum
at once fills, thus renewing the aerated water around the gills, a soft
fleece of hairs distributed over the back and belly.

The piston stroke affects only the work of breathing; it does not alter
the density, makes hardly any change in that which is heavier than
water. To lighten the weight, the caddis worm must first rise to the
surface. With this object, it scales the grasses of one support after
the other; it clambers up, sticking to its purpose in spite of the
drawback of its faggot dragging through the tangle. When it has reached
the goal, it lifts the rear end a little above the water and gives a
stroke of the piston. The vacuum thus obtained fills with air. That is
enough: skiff and boatman are in a position to float. The now useless
support of the grasses is abandoned. The time has come for evolutions on
the surface, in the glad sunlight.

The caddis worm possesses no great talent as a navigator. To turn round,
to tack about, to shift its place slightly by a backward movement is all
that it can do; and even that it does very clumsily. The front part
of the body, sticking out of the case, acts as a rudder. Three or four
times over, it rises abruptly, bends, comes down again and strikes the
water. These paddle strokes, repeated at intervals, carry the unskilled
oarsman to fresh latitudes. It becomes a voyage on the right seas when
the crossing measures a hand's breadth.

However, tacking on the surface of the water affords the caddis worm
no pleasure. It prefers to twitter in one spot, to remain stationary in
flotillas. When the time comes to return to the quiet of the mud bed
at the bottom, the animal, having had enough of the sun, draws itself
wholly into its sheath again and, with a piston stroke, expels the air
from the back room. The normal density is restored and it sinks slowly
to the bottom.

We see, therefore, that the caddis worm has not to trouble about
hydrostatics when building its scabbard. In spite of the incongruity of
its work, in which the bulky and less dense portions seem to balance
the more solid, concentrated part, it is not called upon to contrive
an equipoise between the light and the heavy. It has other artifices
whereby to rise to the surface, to float and to dive down again. The
ascent is made by the ladder of the water weeds. The average density of
the sheath is of no importance, so long as the burden to be dragged is
not beyond the animal's strength. Besides, the weight of the load is
greatly reduced when moved in the water.

The admission of a bubble of air into the back chamber, which the animal
ceases to occupy, allow it, without further to-do, to remain for an
indefinite period on the surface. To dive down again, the caddis worm
has only to retreat entirely into its sheath. The air is driven out; and
the canoe, resuming its mean density, a greater specific density than
that of water, goes under at once and descends of its own accord.

There is, therefore, no choice of materials on the builder's part, no
nice calculation of equilibrium, save for one condition, that no stony
matter be admitted. That apart, everything serves, large and small,
joist and shell, seed and billet. Built up at haphazard, all these
things make an impregnable wall. One point alone is essential: the
weight of the whole must slightly exceed that of the water displaced; if
not, there could be no steadiness at the bottom of the pond, without
a perpetual anchorage struggling against the pull of the water. In the
same manner, quick submersion would be impossible at times when the
surface became dangerous and the frightened creature wanted to leave it.

Nor does this important heavier-than-water question call for lucid
discernment, seeing that almost the whole of the sheath is constructed
at the bottom of the pond, whither all the materials picked up at
random, having descended once before, are likely to descend again. In
the sheaths, the parts capable of floating are very rare. Without taking
their specific levity into account, simply so as not to remain idle, the
caddis worm fixed them to its bundle when sporting on the surface of the
water.

We have our submarines, in which hydraulic ingenuity displays its
highest resources. The caddis worms have theirs, which emerge, float on
the surface, dip down and even stop at mid-depth by releasing gradually
their surplus air. And this apparatus, so perfectly balanced, so
skilful, requires no knowledge on the part of its constructor. It comes
into being of itself, in accordance with the plans of the universal
harmony of things.




CHAPTER IX. THE GREENBOTTLES

I have wished for a few things in my life, none of them capable of
interfering with the common weal. I have longed to possess a pond,
screened from the indiscretion of the passers by, close to my house,
with clumps of rushes and patches of duckweed. Here, in my leisure
hours, in the shade of a willow, I should have meditated upon aquatic
life, a primitive life, easier than our own, simpler in its affections
and its brutalities. I should have watched the unalloyed happiness of
the mollusk, the frolics of the Whirligig, the figure-skating of the
Hydrometra [a water bug known as the Pond skater], the dives of the
Dytiscus beetle, the veering and tacking of the Notonecta [the water
boatman], who, lying on her back, rows with two long oars, while her
short forelegs, folded against her chest, wait to grab the coming prey.
I should have studied the eggs of the Planorbis, a glairy nebula wherein
focuses of life are condensed even as suns are condensed in the nebulae
of the heavens. I should have admired the nascent creature that turns,
slowly turns in the orb of its egg and describes a volute, the draft,
perhaps, of the future shell. No planet circles round its center of
attraction with greater geometrical accuracy.

I should have brought back a few ideas from my frequent visits to the
pond. Fate decided otherwise: I was not to have my sheet of water. I
have tried the artificial pond, between four panes of glass. A poor
shift! Our laboratory aquariums are not even equal to the print left in
the mud by a mule's hoof, when once a shower has filled the humble basin
and life has stocked it with its marvels.

In spring, with the hawthorn in flower and the crickets at their
concerts, a second wish often came to me. Along the road, I light upon a
dead mole, a snake killed with a stone, victims both of human folly.
The mole was draining the soil and purging it of its vermin. Finding him
under his spade, the laborer broke his back for him and flung him over
the hedge. The snake, roused from her slumber by the soft warmth of
April, was coming into the sun to shed her skin and take on a new one.
Man catches sight of her: 'Ah, would you?' says he. 'See me do something
for which the world will thank me!'

And the harmless beast, our auxiliary in the terrible battle which
husbandry wages against the insect, has its head smashed in and dies.

The two corpses, already decomposing, have begun to smell. Whoever
approaches with eyes that do not see turns away his head and passes
on. The observer stops and lifts the remains with his foot; he looks. A
world is swarming underneath; life is eagerly consuming the dead. Let us
replace matters as they were and leave death's artisans to their task.
They are engaged in a most deserving work.

To know the habits of those creatures charged with the disappearance of
corpses, to see them busy at their work of disintegration, to follow
in detail the process of transmutation that makes the ruins of what has
lived return apace into life's treasure house: these are things that
long haunted my mind. I regretfully left the mole lying in the dust of
the road. I had to go, after a glance at the corpse and its harvesters.
It was not the place for philosophizing over a stench. What would people
say who passed and saw me!

And what will the reader himself say, if I invite him to that sight?
Surely, to busy one's self with those squalid sextons means soiling
one's eyes and mind? Not so, if you please! Within the domain of our
restless curiosity, two questions stand out above all others: the
question of the beginning and the question of the end. How does matter
unite in order to assume life? How does it separate when returning to
inertia? The pond, with its Planorbis eggs turning round and round,
would have given us a few data for the first problem; the Mole, going
bad under conditions not too repulsive, will tell us something about the
second: he will show us the working of the crucible wherein all things
are melted to begin anew. A truce to nice delicacy! Odi profanum vulgus
et arceo; hence, ye profane: you would not understand the mighty lesson
of the rag tank.

I am now in a position to realize my second wish. I have space, air and
quiet in the solitude of the harmas. None will come here to trouble me,
to smile or to be shocked at my investigations. So far, so good; but
observe the irony of things: now that I am rid of passers by, I have to
fear my cats, those assiduous prowlers, who, finding my preparations,
will not fail to spoil and scatter them. In anticipation of their
misdeeds, I establish workshops in midair, whither none but genuine
corruption agents can come, flying on their wings. At different points
in the enclosure, I plant reeds, three by three, which, tied at their
free ends, form a stable tripod. From each of these supports, I hang, at
a man's height, an earthenware pan filled with fine sand and pierced at
the bottom with a hole to allow the water to escape, if it should rain.
I garnish my apparatus with dead bodies. The snake, the lizard, the toad
receive the preference, because of their bare skins, which enable me
better to follow the first attack and the work of the invaders. I ring
the changes with furred and feathered beasts. A few children of the
neighborhood, allured by pennies, are my regular purveyors. Throughout
the good season, they come running triumphantly to my door, with a snake
at the end of a stick, or a lizard in a cabbage leaf. They bring me the
rat caught in a trap, the chicken dead of the pip, the mole slain by
the gardener, the kitten killed by accident, the rabbit poisoned by some
weed. The business proceeds to the mutual satisfaction of sellers and
buyer. No such trade had ever been known before in the village nor ever
will be again.

April ends; and the pans rapidly fill. An ant, ever so small, is the
first arrival. I thought I should keep this intruder off by hanging my
apparatus high above the ground: she laughs at my precautions. A few
hours after the deposit of the morsel, fresh still and possessing no
appreciable smell, up comes the eager picker-up of trifles, scales the
stems of the tripod in processions and starts the work of dissection.
If the joint suits her, she even goes to live in the sand of the pan and
digs herself temporary platforms in order to work the rich find more at
her ease.

All through the season, from start to finish, she will always be the
promptest, always the first to discover the dead animal, always the last
to beat a retreat when nothing more remains than a heap of little bones
bleached by the sun. How does the vagabond, passing at a distance, know
that, up there, invisible, high on the gibbet, there is something worth
going for? The others, the real knackers, wait for the meat to go bad;
they are informed by the strength of the effluvia. The ant, gifted with
greater powers of scent, hurries up before there is any stench at all.
But, when the meat, now two days old and ripened by the sun, exhales its
flavor, soon the master ghouls appear upon the scene: Dermestes [bacon
beetles, small flesh-eating beetles] and Saprini [exceedingly small
flesh-eating beetles], Silphae [carrion beetles] and Necrophori [burying
beetles], flies and Staphylini [rove beetles], who attack the corpse,
consume it and reduce it almost to nothing. With the ant alone, who
each time carries off a mere atom, the sanitary operation would take too
long; with them, it is a quick business, especially as certain of them
understand the process of chemical solvents.

These last, who are high class scavengers, are entitled to first
mention. They are flies, of many various species. If time permitted,
each of those strenuous ones would deserve a special examination; but
that would weary the patience of both the reader and the observer. The
habits of one will give us a summary notion of the habits of the rest.
We will therefore confine ourselves to the two principal subjects,
namely, the Luciliae, or greenbottles, and the Sarcophagae, or grey
flesh flies.

The Luciliae--flies that glitter--are magnificent flies known to all of
us. Their metallic luster, generally a golden green, rivals that of our
finest beetles, the Rosechafers, Buprestes and leaf beetles. It gives
one a shock of surprise to see so rich a garb adorn those workers in
putrefaction. Three species frequent my pans: Lucilia Caesar, LIN., L.
cadaverina, LIN., and L. cuprea, ROB. The first two, both of whom are
gold-green, are plentiful; the third, who sports a coppery luster, is
rare. All three have red eyes, set in a silver border.

Lucilia Caesar is larger than L. cadaverina and also more forward in her
business. I catch her in labor on the 23rd of April. She has settled
in the spinal canal of a neck of mutton and is laying her eggs on the
marrow. For more than an hour, motionless in the gloomy cavity, she goes
on packing her eggs. I can just see her red eyes and her silvery face.
At last, she comes out. I gather the fruit of her labor, an easy matter,
for it all lies on the marrow, which I extract without touching the
eggs.

A census would seem important. To take it at once is impracticable: the
germs form a compact mass, which would be difficult to count. The best
thing is to rear the family in a jar and to reckon by the pupae buried
in the sand. I find a hundred and fifty-seven. This is evidently but
a minimum; for Lucilia Caesar and the others, as the observations that
follow will tell me, lay in packets at repeated intervals. It is a
magnificent family, promising a fabulous legion to come.

The greenbottles, I was saying, break up their laying into sections. The
following scene affords a proof of this. A Mole, shrunk by a few days'
evaporation, lies spread upon the sand of the pan. At one point, the
edge of the belly is raised and forms a deep arch. Remark that the
Greenbottles, like the rest of the flesh eating flies, do not trust
their eggs to uncovered surfaces, where the heat of the sun's rays might
endanger the existence of the delicate germs. They want dark hiding
places. The favorite spot is the lower side of the dead animal, when
this is accessible.

In the present case, the only place of access is the fold formed by the
edge of the belly. It is here and here alone that this day's mothers
are laying. There are eight of them. After exploring the piece and
recognizing its good quality, they disappear under the arch, first this
one, then that, or else several at a time. They remain under the Mole
for a considerable while. Those outside wait, but go repeatedly to the
threshold of the cavern to take a look at what is happening within and
see whether the earlier ones have finished. These come out at last,
perch on the animal and wait in their turn. Others at once take their
place in the recesses of the cave. They remain there for some time and
then, having done their business, make room for more mothers and come
forth into the sunlight. This going in and out continues throughout the
morning.

We thus learn that the laying is effected by periodical emissions,
broken with intervals of rest. As long as she does not feel ripe eggs
coming to her oviduct, the greenbottle remains in the sun, hovering to
and fro and sipping modest mouthfuls from the carcass. But, as soon as a
fresh stream descends from her ovaries, quick as lightning she makes for
a propitious site whereon to deposit her burden. It appears to be the
work of several days thus to divide the total laying and to distribute
it at different points.

I carefully raise the animal under which these things are happening.
The egg laying mothers do not disturb themselves; they are far too busy.
Their ovipositor extended telescope fashion, they heap egg upon egg.
With the point of their hesitating, groping instrument, they try to
lodge each germ, as it comes, farther into the mass. Around the serious,
red-eyed matrons, the Ants circle, intent on pillage. Many of them make
off with a greenbottle egg between their teeth. I see some who, greatly
daring, effect their theft under the ovipositor itself. The layers do
not put themselves out, let the ants have their way, remain impassive.
They know their womb to be rich enough to make good any such larceny.

Indeed, what escapes the depredations of the ants promises a plenteous
brood. Let us come back a few days later and lift the mole again.
Underneath, in a pool of sanies, is a surging mass of swarming sterns
and pointed heads, which emerge, wriggle and dive in again. It suggests
a seething billow. It turns one's stomach. It is horrible, most
horrible. Let us steel ourselves against the sight: it will be worse
elsewhere.

Here is a fat snake. Rolled into a compact whorl, she fills the whole
pan. The greenbottles are plentiful. New ones arrive at every moment
and, without quarrel or strife, take their place among the others,
busily laying. The spiral furrow left by the reptile's curves is the
favorite spot. Here alone, in the narrow space between the folds, are
shelters against the heat of the sun. The glistening Flies take their
places, side by side, in rows; they strive to push their abdomen and
their ovipositor as far forward as possible, at the risk of rumpling
their wings and cocking them towards their heads. The care of the person
is neglected amid this serious business. Placidly, with their red eyes
turned outwards, they form a continuous cordon. Here and there, at
intervals, the rank is broken; layers leave their posts, come and
walk about upon the snake, what time their ovaries ripen for another
emission, and then hurry back, slip into the rank and resume the flow of
germs. Despite these interruptions, the work of breeding goes fast. In
the course of one morning, the depths of the spiral furrow are hung
with a continuous white bark, the heaped up eggs. They come off in great
slabs, free of any stain; they can be shoveled up, as it were, with
a paper scoop. It is a propitious moment if we wish to follow the
evolution at close quarters. I therefore gather a profusion of this
white manna and lodge it in glass tubes, test tubes and jars, with the
necessary provisions.

The eggs, about a millimeter long, are smooth cylinders, rounded at
both ends. They hatch within twenty-four hours. The first question that
presents itself is this: how do the greenbottle grubs feed? I know quite
well what to give them, but I do not in the least see how they manage to
consume it. Do they eat, in the strict sense of the word? I have reasons
to doubt it.

Let us consider the grub grown to a sufficient size. It is the usual
fly larva, the common maggot, shaped like an elongated cone, pointed in
front, truncated behind, where two little red spots show, level with the
skin: these are the breathing holes. The front, which is called the
head by stretching a word--for it is little more than the entrance to an
intestine--the front is armed with two little black hooks, which slide
in a translucent sheath, project a little way outside and go in turn by
turn. Are we to look upon these as mandibles? Not at all, for, instead
of having their points facing each other, as would be required in a
real mandibular apparatus, the two hooks work in parallel directions
and never meet. What they are is ambulatory organs, grapnels assisting
locomotion, which give a purchase on the plane and enable the animal to
advance by means of repeated contractions. The maggot walks with the aid
of what a superficial examination would pronounce to be a machine
for eating. It carries in its gullet the equivalent of the climber's
alpenstock.

Let us hold it, on a piece of flesh, under the lens. We shall see it
walking about, raising and lowering its head and, each time, stabbing
the meat with its pair of hooks. When stationary, with its crupper at
rest, it explores space with a continual bending of its fore part; its
pointed head pokes about, jabs forward, goes back again, producing and
withdrawing its black mechanism. There is a perpetual piston play. Well,
look as carefully and conscientiously as I please, I do not once see the
weapons of the mouth tackle a particle of flesh that is torn away and
swallowed. The hooks come down upon the meat at every moment, but never
take a visible mouthful from it. Nevertheless, the grub waxes big and
fat. How does this singular consumer, who feeds without eating, set
about it? If he does not eat, he must drink; his diet is soup. As meat
is a compact substance, which does not liquefy of its own accord, there
must, in that case, be a certain recipe to dissolve it into a fluid
broth. Let us try to surprise the maggot's secret.

In a glass tube, sealed at one end, I insert a piece of lean flesh, the
size of a walnut, which I have drained of its juices by squeezing it in
blotting paper. On the top of this, I place a few slabs of greenbottle
eggs collected a moment ago from the snake in my earthen pan. The number
of germs is, roughly, two hundred. I close the tube with a cotton plug,
stand it upright, in a shady corner of my study, and leave things to
take their course. A control tube, prepared like the first, but not
stocked with maggots, is placed beside it.

As early as two or three days after the hatching, I obtain a striking
result. The meat, which was thoroughly drained by the blotting paper,
has become so moist that the young vermin leave a wet mark behind them
as they crawl over the glass. The swarming brood creates a sort of mist
with the crossing and criss-crossing of its trails. The control tube,
on the contrary, keeps dry, proving that the moisture in which the worms
move is not due to a mere exudation from the meat.

Besides, the work of the maggot becomes more and more evident.
Gradually, the flesh flows in every direction like an icicle placed
before the fire. Soon, the liquefaction is complete. What we see is no
longer meat, but fluid Liebig's extract. If I overturned the tube, not a
drop of it would remain.

Let us clear our minds of any idea of solution by putrefaction, for in
the second tube a piece of meat of the same kind and size has remained,
save for color and smell, what it was at the start. It was a lump and
it is a lump, whereas the piece treated by the worms runs like melted
butter. Here we have maggot chemistry able to rouse the envy of
physiologists when studying the action of the gastric juice.

I obtain better results still with hard-boiled white of egg. When cut
into pieces the size of a hazel nut and handed over to the greenbottle's
grubs, the coagulated albumen dissolves into a colorless liquid which
the eye might mistake for water. The fluidity becomes so great that, for
lack of a support, the worms perish by drowning in the broth; they are
suffocated by the immersion of their hind part, with its open breathing
holes. On a denser liquid, they would have kept at the surface; on this,
they cannot.

A control tube, filled in the same way, but not colonized, stands beside
that in which the strange liquefaction takes place. The hardboiled white
of egg retains its original appearance and consistency. In course of
time, it dries up, if it does not turn moldy; and that is all.

The other quaternary compounds performing the same functions as
albumen--the gluten of cereals, the fibrin of blood, the casein of
cheese and the legumin of chickpeas--undergo a similar modification, in
varying degrees. Fed, from the moment of leaving the egg, on any one of
these substances, the worms thrive very well, provided that they escape
drowning when the gruel becomes too clear; they would not fare better
on a corpse. And, as a general rule, there is not much danger of going
under: the matter only half liquefies; it becomes a running pea soup,
rather than an actual fluid.

Even in this imperfect case, it is obvious that the greenbottle grubs
begin by liquefying their food. Incapable of taking solid nourishment,
they first transform the spoil into running matter; then, dipping their
heads into the product, they drink, they slake their thirst, with long
sups. Their dissolvent, comparable in its effects with the gastric juice
of the higher animals, is, beyond a doubt, emitted through the mouth.
The piston of the hooks, continually in movement, never ceases spitting
it out in infinitesimal doses. Each spot touched receives a grain of
some subtle pepsin, which soon suffices to make that spot run in every
direction. As digesting, when all is said, merely means liquefying,
it is no paradox to assert that the maggot digests its food before
swallowing it.

These experiments with my filthy, evil smelling tubes have given me some
delightful moments. The worthy Abbe Spallanzani must have known some
such when he saw pieces of raw meat begin to run under the action of the
gastric juice which he took, with pellets of sponge, from the stomachs
of crows. He discovered the secrets of digestion; he realized in a glass
tube the hitherto unknown labors of gastric chemistry. I, his distant
disciple, behold once more, under a most unexpected aspect, what struck
the Italian scientist so forcibly. Worms take the place of the crows.
They slaver upon meat, gluten, albumen; and those substances turn to
fluid. What our stomach does within its mysterious recesses the maggot
achieves outside, in the open air. It first digests and then imbibes.

When we see it plunging into the carrion broth, we even wonder if it
cannot feed itself, at least to some extent, in a more direct fashion.
Why should not its skin, which is one of the most delicate, be capable
of absorbing? I have seen the egg of the sacred beetle and other dung
beetles growing considerably larger--I should like to say, feeding--in
the thick atmosphere of the hatching chamber. Nothing tells us that the
grub of the greenbottle does not adopt this method of growing. I picture
it capable of feeding all over the surface of its body. To the gruel
absorbed by the mouth it adds the balance of what is gathered and
strained through the skin. This would explain the need for provisions
liquefied beforehand.

Let us give one last proof of this preliminary liquefaction. If the
carcass--mole, snake or another--left in the open air have a wire gauze
cover placed over it, to keep out the flies, the game dries under a hot
sun and shrivels up without appreciably wetting the sand on which it
lies. Fluids come from it, certainly, for every organized body is a
sponge swollen with water; but the liquid discharge is so slow and
restricted in quantity that the heat and the dryness of the air disperse
it as it appears, while the underlying sand remains dry, or very nearly
so. The carcass becomes a sapless mummy, a mere bit of leather. On the
other hand, do not use the wire gauze cover, let the flies do their work
unimpeded; and things forthwith assume another aspect. In three or four
days, an oozing sanies appears under the animal and soaks the sand to
some distance.

I shall never forget the striking spectacle with which I conclude this
chapter. This time, the dish is a magnificent Aesculapius' snake, a yard
and a half long and as thick as a wide bottleneck. Because of its size,
which exceeds the dimensions of my pan, I roll the reptile in a double
spiral, or in two storeys. When the copious joint is in full process
of dissolution, the pan becomes a puddle wherein wallow, in countless
numbers, the grubs of the greenbottle and those of Sarcophaga carnaria,
the Grey or checkered flesh fly, which are even mightier liquefiers. All
the sand in the apparatus is saturated, has turned into mud, as though
there had been a shower of rain. Through the hole at the bottom, which
is protected by a flat pebble, the gruel trickles drop by drop. It is a
still at work, a mortuary still, in which the Snake is being drawn off.
Wait a week or two; and the whole will have disappeared, drunk up by the
sun: naught but the scales and bones will remain on a sheet of mud.

To conclude: the maggot is a power in this world. To give back to life,
with all speed, the remains of that which has lived, it macerates and
condenses corpses, distilling them into an essence wherewith the earth,
the plant's foster mother, may be nourished and enriched.




CHAPTER X. THE GREY FLESH FLIES

Here the costume changes, not the manner of life. We find the
same frequenting of dead bodies, the same capacity for the speedy
liquefaction of the fleshy matter. I am speaking of an ash-gray fly,
the greenbottle's superior in size, with brown streaks on her back and
silver gleams on her abdomen. Note also the blood-red eyes, with the
hard look of the knacker in them. The language of science knows her as
Sarcophaga, the flesh eater; in the vulgar tongue she is the grey flesh
fly, or simply the flesh fly.

Let not these expressions, however accurate, mislead us into believing
for a moment that the Sarcophagae are the bold company of master
tainters who haunt our dwellings, more particularly in autumn, and plant
their vermin in our ill-guarded viands. The author of those offences
is Calliphora vomitoria, the bluebottle, who is of a stouter build and
arrayed in darkest blue. It is she who buzzes against our windowpanes,
who craftily besieges the meat safe and who lies in wait in the darkness
for an opportunity to outwit our vigilance. The other, the grey fly,
works jointly with the greenbottles, who do not venture inside our
houses and who work in the sunlight. Less timid, however, than they,
should the outdoor yield be small, she will sometimes come indoors to
perpetrate her villainies. When her business is done, she makes off as
fast as she can, for she does not feel at home with us.

At this moment, my study, a very modest extension of my open air
establishments, has become something of a charnel house. The grey fly
pays me a visit. If I lay a piece of butcher's meat on the windowsill,
she hastens up, works her will on it and retires. No hiding place
escapes her notice among the jars, cups, glasses and receptacles of
every kind with which my shelves are crowded.

With a view to certain experiments, I collected a heap of wasp grubs,
asphyxiated in their underground nests. Stealthily she arrives,
discovers the fat pile and, hailing as treasure trove this provender
whereof her race perhaps has never made use before, entrusts to it an
installment of her family. I have left at the bottom of a glass the best
part of a hard-boiled egg from which I have taken a few bits of white
intended for the greenbottle maggots. The grey fly takes possession of
the remains, recks not of their novelty and colonizes them. Everything
suits her that falls within the category of albuminous matters:
everything, down to dead silkworms; everything, down to a mess of
kidney-beans and chick-peas.

Nevertheless, her preference is for the corpse: furred beast and
feathered beast, reptile and fish, indifferently. Together with the
greenbottles, she is sedulous in her attendance on my pans. Daily she
visits my snakes, takes note of the condition of each of them, savors
them with her proboscis, goes away, comes back, takes her time and at
last proceeds to business. Still, it is not here, amid the tumult of
callers, that I propose to follow her operations. A lump of butcher's
meat laid on the window sill, in front of my writing table, will be less
offensive to the eye and will facilitate my observations.

Two flies of the genus Sarcophaga frequent my slaughter yard: Sarcophaga
carnaria and Sarcophaga haemorrhoidalis, whose abdomen ends in a red
speck. The first species, which is a little larger than the second,
is more numerous and does the best part of the work in the open air
shambles of the pans. It is this fly also who, at intervals and nearly
always alone, hastens to the bait exposed on the windowsill.

She comes up suddenly, timidly. Soon she calms herself and no longer
thinks of fleeing when I draw near, for the dish suits her. She is
surprisingly quick about her work. Twice over--buzz! Buzz!--the tip of
her abdomen touches the meat; and the thing is done: a group of vermin
wriggles out, releases itself and disperses so nimbly that I have no
time to take my lens and count then accurately. As seen by the naked
eye, there were a dozen of them. What has become of them? One would
think that they had gone into the flesh, at the very spot where they
were laid, so quickly have they disappeared. But that dive into a
substance of some consistency is impossible to these newborn weaklings.
Where are they? I find them more or less everywhere in the creases of
the meat; singly and already groping with their mouths. To collect them
in order to number them is not practicable, for I do not want to damage
them. Let us be satisfied with the estimate made at a rapid glance:
there are a dozen or so, brought into the world in one discharge of
almost inappreciable length.

Those live grubs, taking the place of the usual eggs, have long been
known. Everybody is aware that the flesh flies bring forth living
maggots, instead of laying eggs. They have so much to do and their work
is so urgent! To them, the instruments of the transformation of
dead matter, a day means a day, a long space of time which it is all
important to utilize. The greenbottle's eggs, though these are of very
rapid development, take twenty-four hours to yield their grubs. The
flesh flies save all this time. From their matrix, laborers flow
straightway and set to work the moment they are born. With these ardent
pioneers of sanitation, there is no rest attendant upon the hatching,
there is not a minute lost.

The gang, it is true, is not a numerous one; but how often can it not
be renewed! Read Reaumur's description of the wonderful procreating
machinery boasted by the Flesh flies. It is a spiral ribbon, a velvety
scroll whose nap is a sort of fleece of maggots set closely together
and each cased in a sheath. The patient biographer counted the host:
it numbers, he tells us, nearly twenty thousand. You are seized with
stupefaction at this anatomical fact.

How does the gray fly find the time to settle a family of such
dimensions, especially in small packets, as she has just done on my
window sill? What a number of dead dogs, moles and snakes must she not
visit before exhausting her womb! Will she find them? Corpses of much
size do not abound to that extent in the country. As everything suits
her, she will alight on other remains of minor importance. Should the
prize be a rich one, she will return to it tomorrow, the day after and
later still, over and over again. In the course of the season, by dint
of packets of grubs deposited here, there and everywhere, she will
perhaps end by housing her entire brood. But then, if all things
prosper, what a glut, for there are several families born during
the year! We feel it instinctively: there must be a check to these
generative enormities. Let us first consider the grub. It is a sturdy
maggot, easy to distinguish from the greenbottle's by its larger girth
and especially by the way in which its body terminates behind. There is
here a sudden breaking off, hollowed into a deep cup. At the bottom of
this crater are two breathing holes, two stigmata with amber-red tips.
The edge of the cavity is fringed with half a score of pointed, fleshy
festoons, which diverge like the spikes of a coronet. The creature
can close or open this diadem at will by bringing the denticulations
together or by spreading them out wide. This protects the air holes
which might otherwise be choked up when the maggot disappears in the sea
of broth. Asphyxia would supervene, if the two breathing holes at the
back became obstructed. During the immersion, the festooned coronet
shuts like a flower closing its petals and the liquid is not admitted to
the cavity.

Next follows the emergence. The hind part reappears in the air, but
appears alone, just at the level of the fluid. Then the coronet spreads
out afresh, the cup gapes and assumes the aspect of a tiny flower, with
the white denticulations for petals and the two bright red dots, the
stigmata at the bottom, for stamens. When the grubs, pressed one
against the other, with their heads downwards in the fetid soup, make
an unbroken shoal, the sight of those breathing cups incessantly opening
and closing, with a little clack like a valve, almost makes one forget
the horrors of the charnel yard. It suggests a carpet of tiny Sea
anemones. The maggot has its beauties after all.

It is obvious, if there be any logic in things, that a grub so
well-protected against asphyxiation by drowning must frequent liquid
surroundings. One does not encircle one's hindquarters with a coronet
for the sole satisfaction of displaying it. With its apparatus of
spokes, the Grey Fly's grub informs us of the dangerous nature of its
functions: when working upon a corpse, it runs the risk of drowning. How
is that? Remember the grubs of the greenbottle, fed on hard-boiled white
of egg. The dish suits them; only, by the action of their pepsin,
it becomes so fluid that they die submerged. Because of their hinder
stigmata, which are actually on the skin and devoid of any defensive
machinery, they perish when they find no support apart from the liquid.

The flesh fly's maggots, though incomparable liquefiers, know nothing
of this peril, even in a puddle of carrion broth. Their bulky hind part
serves as a float and keeps the air holes above the surface. When, for
further investigation, they must needs go under completely, the anemone
at the back shuts and protects the stigmata. The grubs of the gray fly
are endowed with a life buoy because they are first class liquefiers,
ready to incur the danger of a ducking at any moment.

When high and dry on the sheet of cardboard where I place them to
observe them at my ease, they move about actively, with their breathing
rose widespread and their stigmata rising and falling as a support. The
cardboard is on my table, at three steps from an open window, and lit at
this time of day only by the soft light of the sky. Well, the maggots,
one and all of them, turn in the opposite direction to the window; they
hastily, madly take to flight.

I turn the cardboard round, without touching the runaways. This action
makes the creatures face the light again. Forthwith, the troop stops,
hesitates, takes a half turn and once more retreats towards the
darkness. Before the end of the racecourse is reached, I again turn the
cardboard. For the second time, the maggots veer round and retrace their
steps. Repeat the experiment as often as I will, each time the squad
wheels about in the opposite direction to the window and persists in
avoiding the trap of the revolving cardboard.

The track is only a short one: the cardboard measures three hand's
breadths in length. Let us give more space. I settle the grubs on the
floor of the room; with a hair pencil, I turn them with their heads
pointing towards the lighted aperture. The moment they are free, they
turn and run from the light. With all the speed whereof their cripple's
shuffle allows, they cover the tiled floor of the study and go and knock
their heads against the wall, twelve feet off, skirting it afterwards,
some to the right and some to the left. They never feel far enough away
from that hateful illuminated opening.

What they are escaping from is evidently the light, for, if I make it
dark with a screen, the troop does not change its direction when I turn
the cardboard. It then progresses quite readily towards the window; but,
when I remove the screen, it turns tail at once.

That a grub destined to live in the darkness, under the shelter of a
corpse, should avoid the light is only natural; the strange part is its
very perception. The maggot is blind. Its pointed fore part, which
we hesitate to call a head, bears absolutely no trace of any optical
apparatus; and the same with every other part of the body. There is
nothing but one bare, smooth, white skin. And this sightless creature,
deprived of any special nervous points served by ocular power, is
extremely sensitive to the light. Its whole skin is a sort of retina,
incapable of seeing, of course, but able, at any rate, to distinguish
between light and darkness. Under the direct rays of a searching sun,
the grub's distress could be easily explained. We ourselves; with our
coarse skin, in comparison with that of the maggot, can distinguish
between sunshine and shadow without the help of the eyes. But, in the
present case, the problem becomes singularly complicated. The subjects
of my experiment receive only the diffused light of the sky, entering my
study through an open window; yet this tempered light frightens them out
of their senses. They flee the painful apparition; they are bent upon
escaping at all costs.

Now what do the fugitives feel? Are they physically hurt by the chemical
radiations? Are they exasperated by other radiations, known or unknown?
Light still keeps many a secret hidden from us and perhaps our optical
science, by studying the maggot, might become the richer by some
valuable information. I would gladly have gone farther into the
question, had I possessed the necessary apparatus. But I have not, I
never have had and of course I never shall have the resources which are
so useful to the seeker. These are reserved for the clever people who
care more for lucrative posts than for fair truths. Let us continue,
however, within the measure which the poverty of my means permits.

When duly fattened, the grubs of the flesh flies go underground to
transform themselves into pupae. The burial is intended, obviously, to
give the worm the tranquillity necessary for the metamorphosis. Let us
add that another object of the descent is to avoid the importunities
of the light. The maggot isolates itself to the best of its power and
withdraws from the garish day before contracting into a little keg.
In ordinary conditions, with a loose soil, it goes hardly lower than a
hand's breadth down, for provision has to be made for the difficulties
of the return to the surface when the insect, now full grown, is impeded
by its delicate fly wings. The grub, therefore, deems itself suitably
isolated at a moderate depth. Sideways, the layer that shields it from
the light is of indefinite thickness; upwards, it measures about four
inches. Behind this screen reigns utter darkness, the buried one's
delight. This is capital.

What would happen if, by an artifice, the sideward layer were nowhere
thick enough to satisfy the grub? Now, this time, I have the wherewithal
to solve the problem, in the shape of a big glass tube, open at both
ends, about three feet long and less than an inch wide. I use it to blow
the flame of hydrogen in the little chemistry lessons which I give my
children.

I close one end with a cork and fill the tube with fine, dry, sifted
sand. On the surface of this long column, suspended perpendicularly in a
corner of my study, I install some twenty Sarcophaga grubs, feeding
them with meat. A similar preparation is repeated in a wider jar, with
a mouth as broad as one's hand. When they are big enough, the grubs in
either apparatus will go down to the depth that suits them. There is no
more to be done but to leave them to their own devices.

The worms at last bury themselves and harden into pupae. This is the
moment to consult the two apparatus. The jar gives me the answer which
I should have obtained in the open fields. Four inches down, or
thereabouts, the worms have found a quiet lodging, protected above
by the layer through which they have passed and on every side by the
thickness of the vessel's contents. Satisfied with the site, they have
stopped there.

It is a very different matter in the tube. The least buried of the pupae
are half a yard down. Others are lower still; most of them even have
reached the bottom of the tube and are touching the cork stopper, an
insuperable barrier. These last, we can see, would have gone yet deeper
if the apparatus had allowed them. Not one of the score of grubs has
settled at the customary halting place; all have traveled farther down
the column, until their strength gave way. In their anxious flight, they
have dug deeper and ever deeper.

What were they flying from? The light. Above them, the column traversed
forms a more than sufficient shelter; but, at the sides, the irksome
sensation is still felt through a coat of earth half an inch thick
if the descent is made perpendicularly. To escape the disturbing
impression, the grub therefore goes deeper and deeper, hoping to obtain
lower down the rest which is denied it above. It only ceases to move
when worn out with the effort or stopped by an obstacle.

Now, in a soft diffused light, what can be the radiations capable of
acting upon this lover of darkness? They are certainly not the simple
luminous rays, for a screen of fine, heaped up earth, nearly half an
inch in thickness, is perfectly opaque. Then, to alarm the grub, to warn
it of the over proximity of the exterior and send it to mad depths
in search of isolation, other radiations, known or unknown, must be
required, radiations capable of penetrating a screen against which
ordinary radiations are powerless. Who knows what vistas the natural
philosophy of the maggot might open out to us? For lack of apparatus, I
confine myself to suspicions.

To go underground to a yard's depth--and farther if my tube had allowed
it--is on the part of the Flesh fly's grub a vagary provoked by unkind
experiment: never would it bury itself so low down, if left to its own
wisdom. A hand's breadth thickness is quite enough, is even a great deal
when, after completing the transformation, it has to climb back to the
surface, a laborious operation absolutely resembling the task of an
entombed well sinker. It will have to fight against the sand that slips
and gradually fills up the small amount of empty space obtained; it
will perhaps, without crowbar or pickaxe, have to cut itself a gallery
through something tantamount to tufa, that is to say, through earth
which a shower has rendered compact. For the descent, the grub has its
fangs; for the assent, the fly has nothing. Only that moment come into
existence, she is a weakling, with tissues still devoid of any firmness.
How does she manage to get out? We shall know by watching a few pupae
placed at the bottom of a test-tube filled with earth. The method of the
Flesh flies will teach us that of the greenbottles and the other Flies,
all of whom make use of the same means.

Enclosed in her pupa, the nascent fly begins by bursting the lid of her
casket with a hernia which comes between her two eyes and doubles or
trebles the size of her head. This cephalic blister throbs: it swells
and subsides by turns, owing to the alternate flux and reflux of the
blood. It is like the piston of an hydraulic press opening and forcing
back the front part of the keg.

The head makes its appearance. The hydrocephalous monster continues the
play of her forehead, while herself remaining stationary. Inside the
pupa, a delicate work is being performed: the casting of the white
nymphal tunic. All through this operation, the hernia is still
projecting. The head is not the head of a fly, but a queer, enormous
mitre, spreading at the base into two red skull caps, which are the
eyes. To split her cranium in the middle, shunt the two halves to the
right and left and send surging through the gap a tumor which staves the
barrel with its pressure: this constitutes the Fly's eccentric method.

For what reason does the hernia, once the keg is staved, continue
swollen and projecting? I take it to be a waste pocket into which
the insect momentarily forces back its reserves of blood in order to
diminish the bulk of the body to that extent and to extract it more
easily from the nymphal slough and afterwards from the narrow channel
of the shell. As long as the operation of the release lasts, it pushes
outside all that it is able to inject of its accumulated humors; it
makes itself small inside the pupa and swells into a bloated deformity
without. Two hours and more are spent in this laborious stripping.

At last, the fly comes into view. The wings, mere scanty stumps, hardly
reach the middle of the abdomen. On the outer edge, they have a deep
notch similar to the waist of a violin. This diminishes by just so
much the surface and the length, an excellent device for decreasing
the friction along the earthy column which has next to be scaled. The
hydrocephalous one resumes her performance more vigorously than ever;
she inflates and deflates her frontal knob. The pounded sand rustles
down the insect's sides. The legs play but a secondary part. Stretched
behind, motionless, when the piston stroke is delivered, they furnish
a support. As the sand descends, they pile it and nimbly push it back,
after which they drag along lifelessly until the next avalanche. The
head advances each time by a length equal to that of the sand displaced.
Each stroke of the frontal swelling means a step forward. In a dry,
loose soil, things go pretty fast. A column six inches high is traversed
in less than a quarter of an hour.

As soon as it reaches the surface, the insect, covered with dust,
proceeds to make its toilet. It thrusts out the blister of its forehead
for the last time and brushes it carefully with its front tarsi. It is
important that the little pounding engine should be carefully dusted
before it is taken inside to form a forehead that will open no more:
this lest any grit should lodge in the head. The wings are carefully
brushed and polished; they lose their curved notches; they lengthen and
spread. Then, motionless on the surface of the sand, the fly matures
fully. Let us set her at liberty. She will go and join the others on the
Snakes in my pans.




CHAPTER XI. THE BUMBLEBEE FLY

Underneath the wasp's brown paper manor house, the ground is channeled
into a sort of drain for the refuse of the nest. Here are shot the dead
or weakly larvae which a continual inspection roots out from the cells
to make room for fresh occupants; here, at the time of the autumn
massacre, are flung the backward grubs; here, lastly, lies a good part
of the crowd killed by the first touch of winter. During the rack and
ruin of November and December, this sewer becomes crammed with animal
matter.

Such riches will not remain unemployed. The world's great law which says
that nothing edible shall be wasted provides for the consumption of a
mere ball of hair disgorged by the owl. How shall it be with the vast
stores of a ruined wasps' nest! If they have not come yet, the consumers
whose task it is to salve this abundant wreckage for nature's markets,
they will not tarry in coming and waiting for the manna that will soon
descend from above. That public granary, lavishly stocked by death, will
become a busy factory of fresh life. Who are the guests summoned to the
banquet?

If the wasps flew away, carrying the dead or sickly grubs with them,
and dropped them on the ground round about their home, those banqueters
would be, first and foremost, the insect-eating birds, the warblers,
all of whom are lovers of small game. In this connection, we will allow
ourselves a brief digression. We all know with what jealous intolerance
the nightingales occupy each his own cantonment. Neighborly intercourse
among them is tabooed. The males frequently exchange defiant couplets at
a distance; but, should the challenged party draw near, the challenger
makes him clear off. Now, not far from my house, in a scanty clump of
holly oaks which would barely give the woodcutter the wherewithal for
a dozen faggots, I used, all through the spring, to hear such
full-throated warbling of nightingales that the songs of those virtuosi,
all giving voice at once and with no attempt at order, degenerated into
a deafening hubbub.

Why did those passionate devotees of solitude come and settle in such
large numbers at a spot where custom decrees that there is just room
enough for one household only? What reasons have made the recluse become
a congregation? I asked the owner of the spinney about the matter.

'It's like that every year,' he said. 'The clump is overrun by
Nightingales.'

'And the reason?'

'The reason is that there is a hive close by, behind that wall.'

I looked at the man in amazement, unable to understand what connection
there could be between a hive and the thronging nightingales.

'Why, yes,' he added, 'there are a lot of nightingales because there are
a lot of bees.

Another questioning look from my side. I did not yet understand. The
explanation came: 'The bees,' he said, 'throw out their dead grubs.
The front of the hive is strewn with them in the mornings; and the
nightingales come and collect them for themselves and their families.
They are very fond of them.'

This time I had solved the puzzle. Delicious food, abundant and fresh
each day, had brought the songsters together. Contrary to their habit,
numbers of nightingales are living on friendly terms in a cluster of
bushes, in order to be near the hive and to have a larger share in the
morning distribution of plump dainties.

In the same way, the nightingale and his gastronomical rivals would
haunt the neighborhood of the wasps' nests, if the dead grubs were cast
out on the surface of the soil; but these delicacies fall inside the
burrow and no little bird would dare to enter the murky cave, even if
the entrance were not too small to admit it. Other consumers are needed
here, small in size and great in daring; the fly is called for and her
maggot, the king of the departed. What the greenbottles, the bluebottles
and the flesh flies do in the open air, at the expense of every kind
of corpse, other flies, narrowing their province, do underground at the
Wasps' expense.

Let us turn our attention, in September, to the wrapper of a wasps'
nest. On the outer surface and there alone, this wrapper is strewn with
a multitude of big, white, elliptical dots, firmly fixed to the brown
paper and measuring about two millimeters and a half long by one and a
half wide. Flat below, convex above and of a lustrous white, these dots
resemble very neat drops fallen from a tallow candle. Lastly, their
backs are streaked with faint transversal lines, an elegant detail
perceptible only with the lens. These curious objects are scattered
all over the surface of the wrapper, sometimes at a distance from one
another, sometimes gathered into more or less dense groups. They are the
eggs of the Volucella, or bumblebee fly (Volucella zonaria, LIN.)

Also stuck to the brown paper of the outer wrapper and mixed up with the
Volucella's are a large number of other eggs, chalk white, spear-shaped
and ridged lengthwise with seven or eight thin ribs, after the manner of
the seeds of certain Umbelliferae. The finishing touch to their delicate
beauty is the fine stippling all over the surface. They are smaller by
half than the others. I have seen grubs come out of them which might
easily be the earliest stage of some pointed maggots which I have
already noticed in the burrows. My attempts to rear them failed; and I
am not able to say which fly these eggs belong to. Enough for us to note
the nameless one in passing. There are plenty of others, which we must
make up our minds to leave unlabelled, in view of the jumbled crowd of
feasters in the ruined wasps' nest. We will concern ourselves only with
the most remarkable, in the front rank of which stands the bumblebee
Fly.

She is a gorgeous and powerful fly; and her costume, with its brown
and yellow bands, shows a vague resemblance to that of the wasps. Our
fashionable theorists have availed themselves of this brown and yellow
to cite the Volucella as a striking instance of protective mimicry.
Obliged, if not on her own behalf, at least on that of her family, to
introduce herself as a parasite into the wasp's home, she resorts, they
tell us, to trickery and craftily dons her victim's livery. Once inside
the wasps' nest, she is taken for one of the inhabitants and attends
quietly to her business.

The simplicity of the wasp, duped by a very clumsy imitation of her
garb, and the depravity of the fly, concealing her identity under a
counterfeit presentment, exceed the limits of my credulity. The wasp
is not so silly nor the Volucella so clever as we are assured. If the
latter really meant to deceive the Wasp by her appearance, we must
admit that her disguise is none too successful. Yellow sashes round the
abdomen do not make a wasp. It would need more than that and, above all,
a slender figure and a nimble carriage; and the Volucella is thickset
and corpulent and sedate in her movements. Never will the wasp take that
unwieldy insect for one of her own kind. The difference is too great.

Poor Volucella, mimesis has not taught you enough. You ought--this is
the essential point--to have adopted a wasp's shape; and that you forgot
to do: you remained a fat fly, easily recognizable. Nevertheless, you
penetrate into the terrible cavern; you are able to stay there for a
long time, without danger, as the eggs profusely strewn on the wrapper
of the wasps' nest show. How do you set about it?

Let us, first of all, remember that the bumblebee fly does not enter the
enclosure in which the combs are heaped: she keeps to the outer surface
of the paper rampart and there lays her eggs. Let us, on the other hand,
recall the Polistes [a tree nesting wasp] placed in the company of the
wasps in my vivarium. Here of a surety is one who need not have recourse
to mimicry to find acceptance. She belongs to the guild, she is a wasp
herself. Any of us that had not the trained eye of the entomologist
would confuse the two species. Well, this stranger, as long as she does
not become too importunate, is quite readily tolerated by the caged
wasps. None seeks to pick a quarrel with her. She is even admitted to
the table, the strip of paper smeared with honey. But she is doomed if
she inadvertently sets foot upon the combs. Her costume, her shape, her
size, which tally almost exactly with the costume, shape and size of
the wasp, do not save her from her fate. She is at once recognized as a
stranger and attacked and slaughtered with the same vigor as the larvae
of the Hylotoma sawfly and the Saperda beetle, neither of which bears
any outward resemblance to the larva of the wasps.

Seeing that identity of shape and costume does not save the Polistes,
how will the Volucella fare, with her clumsy imitation? The wasp's eye,
which is able to discern the dissimilar in the like, will refuse to
be caught. The moment she is recognized, the stranger is killed on the
spot. As to that there is not the shadow of a doubt.

In the absence of bumblebee flies at the moment of experimenting, I
employ another fly, Milesia fulminans, who, thanks to her slim figure
and her handsome yellow bands, presents a much more striking likeness to
the wasp than does the fat Volucella zonaria. Despite this resemblance,
if she rashly venture on the combs, she is stabbed and slain. Her yellow
sashes, her slender abdomen deceive nobody. The stranger is recognized
behind the features of a double.

My experiments under glass, which varied according to the captures which
I happened to make, all lead me to this conclusion: as long as there
is more propinquity, even around the honey, the other occupants are
tolerated fairly well; but, if they touch the cells, they are assaulted
and often killed, without distinction of shape or costume. The grubs'
dormitory is the sanctum sanctorum which no outsider must enter under
pain of death.

With these caged captives I experiment by daylight, whereas the free
wasps work in the absolute darkness of their underground retreat. Where
light is absent, color goes for nothing. Once, therefore, that she has
entered the cavern, the bumblebee fly derives no benefit from her yellow
bands, which are supposed to be her safeguard. Whether garbed as she is
or otherwise, it is easy for her to effect her purpose in the dark, on
condition that she avoids the tumultuous interior of the wasps' nest. So
long as she has the prudence not to hustle the passers by, she can dab
her eggs, without danger, on the paper wall. No one will know of her
presence. The dangerous thing is to cross the threshold of the burrow
in broad daylight, before the eyes of those who go in and out. At that
moment alone, protective mimicry would be convenient. Now does the
entrance of the Volucella into the presence of a few wasps entail such
very great risks? The wasps' nest in my enclosure, the one which
was afterwards to perish in the sun under a bell glass, gave me the
opportunity for prolonged observations, but without any result upon the
subject of my immediate concern. The bumblebee fly did not appear. The
period for her visits had doubtless passed; for I found plenty of her
grubs when the nest was dug up.

Other flies rewarded me for my assiduity. I saw some--at a respectful
distance, I need hardly say--entering the burrow. They were
insignificant in size and of a dark gray color, not unlike that of the
housefly. They had not a patch of yellow about them and certainly had no
claim to protective mimicry. Nevertheless, they went in and out as they
pleased, calmly, as though they were at home. As long as there was not
too great a number at the door, the wasps left them alone. When there
was anything of a crowd, the gray visitors waited near the threshold for
a less busy moment. No harm came to them.

Inside the establishment, the same peaceful relations prevail. In
this respect I have the evidence of my excavations. In the underground
charnel house, so rich in Fly grubs, I find no corpses of adult flies.
If the strangers had been slaughtered in passing through the entrance
hall, or lower down, they would fall to the bottom of the burrow anyhow,
with the other rubbish. Now in this charnel house, as I said, there are
never any dead bumblebee flies, never a fly of any sort. The incomers
are respected. Having done their business, they go out unscathed.

This tolerance on the part of the wasps is surprising. And a suspicion
comes to one's mind: can it be that the Volucella and the rest are
not what the accepted theories of natural history call them, namely,
enemies, grub killers sacking the wasps' nest? We will look into this
by examining them when they are hatched. Nothing is easier, in September
and October, than to collect the Volucella's eggs in such numbers as we
please. They abound on the outer surface of the wasps' nest. Moreover,
as with the larvae of the wasp, it is some time before they are
suffocated by the petroleum fumes; and so most of them are sure to
hatch. I take my scissors, cut the most densely populated bits from the
paper wall of the nest and fill a jar with them. This is the warehouse
from which I shall daily, for the best part of the next two months, draw
my supply of nascent grubs.

The Volucella's egg remains where it is, with its white color always
strongly marked against the brown of the background. The shell wrinkles
and collapses; and the fore end tears open. From it there issues a
pretty little white grub, thin in front, swelling slightly in the
rear and bristling all over with fleshy protuberances. The creature's
papillae are set on its sides like the teeth of a comb; at the rear,
they lengthen and spread into a fan; on the back, they are shorter and
arranged in four longitudinal rows. The last section but one carries two
short, bright red breathing tubes, standing aslant and joined to each
other. The fore part, near the pointed mouth, is of a darker, brownish
color. This is the biting and motor apparatus, seen through the skin and
consisting of two fangs. Taken all round, the grub is a pretty little
thing, with its bristling whiteness, which gives it the appearance of
a tiny snowflake. But this elegance does not last long: grown big and
strong, the bumblebee fly's grub becomes soiled with sanies, turns a
russety brown and crawls about in the guise of a hulking porcupine.

What becomes of it when it leaves the egg? This my warehousing jar tells
me, partly. Unable to keep its balance on sloping surfaces, it drops
to the bottom of the receptacle, where I find it, daily, as hatched,
wandering restlessly. Things must happen likewise at the wasps'.
Incapable of standing on the slant of the paper wall, the newborn
grubs slide to the bottom of the underground cavity, which contains,
especially at the end of the summer, a heaped up provender of deceased
wasps and dead larvae removed from the cells and flung outside the
house, all nice and gamy, as proper maggot's food should be. The
Volucella's offspring, themselves maggots, notwithstanding their
snowy apparel, find in this charnel house victuals to their liking,
incessantly renewed. Their fall from the high walls might well be
not accidental, but rather a means of reaching, quickly and without
searching, the good things down at the bottom of the cavern. Perhaps,
also, some of the white grubs, thanks to the holes that make the wrapper
resemble a spongy cover, manage to slip inside the Wasps' nest. Still,
most of the Volucella's grubs, at whatever stage of their development,
are in the basement of the burrow, among the carrion remains. The
others, those settled in the wasps' home itself, are comparatively few.

These returns are enough to show us that the grubs of the bumblebee fly
do not deserve the bad reputation that has been given them. Satisfied
with the spoils of the dead, they do not touch the living; they do not
ravage the wasps' nest: they disinfect it.

Experiment confirms what we have learnt in the actual nests. Over and
over again, I bring wasp grubs and Volucella grubs together in small
test tubes, which are easy to observe. The first are well and strong; I
have just taken them from their cells. The others are in various stages,
from that of the snowflake born the same day to that of the sturdy
porcupine. There is nothing tragic about the encounter. The grubs of the
bumblebee fly roam about the test-tube without touching the live tidbit.
The most that they do is to put their mouths for a moment to the morsel;
then they take it away again, not caring for the dish.

They want something different: a wounded, a dying grub; a corpse
dissolving into sanies. Indeed, if I prick the wasp grub with a needle,
the scornful ones at once come and sup at the bleeding wound. If I give
them a dead grub, brown with putrefaction, the worms rip it open and
feast on its humors. Better still: I can feed them quite satisfactorily
with wasps that have turned putrid under their horny rings; I see them
greedily suck the juices of decomposing Rosechafer grubs; I can keep
them thriving with chopped up butcher's meat, which they know how to
liquefy by the method of the common maggot. And these unprejudiced ones,
who accept anything that comes their way, provided it be dead, refuse
it when it is alive. Like the true flies that they are, frank body
snatchers, they wait, before touching a morsel, for death to do its
work.

Inside the wasps' nest, robust grubs are the rule and weaklings the
rare exception, because of the assiduous supervision which eliminates
anything that is diseased and like to die. Here, nevertheless, Volucella
grubs are found, on the combs, among the busy wasps. They are not, it
is true, so numerous as in the charnel house below, but still pretty
frequent. Now what do they do in this abode where there are no corpses?
Do they attack the healthy? Their continual visits from cell to cell
would at first make one think so; but we shall soon be undeceived if
we observe their movements closely; and this is possible with my glass
roofed colonies.

I see them fussily crawling on the surface of the combs, curving their
necks from side to side and taking stock of the cells. This one does
not suit, nor that one either; the bristly creature passes on, still in
search, thrusting its pointed fore part now here, now there. This time,
the cell appears to fulfil the requisite conditions. A larva,
glowing with health, opens wide its mouth, believing its nurse to be
approaching. It fills the hexagonal chamber with its bulging sides.

The gluttonous visitor bends and slides its slender fore part, a blade
of exquisite suppleness, between the wall and the inhabitant, whose
slack rotundity yields to the pressure of this animated wedge. It
plunges into the cell, leaving no part of itself outside but its wide
hind quarters, with the red dots of the two breathing tubes.

It remains in this posture for some time, occupied with its work at
the bottom of the cell. Meanwhile, the wasps present do not interfere,
remain impassive, showing that the grub visited is in no peril. The
stranger, in fact, withdraws with a soft, gliding motion. The chubby
babe, a sort of India rubber bag, resumes its original volume without
having suffered any harm, as its appetite proves. A nurse offers it a
mouthful, which it accepts with every sign of unimpaired vigor. As for
the Volucella grub, it licks its lips after its own fashion, pushing
its two fangs in and out; then, without further loss of time, goes and
repeats its probing elsewhere.

What it wants down there, at the bottom of the cells, behind the grubs,
cannot be decided by direct observation; it must be guessed at. Since
the visited larva remains intact, it is not prey that the Volucella grub
is after. Besides, if murder formed part of its plans, why descend to
the bottom of the cell, instead of attacking the defenseless recluse
straight way? It would be much easier to suck the patient's juices
through the actual orifice of the cell. Instead of that, we see a dip,
always a dip and never any other tactics.

Then what is there behind the wasp grub? Let us try to put it as
decently as possible. In spite of its exceeding cleanliness, this grub
is not exempt from the physiological ills inseparable from the stomach.
Like all that eats, it has intestinal waste matter with regard to which
its confinement compels it to behave with extreme discretion. Like so
many other close-cabined larvae of Wasps and Bees, it waits until the
moment of the transformation to rid itself of its digestive refuse.
Then, once and for all, it casts out the unclean accumulation whereof
the pupa, that delicate, reborn organism, must not retain the least
trace. This is found later, in any empty cell, in the form of a dark
purple plug. But, without waiting for this final purge, this lump, there
are, from time to time, slight excretions of fluid, clear as water. We
have only to keep a Wasp grub in a little glass tube to recognize these
occasional discharges. Well, I see nothing else to explain the action of
the Volucella's grubs when they dip into the cells without wounding the
larvae. They are looking for this liquid, they provoke its emission.
It represents to them a dainty which they enjoy over and above the more
substantial fare provided by the corpses.

The bumblebee fly, that sanitary inspector of the Vespine city, fulfils
a double office: she wipes the wasp's children and she rids the nest of
its dead. For this reason, she is peacefully received, as an auxiliary,
when she enters the burrow to lay her eggs; for this reason, her grub is
tolerated, nay more, respected, in the very heart of the dwelling, where
none might stray with impunity. I remember the brutal reception given
to the Saperda and Hylotoma grubs when I place them on a comb. Forthwith
grabbed, bruised and riddled with stings, the poor wretches perish. It
is quite a different matter with the offspring of the Volucella.
They come and go as they please, poke about in the cells, elbow the
inhabitants and remain unmolested. Let us give some instances of this
clemency, which is very strange in the irascible Wasp.

For a couple of hours, I fix my attention on a Volucella grub
established in a cell, side by side with the Wasp grub, the mistress
of the house. The hind quarters emerge, displaying their papillae.
Sometimes also the fore part, the head, shows, bending from side to side
with sudden, snake-like motions. The wasps have just filled their crops
at the honey pot; they are dispensing the rations, are very busily at
work; and things are taking place in broad daylight, on the table by the
window.

As they pass from cell to cell, the nurses repeatedly brush against and
stride across the Volucella grub. There is no doubt that they see
it. The intruder does not budge, or, if trodden on, curls up, only to
reappear the next moment. Some of the wasps stop, bend their heads
over the opening, seem to be making inquiries and then go off, without
troubling further about the state of things. One of them does something
even more remarkable: she tries to give a mouthful to the lawful
occupant of the cell; but the larva, which is being squeezed by its
visitor, has no appetite and refuses. Without the least sign of anxiety
on behalf of the nursling which she sees in awkward company, the wasp
retires and goes to distribute its ration elsewhere. In vain I prolong
my examination: there is no fluster of any kind. The Volucella grub
is treated as a friend, or at least as a visitor that does not matter.
There is no attempt to dislodge it, to worry it, to put it to flight.
Nor does the grub seem to trouble greatly about those who come and go.
Its tranquillity, tells us that it feels at home.

Here is some further evidence: the grub has plunged, head downwards,
into an empty cell, which is too small to contain the whole of it.
Its hindquarters stick out, very visibly. For long hours, it remains
motionless in this position. At every moment, wasps pass and repass
close by. Three of them, at one time together, at another separately,
come and nibble at the edges of the cell; they break off particles which
they reduce to paste for a new piece of work. The passers by, intent
upon their business, may not perceive the intruder; but these three
certainly do. During their work of demolition, they touch the grub with
their legs, their antennae, their palpi; and yet none of them minds it.
The fat grub, so easily recognized by its queer figure, is left alone;
and this in broad daylight, where everybody can see it. What must it be
when the profound darkness of the burrows protects the visitor with its
mysteries!

I have been experimenting all along with big Volucella grubs, colored
with the dirty red which comes with age. What effect will pure white
produce? I sprinkle on the surface of the combs some larvae that have
lately left the egg. The tiny, snow-white grubs make for the nearest
cells, go down into them, come out again and hunt elsewhere. The
wasps peaceably let them go their way, as heedless of the little white
invaders as of the big red ones. Sometimes, when it enters an occupied
cell, the little creature is seized by the owner, the wasp grub, which
nabs it and turns and returns it between its mandibles. Is this a
defensive bite? No, the wasp grub has merely blundered, taking its
visitor for a proffered mouthful. There is no great harm done. Thanks
to its suppleness, the little grub emerges from the grip intact and
continues its investigations.

It might occur to us to attribute this tolerance to some lack of
penetration in the wasps' vision. What follows will undeceive us: I
place separately, in empty cells, a grub of Saperda scalaria and a
Volucella grub, both of them white and selected so as not to fill the
cell entirely. Their presence is revealed only by the paleness of
the hind part which serves as a plug to the opening. A superficial
examination would leave the nature of the recluse undecided. The wasps
make no mistake: they extirpate the Saperda grub, kill it, fling it on
the dust heap; they leave the Volucella grub in peace.

The two strangers are quite well recognized in the secrecy of the cells:
one is the intruder that must be turned out; the other is the regular
visitor that must be respected. Sight helps, for things take place in
the daylight, under glass; but the wasps have other means of information
in the dimness of the burrow. When I produce darkness by covering the
apparatus with a screen, the murder of the trespassers is accomplished
just the same. For so say the police regulations of the wasps' nest: any
stranger discovered must be slain and thrown on the midden.

To thwart this vigilance, the real enemies need to be masters of the art
of deceptive immobility and cunning disguise. But there is no deception
about the Volucella grub. It comes and goes, openly, wheresoever it
will; it looks round amongst the wasps for cells to suit it. What has it
to make itself thus respected? Strength? Certainly not. It is a harmless
creature, which the wasp could rip open with a blow of her shears, while
a touch of the sting would mean lightning death. It is a familiar guest,
to whom no denizen of a wasps' nest bears any ill will. Why? Because
it renders good service: so far from working mischief, it does the
scavenging for its hosts. Were it an enemy or merely an intruder, it
would be exterminated; as a deserving assistant, it is respected.

Then what need is there for the Volucella to disguise herself as a
wasp? Any fly, whether clad in drab or motley, is admitted to the burrow
directly she makes herself useful to the community. The mimicry of the
bumblebee fly, which was said to be one of the most conclusive cases,
is, after all, a mere childish notion. Patient observation, continually
face to face with facts, will have none of it and leaves it to the
armchair naturalists, who are too prone to look at the animal world
through the illusive mists of theory.




CHAPTER XII. MATHEMATICAL MEMORIES: NEWTON'S BINOMIAL THEOREM

The spider's web is a glorious mathematical problem. I should enjoy
working it out in all its details, were I not afraid of wearying the
reader's attention. Perhaps I have even gone too far in the little that
I have said, in which case I owe him some compensation: 'Would you
like me,' I will ask him, 'would you like me to tell you how I acquired
sufficient algebra to master the logarithmic systems and how I became
a surveyor of Spiders' webs? Would you? It will give us a rest from
natural history.'

I seem to catch a sign of acquiescence. The story of my village school,
visited by the chicks and the porkers, has been received with some
indulgence; why should not my harsh school of solitude possess its
interest as well? Let us try to describe it. And who knows? Perhaps,
in doing so, I shall revive the courage of some other poor derelict
hungering after knowledge.

I was denied the privilege of learning with a master. I should be wrong
to complain. Solitary study has its advantages: it does not cast you in
the official mould; it leaves you all your originality. Wild fruit, when
it ripens, has a different taste from hothouse produce: it leaves on
a discriminating palate a bittersweet flavor whose virtue is all the
greater for the contrast. Yes, if it were in my power, I would start
afresh, face to face with my only counselor, the book itself, not always
a very lucid one; I would gladly resume my lonely watches, my struggles
with the darkness whence, at last, a glimmer appears as I continue to
explore it; I should retraverse the irksome stages of yore, stimulated
by the one desire that has never failed me, the desire of learning and
of afterwards bestowing my mite of knowledge on others.

When I left the normal school, my stock of mathematics was of the
scantiest. How to extract a square root, how to calculate and prove the
surface of a sphere: these represented to me the culminating points of
the subject. Those terrible logarithms, when I happened to open a
table of them, made my head swim, with their columns of figures; actual
fright, not unmixed with respect, overwhelmed me on the very threshold
of that arithmetical cave. Of algebra I had no knowledge whatever. I had
heard the name; and the syllables represented to my poor brain the whole
whirling legion of the abstruse.

Besides, I felt no inclination to decipher the alarming hieroglyphics.
They made one of those indigestible dishes which we confidently extol
without touching them. I greatly preferred a fine line of Virgil, whom I
was now beginning to understand; and I should have been surprised
indeed had any one told me that, for long years to come, I should be an
enthusiastic student of the formidable science. Good fortune procured me
my first lesson in algebra, a lesson given and not received, of course.

A young man of about my own age came to me and asked me to teach him
algebra. He was preparing for his examination as a civil engineer; and
he came to me because, ingenuous youth that he was, he took me for
a well of learning. The guileless applicant was very far out in his
reckoning.

His request gave me a shock of surprise, which was forthwith repressed
on reflection: 'I give algebra lessons?' said I to myself. 'It would be
madness: I don't know anything about the subject!'

And I left it at that for a moment or two, thinking hard, drawn now
this way, now that with indecision: 'Shall I accept? Shall I refuse?'
continued the inner voice.

Pooh, let's accept! An heroic method of learning to swim is to
leap boldly into the sea. Let us hurl ourselves head first into the
algebraical gulf; and perhaps the imminent danger of drowning will call
forth efforts capable of bringing me to land. I know nothing of what
he wants. It makes no difference: let's go ahead and plunge into the
mystery. I shall learn by teaching.

It was a fine courage that drove me full tilt into a province which I
had not yet thought of entering. My twenty-year-old confidence was an
incomparable lever.

'Very well,' I replied. 'Come the day after tomorrow, at five, and we'll
begin.'

This twenty-four hours' delay concealed a plan. It secured me the
respite of a day, the blessed Thursday, which would give me time to
collect my forces.

Thursday comes. The sky is gray and cold. In this horrid weather, a
grate well filled with coke has its charms. Let's warm ourselves and
think.

Well, my boy, you've landed yourself in a nice predicament! How will
you manage tomorrow? With a book, plodding all through the night, if
necessary, you might scrape up something resembling a lesson, just
enough to fill the dread hour more or less. Then you could see about the
next: sufficient for the day is the evil thereof. But you haven't the
book. And it's no use running out to the bookshop. Algebraical treatises
are not current wares. You'll have to send for one, which will take
a fortnight at least. And I've promised for tomorrow, for tomorrow
certain! Another argument and one that admits of no reply: funds are
low; my last pecuniary resources lie in the corner of a drawer. I count
the money: it amounts to twelve sous, which is not enough.

Must I cry off? Rather not! One resource suggests itself: a highly
improper one, I admit, not far removed indeed from larceny. O quiet
paths of algebra, you are my excuse for this venial sin! Let me confess
the temporary embezzlement.

Life at my college is more or less cloistered. In return for a modest
payment, most of us masters are lodged in the building; and we take our
meals at the principal's table. The science master, who is the big gun
of the staff and lives in the town, has nevertheless, like ourselves,
his own two cells, in addition to a balcony, or leads, where the
chemical preparations give forth their suffocating gases in the open
air. For this reason, he finds it more convenient to hold his class here
during the greater part of the year. The boys come to these rooms in
winter, in front of a grate stuffed full of coke, like mine, and there
find a blackboard, a pneumatic trough, a mantelpiece covered with glass
receivers, panoplies of bent tubes on the walls, and, lastly, a
certain cupboard in which I remember seeing a row of books, the oracles
consulted by the master in the course of his lessons.

'Among those books,' said I to myself, 'there is sure to be one on
algebra. To ask the owner for the loan of it does not appeal to me.
My amiable colleague would receive me superciliously and laugh at my
ambitious aims. I am sure he would refuse my request.'

The future was to show that my distrust was justified. Narrow mindedness
and petty jealousy prevail everywhere alike.

I decide to help myself to this book, which I should never get by
asking. This is the half-holiday. The science master will not put in an
appearance today; and the key of my room is practically the same as his.
I go, with eyes and ears on the alert. My key does not quite fit; it
sticks a little, then goes in; and an extra effort makes it turn in
the lock. The door opens. I inspect the cupboard and find that it does
contain an algebra book, one of the big, fat books which men used to
write in those days, a book nearly half a foot thick. My legs give way
beneath me. You poor specimen of a housebreaker, suppose you were caught
at it! However, all goes well. Quick, let's lock the door again and go
back to our own quarters with the pilfered volume.

And now we are together, O mysterious tome, whose Arab name breathes a
strange mustiness of occult lore and claims kindred with the sciences of
almagest and alchemy. What will you show me? Let us turn the leaves at
random. Before fixing one's eyes on a definite point in the landscape,
it is well to take a summary view of the whole. Page follows swiftly
upon page, telling me nothing. A chapter catches my attention in the
middle of the volume; it is headed, Newton's Binomial Theorem.

The title allures me. What can a binomial theorem be, especially one
whose author is Newton, the great English mathematician who weighed the
worlds? What has the mechanism of the sky to do with this? Let us read
and seek for enlightenment. With my elbows on the table and my thumbs
behind my ears, I concentrate all my attention.

I am seized with astonishment, for I understand! There are a certain
number of letters, general symbols which are grouped in all manner of
ways, taking their places here, there and elsewhere by turns; there are,
as the text tells me, arrangements, permutations and combinations.
Pen in hand, I arrange, permute and combine. It is a very diverting
exercise, upon my word, a game in which the test of the written result
confirms the anticipations of logic and supplements the shortcomings of
one's thinking apparatus.

'It will be plain sailing,' said I to myself, 'if algebra is no more
difficult than this.'

I was to recover from the illusion later, when the binomial theorem,
that light, crisp biscuit, was followed by heavier and less
digestible fare. But, for the moment, I had no foretaste of the
future difficulties, of the pitfall in which one becomes more and more
entangled, the longer one persists in struggling. What a delightful
afternoon that was, before my grate, amid my permutations and
combinations! By the evening, I had nearly mastered my subject. When the
bell rang, at seven, to summon us to the common meal at the principal's
table, I went downstairs puffed up with the joys of the newly initiated
neophyte. I was escorted on my way by a, b and c, intertwined in cunning
garlands.

Next day, my pupil is there. Blackboard and chalk, everything is ready.
Not quite so ready is the master. I bravely broach my binomial theorem.
My hearer becomes interested in the combinations of letters. Not for a
moment does he suspect that I am putting the cart before the horse and
beginning where we ought to have finished. I relieve the dryness of my
explanations with a few little problems, so many halts at which the mind
takes breath awhile and gathers strength for fresh flights.

We try together. Discreetly, so as to leave him the merit of the
discovery, I shed a little light on the path. The solution is found. My
pupil triumphs; so do I, but silently, in my inner consciousness, which
says:

'You understand, because you succeed in making another understand.'

The hour passed quickly and very pleasantly for both of us. My young man
was contented when he left me; and I no less so, for I perceived a new
and original way of learning things.

The ingenious and easy arrangement of the binomial gave me time to
tackle my algebra book from the proper commencement. In three or four
days, I had rubbed up my weapons. There was nothing to be said about
addition and subtraction: they were so simple as to force themselves
upon one at first sight. Multiplication spoilt things. There was a
certain rule of signs which declared that minus multiplied by minus made
plus. How I toiled over that wretched paradox! It would seem that
the book did not explain this subject clearly, or rather employed too
abstract a method. I read, reread and meditated in vain: the obscure
text retained all its obscurity. That is the drawback of books in
general: they tell you what is printed in them and nothing more. If
you fail to understand, they never advise you, never suggest an attempt
along another road which might lead you to the light. The merest word
would sometimes be enough to put you on the right track; and that word
the books, hidebound in a regulation phraseology, never give you.

How greatly preferable is the oral lesson! It goes forward, goes back,
starts afresh, walks around the obstacle and varies the methods of
attack until, at long last, light is shed upon the darkness. This
incomparable beacon of the master's word was what I lacked; and I went
under, without hope of succor, in that treacherous pool of the rule of
signs.

My pupil was bound to suffer the effects. After an attempt at an
explanation in which I made the most of the few gleams that reached me I
asked him:

'Do you understand?'

It was a futile question, but useful for gaining time. Myself not
understanding, I was convinced beforehand that he did not understand
either.

'No,' he replied, accusing himself, perhaps, in his simple mind, of
possessing a brain incapable of taking in those transcendental verities.

'Let us try another method.'

And I start again this way and that way and yet another way. My pupil's
eyes serve as my thermometer and tell me of the progress of my efforts.
A blink of satisfaction announces my success. I have struck home, I have
found the joint in the armor. The product of minus multiplied by minus
delivers its mysteries to us.

And thus we continued our studies: he, the passive receiver, taking in
the ideas acquired without effort; I, the fierce pioneer, blasting my
rock, the book, with the aid of much sitting up at night, to extract the
diamond, truth. Another and no less arduous task fell to my share: I had
to cut and polish the recondite gem, to strip it of its ruggedness
and present it to my companion's intelligence under a less forbidding
aspect. This diamond cutter's work, which admitted a little light into
the precious stone, was the favorite occupation of my leisure; and I owe
a great deal to it.

The ultimate result was that my pupil passed his examination. As for the
book borrowed by stealth, I restored it to the shelves and replaced it
by another, which, this time, belonged to me.

At my normal school, I had learnt a little elementary geometry under
a master. From the first few lessons onwards, I rather enjoyed the
subject. I divined in it a guide for one's reasoning faculties through
the thickets of the imagination; I caught a glimpse of a search after
truth that did not involve too much stumbling on the way, because each
step forward rests solidly upon the step already taken; I suspected
geometry to be what it preeminently is: a school of intellectual
fencing.

The truth demonstrated and its application matter little to me; what
rouses my enthusiasm is the process that sets the truth before us.
We start from a brilliantly lighted spot and gradually get deeper and
deeper in the darkness, which, in its turn, becomes self-illuminated by
kindling new lights for a higher ascent. This progressive march of
the known toward the unknown, this conscientious lantern lighting what
follows by the rays of what comes before: that was my real business.

Geometry was to teach me the logical progression of thought; it was
to tell me how the difficulties are broken up into sections which,
elucidated consecutively, together form a lever capable of moving the
block that resists any direct efforts; lastly, it showed me how order is
engendered, order, the base of clarity. If it has ever fallen to my lot
to write a page or two which the reader has run over without excessive
fatigue, I owe it, in great part, to geometry, that wonderful teacher
of the art of directing one's thought. True, it does not bestow
imagination, a delicate flower blossoming none knows how and unable to
thrive on every soil; but it arranges what is confused, thins out the
dense, calms the tumultuous, filters the muddy and gives lucidity, a
superior product to all the tropes of rhetoric.

Yes, as a toiler with the pen, I owe much to it. Wherefore my thoughts
readily turn back to those bright hours of my novitiate, when, retiring
to a corner of the garden in recreation time, with a bit of paper on my
knees and a stump of pencil in my fingers, I used to practice deducing
this or that property correctly from an assemblage of straight lines.
The others amused themselves all around me; I found my delight in the
frustum of a pyramid. Perhaps I should have done better to strengthen
the muscles of my thighs by jumping and leaping, to increase the
suppleness of my loins with gymnastic contortions. I have known some
contortionists who have prospered beyond the thinker.

See me then entering the lists as an instructor of youth, fairly well
acquainted with the elements of geometry. In case of need, I could
handle the land surveyor's stake and chain. There my views ended. To
cube the trunk of a tree, to gauge a cask, to measure the distance of an
inaccessible point appeared to me the highest pitch to which geometrical
knowledge could hope to soar. Were there loftier flights? I did not even
suspect it, when an unexpected glimpse showed me the puny dimensions of
the little corner which I had cleared in the measureless domain.

At that time, the college in which, two years before, I had made my
first appearance as a teacher, had just halved the size of its classes
and largely increased its staff. The newcomers all lived in the
building, like myself, and we had our meals in common at the principal's
table. We formed a hive where, in our leisure time, some of us, in our
respective cells, worked up the honey of algebra and geometry, history
and physics, Greek and Latin most of all, sometimes with a view to the
class above, sometimes and oftener with a view to acquiring a degree.
The university titles lacked variety. All my colleagues were bachelors
of letters, but nothing more. They must, if possible, arm themselves
a little better to make their way in the world. We all worked hard and
steadily. I was the youngest of the industrious community and no less
eager than the rest to increase my modest equipment.

Visits between the different rooms were frequent. We would come to
consult one another about a difficulty, or simply to pass the time
of day. I had as a neighbor, in the next cell to mine, a retired
quartermaster who, weary of barrack life, had taken refuge in education.
When in charge of the books of his company he had become more or less
familiar with figures; and it became his ambition to take a mathematical
degree. His cerebrum appears to have hardened while he was with his
regiment. According to my dear colleagues, those amiable retailers
of the misfortunes of others, he had already twice been plucked.
Stubbornly, he returned to his books and exercises, refusing to be
daunted by two reverses.

It was not that he was allured by the beauties of mathematics, far from
it; but the step to which he aspired favored his plans. He hoped to
have his own boarders and dispense butter and vegetables to lucrative
purpose. The lover of study for its own sake and the persistent trapper
hunting a diploma as he would something to put in his mouth were not
made to understand or to see much of each other. Chance, however,
brought us together.

I had often surprised our friend sitting in the evening, by the light of
a candle, with his elbows on the table and his head between his hands,
meditating at great length in front of a big exercise book crammed with
cabalistic signs. From time to time, when an idea came to him, he would
take his pen and hastily put down a line of writing wherein letters,
large and small, were grouped without any grammatical sense. The letters
x and y often recurred, intermingled with figures. Every row ended
with the sign of equality and a nought. Next came more reflection, with
closed eyes, and a fresh row of letters arranged in a different order
and likewise followed by a nought. Page after page was filled in this
queer fashion, each line winding up with 0.

'What are you doing with all those rows of figures amounting to zero?' I
asked him one day.

The mathematician gave me a leery look, picked up in barracks. A
sarcastic droop in the corner of his eye showed how he pitied my
ignorance. My colleague of the many noughts did not, however, take an
unfair advantage of his superiority. He told me that he was working at
analytical geometry.

The phrase had a strange effect upon me. I ruminated silently to this
purpose: there was a higher geometry, which you learnt more particularly
with combinations of letters in which x and y played a prominent part.
When my next-door neighbor reflected so long, clutching his forehead
between his hands, he was trying to discover the hidden meaning of his
own hieroglyphics; he saw the ghostly translation of his sums dancing in
space. What did he perceive? How would the alphabetical signs, arranged
first in one and then in another manner, give an image of the actual
things, an image visible to the eyes of the mind alone? It beat me.

'I shall have to learn analytical geometry some day,' I said. 'Will you
help me?'

'I'm quite willing,' he replied, with a smile in which I read his lack
of confidence in my determination.

No matter; we struck a bargain that same evening. We would together
break up the stubble of algebra and analytical geometry, the foundation
of the mathematical degree; we would make common stock: he would bring
long hours of calculation, I my youthful ardor. We would begin as soon
as I had finished with my arts degree, which was my main preoccupation
for the moment.

In those far off days it was the rule to make a little serious literary
study take precedence of science. You were expected to be familiar
with the great minds of antiquity, to converse with Horace and Virgil,
Theocritus and Plato, before touching the poisons of chemistry or the
levers of mechanics. The niceties of thought could only be the gainers
by these preparations. Life's exigencies, ever harsher as progress
afflicts us with its increasing needs, have changed all that. A fig for
correct language! Business before all!

This modern hurry would have suited my impatience. I confess that I
fumed against the regulation which forced Latin and Greek upon me before
allowing me to open up relations with the sine and cosine. Today, wiser,
ripened by age and experience, I am of a different opinion. I very much
regret that my modest literary studies were not more carefully conducted
and further prolonged. To fill up this enormous blank a little, I
respectfully returned, somewhat late in life, to those good old books
which are usually sold second-hand with their leaves hardly cut.
Venerable pages, annotated in pencil during the long evenings of my
youth, I have found you again and you are more than ever my friends. You
have taught me that an obligation rests upon whoever wields the pen: he
must have something to say that is capable of interesting us. When
the subject comes within the scope of natural science, the interest is
nearly always assured; the difficulty, the great difficulty, is to prune
it of its thorns and to present it under a prepossessing aspect. Truth,
they say, rises naked from a well. Agreed; but admit that she is all
the better for being decently clothed. She craves, if not the gaudy
furbelows borrowed from rhetoric's wardrobe, at least a vine leaf. The
geometers alone have the right to refuse her that modest garment; in
theorems, plainness suffices. The others, especially the naturalist, are
in duty bound to drape a gauze tunic more or less elegantly around her
waist.

Suppose I say: 'Baptiste, give me my slippers.'

I am expressing myself in plain language, a little poor in variants. I
know exactly what I am saying and my speech is understood.

Others--and they are numerous--contend that this rudimentary method is
the best in all things. They talk science to their readers as they might
talk slippers to Baptiste. Kaffir syntax does not shock them. Do not
speak to them of the value of a well selected term, set down in its
right place, still less of a lilting construction, sounding rather well.
Childish nonsense they call all that; the fiddling of a short sighted
mind!

Perhaps they are right: the Baptiste idiom is a great economizer of time
and trouble. This advantage does not tempt me; it seems to me that
an idea stands out better if expressed in lucid language, with sober
imagery. A suitable phrase, placed in its correct position and saying
without fuss the things we want to say, necessitates a choice, an often
laborious choice. There are drab words, the commonplaces of colloquial
speech; and there are, so to speak, colored words, which may be compared
with the brushstrokes strewing patches of light over the gray background
of a painting. How are we to find those picturesque words, those
striking features which arrest the attention? How are we to group them
into a language heedful of syntax and not displeasing to the ear?

I was taught nothing of this art. For that matter, is it ever taught
in the schools? I greatly doubt it. If the fire that runs through our
veins, if inspiration do not come to our aid, we shall flutter the pages
of the thesaurus in vain: the word for which we seek will refuse to
come. Then to what masters shall we have recourse to quicken and develop
the humble germ that is latent within us? To books.

As a boy, I was always an ardent reader; but the niceties of a
well-balanced style hardly interested me: I did not understand them. A
good deal later, when close upon fifteen, I began vaguely to see that
words have a physiognomy of their own. Some pleased me better than
others by the distinctness of their meaning and the resonance of their
rhythm; they produced a clearer image in my mind; after their fashion,
they gave me a picture of the object described. Colored by its adjective
and vivified by its verb, the name became a living reality: what it said
I saw. And thus, gradually, was the magic of words revealed to me, when
the chances of, my undirected reading placed a few easy standard pages
in my way.




CHAPTER XIII. MATHEMATICAL MEMORIES: MY LITTLE TABLE

It is time to start our analytical geometry. He can come now, my
partner, the mathematician: I think I shall understand what he says.
I have already run through my book and noticed that our subject, whose
beautiful precision makes work a recreation, bristles with no very
serious difficulties.

We begin in my room, in front of a blackboard. After a few evenings,
prolonged into the peaceful watches of the night, I become aware, to my
great surprise, that my teacher, the past master in those hieroglyphics,
is really, more often than not, my pupil. He does not see the
combinations of the abscissas and ordinates very clearly. I make bold
to take the chalk in hand myself, to seize the rudder of our algebraical
boat. I comment on the book, interpret it in my own fashion, expound the
text, sound the reefs until daylight comes and leads us to the haven of
the solution. Besides, the logic is so irresistible, it is all such easy
going and so lucid that often one seems to be remembering rather than
learning.

And so we proceed, with our positions reversed. I dig into the hard
rock, crumble it, loosen it until I make room for thought to penetrate.
My comrade--I can now allow myself to speak of him on equal terms--my
comrade listens, suggests objections, raises difficulties which we try
to solve in unison. The two combined levers, inserted in the fissure,
end by shaking and overturning the rocky mass.

I no longer see in the corner of the quartermaster's eye the leery
droop that greeted me at the start. Cordial frankness now reigns, the
infectious high spirits imparted by success. Little by little, dawn
breaks, very misty as yet, but laden with promises. We are both greatly
amazed; and my share in the satisfaction is a double one, for he sees
twice over who makes others see. Thus do we pass half the night, in
delightful hours. We cease when sleep begins to weigh too heavily on our
eyelids.

When my comrade returns to his room, does he sleep, careless for the
moment of the shifting scene which we have conjured up? He confesses to
me that he sleeps soundly. This advantage I do not possess. It is not
in my power to pass the sponge over my poor brain even as I pass it
over the blackboard. The network of ideas remains and forms as it were a
moving cobweb in which repose wriggles and tosses, incapable of finding
a stable equilibrium. When sleep does come at last, it is often but a
state of somnolence which, far from suspending the activity of the mind,
actually maintains and quickens it more than waking would. During this
torpor, in which night has not yet closed upon the brain, I sometimes
solve mathematical difficulties with which I struggled unsuccessfully
the day before. A brilliant beacon, of which I am hardly conscious,
flares in my brain. Then I jump out of bed, light my lamp again and
hasten to jot down my solutions, the recollection of which I should
have lost on awakening. Like lightning flashes, those gleams vanish as
suddenly as they appear.

Whence do they come? Probably from a habit which I acquired very early
in life: to have food always there for my mind, to pour the never
failing oil constantly into the lamp of thought. Would you succeed in
the things of the mind? The infallible method is to be always thinking
of them. This method I practiced more sedulously than my comrade; and
hence, no doubt, arose the interchange of positions, the disciple turned
into the master. It was not, however, an overwhelming infatuation, a
painful obsession; it was rather a recreation, almost a poetic feast. As
our great lyric writer put it in the preface to his volume, Les Rayons
et les ombres: 'Mathematics play their part in art as well as in
science. There is algebra in astronomy: astronomy is akin to poetry;
there is algebra in music: music is akin to poetry.'

Is this poetic exaggeration? Surely not: Victor Hugo spoke truly.
Algebra, the poem of order, has magnificent flights. I look upon its
formulae, its strophes as superb, without feeling at all astonished when
others do not agree. My colleague's satirical look came back when I was
imprudent enough to confide my extrageometrical raptures to his ears:
'Nonsense,' said he, 'pure stuff and nonsense! Let's get on with our
tangents.'

The quartermaster was right: the strict severity of our approaching
examination allowed of no such dreamer's outbursts. Was I, on my side,
very wrong? To warm chill calculation by the fire of the ideal, to
lift one's thought above mere formulae, to brighten the caverns of
the abstract with a spark of life: was this not to ease the effort
of penetrating the unknown? Where my comrade plodded on, scorning my
viaticum, I performed a journey of pleasure. If I had to lean on the
rude staff of algebra, I had for my guide that voice within me, urging
me to lofty flights. Study became a joy.

It became still more interesting when, after the angularities of a
combination of straight lines, I learnt to portray the graces of a
curve. How many properties were there of which the compass knew nothing,
how many cunning laws lay contained in embryo within an equation, the
mysterious nut which must be artistically cracked to extract the rich
kernel, the theorem! Take this or that term, place the + sign before it
and forthwith you have the ellipse, the trajectory of the planets,
with its two friendly foci, transmitting pairs of vectors whose sum
is constant; substitute the--sign and you have the hyperbola with
the antagonistic foci, the desperate curve that dives into space with
infinite tentacles, approaching nearer and nearer to straight lines, the
asymptotes, but never succeeding in meeting them. Suppress that term and
you have the parabola, which vainly seeks in infinity its lost second
focus; you have the trajectory of the bombshell; you have the path of
certain comets which come one day to visit our sun and then flee to
depths whence they never return. Is it not wonderful thus to formulate
the orbit of the worlds? I thought so then and I think so still.

After fifteen months of this exercise, we went up together for our
examination at Montpellier; and both of us received our degrees as
bachelors of mathematical science. My companion was a wreck: I, on the
other hand, had refreshed myself with analytical geometry.

Utterly worn out by his course of conic sections, my chum declares that
he has had enough. In vain I hold out the glittering prospect of a new
degree, that of licentiate of mathematical science, which would lead
us to the splendors of the higher mathematics and initiate us into the
mechanics of the heavens: I cannot prevail upon him, cannot make him
share my audacity. He calls it a mad scheme, which will exhaust us and
come to nothing. Without the advice of an experienced pilot, with no
other compass than a book, which is not always very clear, because of
its laconic adherence to set terms, our poor bark is bound to be wrecked
on the first reef. One might as well put out to sea in a nutshell and
defy the billows of the vasty deep. He does not use these actual words,
but his gloomy estimate of the extreme difficulties to be encountered is
enough to explain his refusal. I am quite free to go and break my neck
in far countries; he is more prudent and will not follow me.

I suspect another reason, which the deserter does not confess. He has
obtained the title needed for his plans. What does he care for the rest?
Is it worth while to sit up late at night and wear one's self out in
toil for the mere pleasure of learning? He must be a madman who, without
the lure of profit, lends an ear to the blandishments of knowledge. Let
us retreat into our shell, close our lid to the importunities of the
light and lead the life of a mussel. There lies the secret of happiness.
This philosophy is not mine. My curiosity sees in a stage accomplished
no more than the preparation for a new stage towards the retreating
unknown. My partner, therefore, leaves me. Henceforth, I am alone, alone
and wretched. There is no one left with whom I can sit up and thresh
the subject out in exhilarating discussion. There is no one near me to
understand me, no one who can even passively oppose his ideas to mine
and take part in the conflict whence the light will spring, even as a
spark is born of the concussion of two flints. When a difficulty arises,
steep as a cliff, there is no friendly shoulder to support me in my
attempt to climb it. Alone, I have to cling to the roughness of the
jagged rock, to fall, often, and pick myself up, covered with bruises,
and renew the assault; alone, I must give my shout of triumph, without
the least echo of encouragement, when, reaching the summit and broken in
the effort, I am at last allowed to see a little way beyond.

My mathematical campaign will cost me much stubborn thought: I am aware
of this after the first few lines of my book. I am entering upon the
domain of the abstract, rough ground that can only be cleared by the
insistent plow of reflection. The blackboard, excellent for the curves
of analytical geometry studied in my friend's company, is now neglected.
I prefer the exercise book, a quire of paper bound in a cover. With this
confidant, which allows one to remain seated and rests the muscles of
the legs, I can commune nightly under my lampshade, until a late hour,
and keep going the forge of thought wherein the intractable problem is
softened and hammered into shape.

My study table, the size of a pocket handkerchief, occupied on the right
by the ink stand--a penny bottle--and on the left by the open exercise
book, gives me just the room which I need to wield the pen. I love that
little piece of furniture, one of the first acquisitions of my early
married life. It is easily moved where you wish: in front of the window,
when the sky is cloudy; into the discreet light of a corner, when
the sun is troublesome. In winter, it allows you to come close to the
hearth, where a log is blazing.

Poor little walnut board, I have been faithful to you for half a century
and more. Ink-stained, cut and scarred with the penknife, you lend
your support today to my prose as you once did to my equations. This
variation in employment leaves you indifferent; your patient back
extends the same welcome to the formulae of algebra and the formula of
thought. I cannot boast this placidity; I find that the change has not
increased my peace of mind; hunting for ideas troubles the brain even
more than hunting for the roots of an equation.

You would never recognize me, little friend, if you could give a glance
at my gray mane. Where is the cheerful face of former days, bright with
enthusiasm and hope? I have aged, I have aged. And you, what a falling
off, since you came to me from the dealer's, gleaming and polished and
smelling so good with your beeswax! Like your master, you have wrinkles,
often my work, I admit; for how many times, in my impatience, have I not
dug my pen into you, when, after its dip in the muddy inkpot, the nib
refused to write decently!

One of your corners is broken off; the boards are beginning to
come loose. Inside you, I hear, from time to time, the plane of
the death-watch, who despoils old furniture. From year to year, new
galleries are excavated, endangering your solidity. The old ones show on
the outside in the shape of tiny round holes. A stranger has seized
upon the latter, excellent quarters, obtained without trouble. I see the
impudent intruder run nimbly under my elbow and penetrate forthwith into
the tunnel abandoned by the death-watch. She is after game, this slender
huntress, clad in black, busy collecting wood lice for her grubs. A
whole nation is devouring you, you old table; I am writing on a swarm of
insects! No support could be more appropriate to my entomological notes.

What will become of you when your master is gone? Will you be knocked
down for a franc, when the family come to apportion my poor spoils? Will
you be turned into a stand for the pitcher beside the kitchen sink?
Will you be the plank on which the cabbages are shredded? Or will my
children, on the contrary, agree and say:

'Let us preserve the relic. It was where he toiled so hard to teach
himself and make himself capable of teaching others; it was where he so
long consumed his strength to find food for us when we were little. Let
us keep the sacred plank.'

I dare not believe in such a future for you. You will pass into strange
hands, O my old friend; you will become a bedside table, laden with bowl
after bowl of linseed tea, until, decrepit, rickety and broken down, you
are chopped up to feed the flames for a brief moment under the simmering
saucepan. You will vanish in smoke to join my labors in that other
smoke, oblivion, the ultimate resting place of our vain agitations.

But let us return, little table, to our young days; those of your
shining varnish and of my fond illusions. It is Sunday, the day of rest,
that is to say, of continuous work, uninterrupted by my duties in the
school. I greatly prefer Thursday, which is not a general holiday
and more propitious to studious calm. Such as it is, for all its
distractions, the Lord's day gives me a certain leisure. Let us make the
most of it. There are fifty-two Sundays in the year, making a total that
is almost equivalent to the long vacation.

It so happens that I have a glorious question to wrestle with today;
that of Kepler's three laws, which, when explored by the calculus, are
to show me the fundamental mechanism of the heavenly bodies. One of them
says: 'The area swept out in a given time by the radius vector of the
path of a planet is proportional to the time taken.'

From this I have to deduce that the force which confines the planet
to its orbit is directed towards the sun. Gently entreated by the
differential and integral calculus, already the formula is beginning to
voice itself. My concentration redoubles, my mind is set upon seizing
the radiant dawn of truth.

Suddenly, in the distance, br-r-r-rum! Br-r-r-rum! Br-r-r-rum! The noise
comes nearer, grows louder. Woe upon me! And plague take the Pagoda!

Let me explain. I live in a suburb, at the beginning of the Pernes Road,
far from the tumult of the town [of Carpentras where Fabre was a master
at the college]. Twenty yards in front of my house, some pleasure
gardens have been opened, bearing a signboard inscribed, 'The Pagoda.'
Here, on Sunday afternoons, the lads and lasses from the neighboring
farms come to disport themselves in country dances. To attract custom
and push the sale of refreshments, the proprietor of the ball ends
the Sunday hop with a tombola. Two hours beforehand, he has the prizes
carried along the public roads, preceded by fifes and drums. From a
beribboned pole, borne by a stalwart fellow in a red sash, dangle a
plated goblet, a handkerchief of Lyons silk, a pair of candlesticks and
some packets of cigars. Who would not enter the pleasure gardens, with
such a bait?

'Br-r-r-rum! Br-r-r-rum! Br-r-r-rum!' goes the procession.

It comes just under my window, wheels to the right and marches into the
establishment, a huge wooden booth, hung with evergreens. And now, if
you dislike noise, flee, flee as far as you can. Until nightfall, the
ophicleides will bellow, the fifes tootle and the cornets bray. How
would you deduce the steps of Kepler's laws to the accompaniment of that
noisy orchestra! It is enough to drive one mad. Let us be off with all
speed.

A mile away, I know a flinty waste beloved of the wheatear and the
locust. Here reigns perfect calm; moreover, there are some clumps of
evergreen oak which will lend me their scanty shade. I take my book,
a few sheets of paper and a pencil and fly to this solitude. What
beauteous silence, what exquisite quiet! But the sun is overwhelming,
under the meager cover of the bushes. Cheerily, my lad! Have at your
Kepler's laws in the company of the blue-winged locusts. You will return
home with your problems solved, but with a blistered skin. An overdose
of sun in the neck shall be the outcome of grasping the law of the
areas. One thing makes up for another.

During the rest of the week, I have my Thursdays and the evenings, which
I employ in study until I drop with sleep. All told I have no lack of
time, despite the drudgery of my college ties. The great thing is not
to be discouraged by the unavoidable difficulties encountered at
the outset. I lose my way easily in that dense forest overgrown with
creepers that have to be cut away with the axe to obtain a clearing. A
fortunate turn or two; and I once more know where I am. I lose my way
again. The stubborn axe makes its opening without always letting in
sufficient light.

The book is just a book, that is to say, a set text, saying not a word
more than it is obliged to, exceedingly learned, I admit, but,
alas, often obscure! The author, it seems, wrote it for himself. He
understood; therefore others must. Poor beginners, left to yourselves,
you manage as best you can! For you, there shall be no retracing of
steps in order to tackle the difficulty in another way; no circuit
easing the arduous road and preparing the passage; no supplementary
aperture to admit a glimmer of daylight. Incomparably inferior to the
spoken word, which begins again with fresh methods of attack and is
ready to vary the paths that lead to the open, the book says what it
says and nothing more. Having finished its demonstration, whether you
understand or no, the oracle is inexorably dumb. You reread the text and
ponder it obstinately; you pass and repass your shuttle through the woof
of figures. Useless efforts all: the darkness continues. What would be
needed to supply the illuminating ray? Often enough, a trifle, a mere
word; and that word the book will not speak.

Happy is he who is guided by a master's teaching! His progress does not
know the misery of those wearisome breakdowns. What was I to do before
the disheartening wall that every now and then rose up and barred
my road? I followed d'Alembert's precept in his advice to young
mathematical students: 'Have faith and go ahead,' said the great
geometrician.

Faith I had; and I went on pluckily. And it was well for me that I did,
for I often found behind the wall the enlightenment which I was seeking
in front of it. Giving up the bad patch as hopeless, I would go on and,
after I had left it behind, discover the dynamite capable of blasting
it. 'Twas a tiny grain at first, an insignificant ball rolling and
increasing as it went. From one slope to the other of the theorems, it
grew to a heavy mass; and the mass became a mighty projectile which,
flung backwards and retracing its course, split the darkness and spread
it into one vast sheet of light.

D'Alembert's precept is good and very good, provided you do not abuse
it. Too much precipitation in turning over the intractable page might
expose you to many a disappointment. You must have fought the difficulty
tooth and nail before abandoning it. This rough skirmishing leads to
intellectual vigor.

Twelve months of meditation in the company of my little table at last
won me my degree as a licentiate of mathematical science; and I was
now qualified to perform, half a century later, the eminently lucrative
functions of an inspector of Spiders' webs!




CHAPTER XIV. THE BLUEBOTTLE: THE LAYING

To purge the earth of death's impurities and cause deceased animal
matter to be once more numbered among the treasures of life there
are hosts of sausage queens, including, in our part of the world, the
bluebottle (Calliphora vomitaria, LIN.) and the checkered flesh fly
(Sarcophaga carnaria, LIN.). Every one knows the first, the big,
dark-blue fly who, after effecting her designs in the ill-watched meat
safe, settles on our window panes and keeps up a solemn buzzing, anxious
to be off in the sun and ripen a fresh emission of germs. How does
she lay her eggs, the origin of the loathsome maggot that battens
poisonously on our provisions, whether of game or butcher's meat? What
are her stratagems and how can we foil them? This is what I propose to
investigate.

The bluebottle frequents our homes during autumn and a part of winter,
until the cold becomes severe; but her appearance in the fields dates
back much earlier. On the first fine day in February, we shall see her
warming herself, chillily, against the sunny walls. In April, I notice
her in considerable numbers on the laurestinus. It is here that she
seems to pair, while sipping the sugary exudations of the small white
flowers. The whole of the summer season is spent out of doors, in brief
flights from one refreshment bar to the next. When autumn comes, with
its game, she makes her way into our houses and remains until the hard
frosts.

This suits my stay-at-home habits and especially my legs, which are
bending under the weight of years. I need not run after the subjects of
my present study; they call on me. Besides, I have vigilant assistants.
The household knows of my plans. Every one brings me, in a little screw
of paper, the noisy visitor just captured against the panes.

Thus do I fill my vivarium, which consists of a large, bell-shaped
cage of wire gauze, standing in an earthenware pan full of sand. A
mug containing honey is the dining room of the establishment. Here the
captives come to recruit themselves in their hours of leisure. To
occupy their maternal cares, I employ small birds--chaffinches, linnets,
sparrows--brought down, in the enclosure, by my son's gun.

I have just served up a Linnet shot two days ago. I next place in the
cage a bluebottle, one only, to avoid confusion. Her fat belly proclaims
the advent of a laying time. An hour later, when the excitement of being
put in prison is allayed, my captive is in labor. With eager, jerky
steps, she explores the morsel of game, goes from the head to the tail,
returns from the tail to the head, repeats the action several times and
at last settles near an eye, a dimmed eye sunk into its socket.

The ovipositor bends at a right angle and dives into the junction of the
beak, straight down to the root. Then the eggs are emitted for nearly
half an hour. The layer, utterly absorbed in her serious business,
remains stationary and impassive and is easily observed through my lens.
A movement on my part would doubtless scare her; but my restful presence
gives her no anxiety. I am nothing to her.

The discharge does not go on continuously until the ovaries are
exhausted; it is intermittent and performed in so many packets. Several
times over, the fly leaves the bird's beak and comes to take a rest upon
the wire gauze, where she brushes her hind legs one against the other.
In particular, before using it again, she cleans, smoothes and polishes
her laying tool, the probe that places the eggs. Then, feeling her womb
still teeming, she returns to the same spot at the joint of the beak.
The delivery is resumed, to cease presently and then begin anew. A
couple of hours are thus spent in alternate standing near the eye and
resting on the wire gauze.

At last, it is over. The fly does not go back to the bird, a proof
that her ovaries are exhausted. The next day, she is dead. The eggs are
dabbed in a continuous layer, at the entrance to the throat, at the
root of the tongue, on the membrane of the palate. Their number appears
considerable; the whole inside of the gullet is white with them. I fix
a little wooden prop between the two mandibles of the beak, to keep them
open and enable me to see what happens.

I learn in this way that the hatching takes place in a couple of days.
As soon as they are born, the young vermin, a swarming mass, leave the
place where they are and disappear down the throat. To inquire further
into the work is useless for the moment. We shall learn more about it
later, under conditions that make examination easier.

The beak of the bird invaded was closed at the start, as far as the
natural contact of the mandibles allowed. There remained a narrow slit
at the base, sufficient at most to admit the passage of a horsehair.
It was through this that the laying was performed. Lengthening her
ovipositor like a telescope, the mother inserted the point of her
implement, a point slightly hardened with a horny armor. The fineness
of the probe equals the fineness of the aperture. But, if the beak were
entirely closed, where would the eggs be laid then?

With a tied thread, I keep the two mandibles in absolute contact; and
I place a second bluebottle in the presence of the linnet, which the
colonists have already entered by the beak. This time, the laying
takes place on one of the eyes, between the lid and the eyeball. At
the hatching, which again occurs a couple of days later, the grubs make
their way into the fleshy depths of the socket. The eyes and the beak,
therefore, form the two chief entrances into feathered game.

There are others; and these are the wounds. I cover the linnet's head
with a paper hood which will prevent invasion through the beak and eyes.
I serve it, under the wire gauze bell, to a third egg layer. The bird
has been struck by a shot in the breast, but the sore is not bleeding:
no outer stain marks the injured spot. Moreover, I am careful to arrange
the feathers, to smooth them with a hair pencil, so that the bird looks
quite smart and has every appearance of being untouched.

The fly is soon there. She inspects the linnet from end to end; with
her front tarsi she fumbles at the breast and belly. It is a sort of
auscultation by sense of touch. The insect becomes aware of what is
under the feathers by the manner in which these react. If scent comes
to her assistance, it can only be very slightly, for the game is not yet
high. The wound is soon found. No drop of blood is near it, for it is
closed by a plug of down rammed into it by the shot. The fly takes up
her position without separating the feathers or uncovering the wound.
She remains here for two hours without stirring, motionless, with her
abdomen concealed beneath the plumage. My eager curiosity does not
distract her from her business for a moment.

When she has finished, I take her place. There is nothing either on the
skin or at the mouth of the wound. I have to withdraw the downy plug
and dig to some depth before discovering the eggs. The ovipositor has
therefore lengthened its extensible tube and pushed beyond the feather
stopper driven in by the lead. The eggs are in one packet; they number
about three hundred.

When the beak and eyes are rendered inaccessible, when the body,
moreover, has no wounds, the laying still takes place, but, this time,
in a hesitating and niggardly fashion. I pluck the bird completely, the
better to watch what happens; also, I cover the head with a paper hood
to close the usual means of access. For a long time, with jerky steps,
the mother explores the body in every direction; she takes her stand by
preference on the head, which she sounds by tapping on it with her front
tarsi. She knows that the openings which she needs are there, under
the paper; but she also knows how frail are her grubs, how powerless to
pierce their way through the strange obstacle which stops her as well
and interferes with the work of her ovipositor. The cowl inspires her
with profound distrust. Despite the tempting bait of the veiled head,
not an egg is laid on the wrapper, slight though it may be.

Weary of vain attempts to compass this obstacle, the Fly at last decides
in favor of other points, but not on the breast, belly or back, where
the hide would seem too tough and the light too intrusive. She needs
dark hiding places, corners where the skin is very delicate. The spots
chosen are the cavity of the axilla, corresponding with our armpit,
and the crease where the thigh joins the belly. Eggs are laid in both
places, but not many, showing that the groin and the axilla are adopted
only reluctantly and for lack of a better spot.

With an unplucked bird, also hooded, the same experiment failed: the
feathers prevent the fly from slipping into those deep places. Let us
add, in conclusion, that, on a skinned bird, or simply on a piece of
butcher's meat, the laying is effected on any part whatever, provided
that it be dark. The gloomiest corners are the favorite ones.

It follows from all this that, to lay the eggs, the Bluebottle picks out
either naked wounds or else the mucous membranes of the mouth or eyes,
which are not protected by a skin of any thickness. She also needs
darkness. We shall see the reasons for her preference later on.

The perfect efficiency of the paper bag, which prevents the inroads
of the worms through the eye sockets or the beak, suggests a similar
experiment with the whole bird. It is a matter of wrapping the body in a
sort of artificial skin which will be as discouraging to the fly as the
natural skin. Linnets, some with deep wounds, others almost intact,
are placed one by one in paper envelopes similar to those in which the
nursery gardener keeps his seeds, envelopes just folded, without being
stuck. The paper is quite ordinary and of average thickness. Torn pieces
of newspaper serve the purpose.

These sheaths with the corpses inside them are freely exposed to the
air, on the table in my study, where they are visited, according to the
time of day, in dense shade and in bright sunlight. Attracted by the
effluvia from the dead meat, the bluebottles haunt my laboratory, the
windows of which are always open. I see them daily alighting on the
envelopes and very busily exploring them, apprised of the contents by
the gamy smell. Their incessant coming and going is a sign of intense
cupidity; and yet none of them decides to lay on the bags. They do not
even attempt to slide their ovipositor through the slits of the folds.
The favorable season passes and not an egg is laid on the tempting
wrappers. All the mothers abstain, judging the slender obstacle of the
paper to be more than the vermin will be able to overcome.

This caution on the fly's part does not at all surprise me: motherhood
everywhere has gleams of great perspicacity. What does astonish me is
the following result. The parcels containing the linnets are left for a
whole year uncovered on the table; they remain there for a second year
and a third. I inspect the contents from time to time. The little birds
are intact, with unrumpled feathers, free from smell, dry and light,
like mummies. They have become not decomposed, but mummified.

I expected to see them putrefying, running into sanies, like corpses
left to rot in the open air. On the contrary, the birds have dried and
hardened, without undergoing any change. What did they want for their
putrefaction? Simply the intervention of the fly. The maggot, therefore,
is the primary cause of dissolution after death; it is, above all, the
putrefactive chemist.

A conclusion not devoid of value may be drawn from my paper game bags.
In our markets, especially in those of the South, the game is hung
unprotected from the hooks on the stalls. Larks strung up by the dozen
with a wire through their nostrils, thrushes, plovers, teal, partridges,
snipe, in short, all the glories of the spit which the autumn migration
brings us, remain for days and weeks at the mercy of the flies. The
buyer allows himself to be tempted by a goodly exterior; he makes his
purchase and, back at home, just when the bird is being prepared for
roasting, he discovers that the promised dainty is alive with worms. O
horror! There is nothing for it but to throw the loathsome, verminous
thing away.

The bluebottle is the culprit here. Everybody knows it; and nobody
thinks of seriously shaking off her tyranny: not the retailer, nor the
wholesale dealer, nor the killer of the game. What is wanted to keep the
maggots out? Hardly anything: to slip each bird into a paper sheath. If
this precaution were taken at the start, before the flies arrive, any
game would be safe and could be left indefinitely to attain the degree
of ripeness required by the epicure's palate.

Stuffed with olives and myrtle berries, the Corsican blackbirds are
exquisite eating. We sometimes receive them at Orange, layers of them,
packed in baskets through which the air circulates freely and
each contained in a paper wrapper. They are in a state of perfect
preservation, complying with the most exacting demands of the kitchen.
I congratulate the nameless shipper who conceived the bright idea of
clothing his blackbirds in paper. Will his example find imitators? I
doubt it.

There is, of course, a serious objection to this method of preservation.
In its paper shroud, the article is invisible; it is not enticing; it
does not inform the passer by of its nature and qualities. There is one
resource left which would leave the bird uncovered: simply to case the
head in a paper cap. The head being the part most threatened, because of
the mucus membrane of the throat and eyes, it would be sufficient, as a
rule, to protect the head, in order to keep off the Flies and to thwart
their attempts.

Let us continue to study the bluebottle, while varying our means
of information. A tin, about four inches deep, contains a piece of
butcher's meat. The lid is not put in quite straight and leaves a
narrow slit at one point of its circumference, allowing, at most, of the
passage of a fine needle. When the bait begins to give off a gamy scent,
the mothers come. Singly or in numbers. They are attracted by the odor
which, transmitted through a thin crevice, hardly reaches my nostrils.

They explore the metal receptacle for some time, seeking an entrance.
Finding naught that enables them to reach the coveted morsel, they
decide to lay their eggs on the tin, just beside the aperture.
Sometimes, when the width of the passage allows of it, they insert the
ovipositor into the tin and lay the eggs inside, on the very edges of
the slit. Whether outside or in, the eggs are dabbed down in a fairly
regular and absolutely white layer. I as it were shovel them up with a
little paper scoop. I thus obtain all the germs that I require for
my experiments, eggs bearing no trace of the stains which would be
inevitable if I had to collect them on tainted meat.

We have seen the bluebottle refusing to lay her eggs on the paper bag,
notwithstanding the carrion fumes of the Linnet enclosed; yet now,
without hesitation, she lays them on a sheet of metal. Can the nature of
the floor make any difference to her? I replace the tin lid by a paper
cover stretched and pasted over the orifice. With the point of my knife,
I make a narrow slit in this new lid. That is quite enough: the parent
accepts the paper.

What determined her, therefore, is not simply the smell, which can
easily be perceived even through the uncut paper, but, above all, the
crevice, which will provide an entrance for the vermin, hatched outside,
near the narrow passage. The maggots' mother has her own logic, her
prudent foresight. She knows how feeble her wee grubs will be, how
powerless to cut their way through an obstacle of any resistance; and
so, despite the temptation of the smell, she refrains from laying so
long as she finds no entrance through which the newborn worms can slip
unaided.

I wanted to know whether the color, the shininess, the degree of
hardness and other qualities of the obstacle would influence the
decision of a mother obliged to lay her eggs under exceptional
conditions. With this object in view, I employed small jars, each baited
with a bit of butcher's meat. The respective lids were made of different
colored paper, of oilskin, or of some of that tinfoil, with its gold or
coppery sheen, which is used for sealing liqueur bottles. On not one
of these covers did the mothers stop, with any desire to deposit their
eggs; but, from the moment that the knife had made the narrow slit,
all the lids were, sooner or later, visited and all of them, sooner or
later, received the white shower somewhere near the gash. The look of
the obstacle, therefore, does not count; dull or brilliant, drab or
colored: these are details of no importance; the thing that matters is
that there should be a passage to allow the grubs to enter.

Though hatched outside, at a distance from the coveted morsel, the
newborn worms are well able to find their refectory. As they release
themselves from the egg, without hesitation, so accurate is their scent,
they slip beneath the edge of the ill-joined lid, or through the passage
cut by the knife. Behold them entering upon their promised land, their
reeking paradise.

Eager to arrive, do they drop from the top of the wall? Not they! Slowly
creeping, they make their way down the side of the jar; they use their
fore part, ever in quest of information, as a crutch and grapnel in one.
They reach the meat and at once install themselves upon it.

Let us continue our investigation, varying the conditions. A large
test-tube, measuring nine inches high, is baited at the bottom with a
lump of butcher's meat. It is closed with wire gauze, whose meshes, two
millimeters wide, do not permit of the fly's passage. The bluebottle
comes to my apparatus, guided by scent rather than sight. She hastens to
the test tube whose contents are veiled under an opaque cover with the
same alacrity as to the open tube. The invisible attracts her quite as
much as the visible.

She stays a while on the lattice of the mouth, inspects it attentively;
but, whether because circumstances have failed to serve me, or because
the wire network inspires her with distrust, I never saw her dab her
eggs upon it for certain. As her evidence was doubtful, I had recourse
to the flesh fly (Sarcophaga carnaria).

This fly is less finicky in her preparations, she has more faith in the
strength of her worms, which are born ready-formed and vigorous, and
easily shows me what I wish to see. She explores the trellis-work,
chooses a mesh through which she inserts the tip of her abdomen and,
undisturbed by my presence, emits, one after the other, a certain number
of grubs, about ten or so. True, her visits will be repeated, increasing
the family at a rate of which I am ignorant.

The newborn worms, thanks to a slight viscidity, cling for a moment to
the wire gauze; they swarm, wriggle, release themselves and leap into
the chasm. It is a nine inch drop at least. When this is done, the
mother makes off, knowing for a certainty that her offspring will shift
for themselves. If they fall on the meat, well and good; if they fall
elsewhere, they can reach the morsel by crawling.

This confidence in the unknown factor of the precipice, with no
indication but that of smell, deserves fuller, investigation. From
what height will the flesh fly dare to let her children drop? I top the
test-tube with another tube, the width of the neck of a claret bottle.
The mouth is closed either with wire gauze, or with a paper cover with a
slight cut in it. Altogether, the apparatus measures twenty-five inches
in height. No matter: the fall is not serious for the lithe backs of the
young grubs; and, in a few days, the test-tube is filled with larvae,
in which it is easy to recognize the flesh fly's family by the fringed
coronet that opens and shuts at the maggot's stern like the petals of
a little flower. I did not see the mother operating: I was not there at
the time; but there is no doubt possible of her coming nor of the great
dive taken by the family: the contents of the test-tube furnish me with
a duly authenticated certificate.

I admire the leap and, to obtain one better still, I replace the tube
by another, so that the apparatus now stands forty-six inches high. The
column is erected at a spot frequented by flies, in a dim light. Its
mouth, closed with a wire gauze cover, reaches the level of various
other appliances, test-tubes and jars, which are already stocked or
awaiting their colony of vermin. When the position is well known to the
flies, I remove the other tubes and leave the column, lest the visitors
should turn aside to easier ground.

From time to time, the bluebottle and the flesh fly perch on the
trellis-work, make a short investigation and then decamp. Throughout the
summer season, for three whole months, the apparatus remains where it
is, without the least result: never a worm. What is the reason? Does
the stench of the meat not spread, coming from that depth? Certainly it
spreads: it is unmistakable to my dulled nostrils and still more so to
the nostrils of my children, whom I call to bear witness. Then why does
the flesh fly, who but now was dropping her grubs from a goodly height,
refuse to let them fall from the top of a column twice as high? Does
she fear lest her worms should be bruised by an excessive drop? There
is nothing about her to point to anxiety aroused by the length of the
shaft. I never see her explore the tube or take its size. She stands on
the trellised orifice; and there the matter ends. Can she be apprised
of the depth of the chasm by the comparative faintness of the offensive
odors that arise from it? Can the sense of smell measure the distance
and judge whether it be acceptable or not? Perhaps.

The fact remains that, despite the attraction of the scent, the flesh
fly does not expose her worms to disproportionate falls. Can she know
beforehand that, when the chrysalides break, her winged family, knocking
with a sudden flight against the sides of a tall chimney, will be unable
to get out? This foresight would be in agreement with the rules which
order maternal instinct according to future needs.

But when the fall does not exceed a certain depth, the budding worms of
the flesh fly are dropped without a qualm, as all our experiments show.
This principle has a practical application which is not without its
value in matters of domestic economy. It is as well that the wonders of
entomology should sometimes give us a hint of commonplace utility.

The usual meat safe is a sort of large cage with a top and bottom
of wood and four wire gauze sides. Hooks fixed into the top are used
whereby to hang pieces which we wish to protect from the flies. Often,
so as to employ the space to the best advantage, these pieces are simply
laid on the floor on the cage. With these arrangements, are we sure of
warding off the fly and her vermin?

Not at all. We may protect ourselves against the Bluebottle, who is not
much inclined to lay her eggs at a distance from the meat; but there is
still the flesh fly, who is more venturesome and goes more briskly to
work and who will slip the grubs through a hole in the meshes and drop
them inside the safe. Agile as they are and well able to crawl, the
worms will easily reach anything on the floor; the only things secure
from their attacks will be the pieces hanging from the ceiling. It is
not in the nature of maggots to explore the heights, especially if this
implies climbing down a string in addition.

People also use wire gauze dish covers. The trellised dome protects the
contents even less than does the meat safe. The flesh fly takes no heed
of it. She can drop her worms through the meshes on the covered joint.

Then what are we to do? Nothing could be simpler. We need only wrap
the birds which we wish to preserve--thrushes, partridges, snipe and so
on--in separate paper envelopes; and the same with our beef and mutton.
This defensive armor alone, while leaving ample room for the air to
circulate, makes any invasion by the worms impossible, even without a
cover or a meat safe: not that paper possesses any special preservative
virtues, but solely because it forms an impenetrable barrier. The
Bluebottle carefully refrains from laying her eggs upon it and the flesh
fly from bringing forth her offspring, both of them knowing that their
newborn young are incapable of piercing the obstacle.

Paper is equally successful in our strife against the Moths, those
plagues of our furs and clothes. To keep away these wholesale ravages,
people generally use camphor, naphthalene, tobacco, bunches of lavender
and other strong-scented remedies. Without wishing to malign those
preservatives, we are bound to admit that the means employed are none
too effective. The smell does very little to prevent the havoc of the
moths.

I would therefore counsel our housewives, instead of all this chemist's
stuff, to use newspapers of a suitable shape and size. Take whatever you
wish to protect--your furs, your flannel or your clothes--and pack each
article carefully in a newspaper, joining the edges with a double fold,
well pinned. If this joining is properly done, the Moth will never get
inside. Since my advice has been taken and this method employed in my
household, the old damage has never been repeated.

To return to the fly. A piece of meat is hidden in a jar under a layer
of fine, dry sand, a finger's-breadth thick. The jar has a wide mouth
and is left quite open. Let whoever come that will, attracted by the
smell. The Bluebottles are not long in inspecting what I have prepared
for them: they enter the jar, go out and come back again, inquiring into
the invisible thing revealed by its fragrance. A diligent watch enables
me to see them fussing about, exploring the sandy expanse, tapping it
with their feet, sounding it with their proboscis. I leave the visitors
undisturbed for a fortnight or three weeks. None of them lays any eggs.

This is a repetition of what the paper bag, with its dead bird, showed
me. The flies refuse to lay on the sand, apparently for the same
reasons. The paper was considered an obstacle which the frail vermin
would not be able to overcome. With sand, the case is worse. Its
grittiness would hurt the newborn weaklings, its dryness would absorb
the moisture indispensable to their movements. Later, when preparing for
the metamorphosis, when their strength has come to them, the grubs will
dig the earth quite well and be able to descend; but, at the start,
that would be very dangerous for them. Knowing these difficulties, the
mothers, however greatly tempted by the smell, abstain from breeding. As
a matter of fact, after long waiting, fearing lest some packets of eggs
may have escaped my attention, I inspect the contents of the jar from
top to bottom. Meat and sand contain neither larvae nor pupae: the whole
is absolutely deserted.

The layer of sand being only a finger's-breadth thick, this experiment
requires certain precautions. The meat may expand a little, in going
bad, and protrude in one or two places. However small the fleshy eyots
that show above the surface, the flies come to them and breed. Sometimes
also the juices oozing from the putrid meat soak a small extent of the
sandy floor. That is enough for the maggot's first establishment. These
causes of failure are avoided with a layer of sand about an inch thick.
Then the bluebottle, the flesh fly and other flies whose grubs batten on
dead bodies are kept at a proper distance.

In the hope of awakening us to a proper sense of our insignificance,
pulpit orators sometimes make an unfair use of the grave and its worms.
Let us put no faith in their doleful rhetoric. The chemistry of man's
final dissolution is eloquent enough of our emptiness: there is no need
to add imaginary horrors. The worm of the sepulchre is an invention of
cantankerous minds, incapable of seeing things as they are. Covered by
but a few inches of earth, the dead can sleep their quiet sleep: no fly
will ever come to take advantage of them.

At the surface of the soil, exposed to the air, the hideous invasion
is possible; ay, it is the invariable rule. For the melting down and
remolding of matter, man is no better, corpse for corpse, than the
lowest of the brutes. Then the fly exercises her rights and deals with
us as she does with any ordinary animal refuse. Nature treats us with
magnificent indifference in her great regenerating factory: placed in
her crucibles, animals and men, beggars and kings are one and all alike.
There you have true equality, the only equality in this world of ours:
equality in the presence of the maggot.




CHAPTER XV. THE BLUEBOTTLE: THE GRUB

The larvae of the bluebottle hatch within two days in the warm weather.
Whether inside my apparatus, in direct contact with the piece of meat,
or outside, on the edge of a slit that enables them to enter, they set
to work at once. They do not eat, in the strict sense of the word,
that is to say, they do not tear their food, do not chew it by means of
implements of mastication. Their mouth parts do not lend themselves to
this sort of work. These mouth parts are two horny spikes, sliding one
upon the other, with curved ends that do not face, thus excluding the
possibility of any function such as seizing and grinding.

The two guttural grapnels serve for walking much rather than for
feeding. The worm plants them alternately in the road traversed and, by
contracting its crupper, advances just that distance. It carries in
its tubular throat the equivalent of our iron tipped sticks which give
support and assist progress.

Thanks to this machinery of the mouth, the maggot not only moves over
the surface, but also easily penetrates the meat: I see it disappear
as though it were dipping into butter. It cuts its way, levying, as it
goes, a preliminary toll, but only of liquid mouthfuls. Not the smallest
solid particle is detached and swallowed. That is not the maggot's
diet. It wants a broth, a soup, a sort of fluid extract of beef which it
prepares itself. As digestion, after all, merely means liquefaction,
we may say, without being guilty of paradox, that the grub of the
bluebottle digests its food before swallowing it.

With the object of relieving gastric troubles, our manufacturing
chemists scrape the stomachs of the pig and sheep and thus obtain
pepsin, a digestive agent which possesses the property of liquefying
albuminous matters and lean meat in particular. Why cannot they rasp
the stomach of the maggot! They would obtain a product of the highest
quality, for the carnivorous worm also owns its pepsin, pepsin of a
singularly active kind, as the following experiments will show us.

I divide the white of a hard-boiled egg into tiny cubes and place them
in a little test-tube. On the top of the contents, I sprinkle the eggs
of the bluebottle, eggs free from the least stain, taken from those
laid on the outside of tins baited with meat and not absolutely shut.
A similar test-tube is filled with white of egg, but receives no germs.
Both are closed with a plug of cotton-wool and left in a dark corner.

In a few days, the tube swarming with newborn vermin contains a liquid
as fluid and transparent as water. Not a drop would remain in the
tube if I turned it upside down. All the white of egg has disappeared,
liquefied. As for the worms, which are already a fair size, they seem
very ill at ease. Deprived of a support whence to attain the outer air,
most of them dive into the broth of their own making, where they perish
by drowning. Others, endowed with greater vigor, crawl up the glass to
the plug and manage to make their way through the wadding. Their pointed
front, armed with grappling irons, is the nail that penetrates the
fibrous mass.

In the other test-tube, standing beside the first and subjected to
the same atmospheric influences, nothing striking has occurred. The
hard-boiled white of egg has retained its dead white color and its
firmness. I find it as I left it. The utmost that I observe is a few
traces of must. The result of this first experiment is patent: the
Bluebottle's grub is the medium that converts coagulated albumen into a
liquid.

The value of chemist's pepsin is estimated by the quantity of
hard-boiled white of egg which a gram of that agent can liquefy. The
mixture has to be exposed in an oven to a temperature of 1400 F. and
also to be frequently shaken. My preparation, in which the bluebottle's
eggs are hatched, is neither shaken nor subjected to the heat of
an oven; everything happens in quietness and under the thermometric
conditions of the surrounding air; nevertheless, in a few days, the
coagulated albumen, treated by the vermin, runs like water.

The reagent that causes this liquefaction escapes my endeavors to detect
it. The worms must disgorge it in infinitesimal doses, while the spikes
in their throats, which are in continual movement, emerge a little
way from the mouth, reenter and reappear. Those piston thrusts, those
quasi-kisses, are accompanied by the emission of the solvent: at least,
that is how I picture it. The maggot spits on its food, places on it
the wherewithal to make it into broth. To appraise the quantity of the
matter expectorated is beyond my powers: I observe the result, but do
not perceive the leavening agent.

Well, this result is really astounding, when we consider the scantiness
of the means. No pig's or sheep's pepsin can rival that of the worm.
I have a bottle of pepsin that comes from the School of Chemistry at
Montpellier. I lavishly powder some pieces of hard-boiled white of egg
with the potent drug, just as I did with the eggs of the Bluebottle.
The oven is not brought into play, neither is distilled water added, nor
hydrochloric acid: two auxiliaries which are recommended. The experiment
is conducted in exactly the same way as that of the tubes with the
vermin. The result is entirely different from what I expected. The white
of egg does not liquefy. It simply becomes moist on the surface; and
even this moisture may come from the pepsin, which is highly absorbent.
Yes, I was right: if the thing were feasible, it would be an advantage
for the chemists to collect their digestive drug from the stomach of the
maggot. The worm, in this case, beats the pig and the sheep.

The same method is followed for the remaining experiments. I put the
bluebottle's eggs to hatch on a piece of meat and leave the worms to do
their work as they please. The lean tissues, whether of mutton, beef
or pork, no matter which, are not turned into liquid; they become a pea
soup of a clarety brown. The liver, the lung, the spleen are attacked
to better purpose, without, however, getting beyond the state of a
semi-fluid jam, which easily mixes with water and even appears to
dissolve in it. The brains do not liquefy either: they simply melt into
a thin gruel.

On the other hand, fatty substances, such as beef suet, lard and butter,
do not undergo any appreciable change. Moreover, the worms soon dwindle
away, incapable of growing. This sort of food does not suit them. Why?
Apparently because it cannot be liquefied by the reagent disgorged
by the worms. In the same way, ordinary pepsin does not attack fatty
substances; it takes pancreatin to reduce them to an emulsion. This
curious analogy of properties, positive for albuminous, negative for
fatty matter, proclaims the similarity and perhaps the identity of the
dissolvent discharged by the grubs and the pepsin of the higher animals.

Here is another proof: the usual pepsin does not dissolve the epidermis,
which is a material of a horny nature. That of the maggots does not
dissolve it either. I can easily rear bluebottle grubs on dead crickets
whose bellies I have first opened; but I do not succeed if the morsel
be left intact: the worms are unable to perforate the succulent paunch;
they are stopped by the cuticle, on which their reagent refuses to act.
Or else I give them frogs' hind legs, stripped of their skin. The flesh
turns to broth and disappears to the bone. If I do not peel the legs,
they remain intact in the midst of the vermin. Their thin skin is
sufficient to protect them.

This failure to act upon the epidermis explains why the bluebottle at
work on the animal declines to lay her eggs on the first part that comes
handy. She needs the delicate membrane of the nostrils, eyes or throat,
or else some wound in which the flesh is laid bare. No other place suits
her, however excellent for flavor and darkness. At most, finding nothing
better when my stratagems interfere, she persuades herself to dab a few
eggs under the axilla of a plucked bird or in the groin, two points at
which the skin is thinner than elsewhere.

With her maternal foresight, the bluebottle knows to perfection the
choice surfaces, the only ones liable to soften and run under the
influence of the reagent dribbled by the newborn grubs. The chemistry
of the future is familiar to her, though she does not use it for her own
feeding; motherhood, that great inspirer of instinct, teaches her all
about it.

Scrupulous though she be in choosing exactly where to lay her eggs, the
bluebottle does not trouble about the quality of the provisions intended
for her family's consumption. Any dead body suits her purpose. Redi, the
Italian scientist who first exploded the old, foolish notion of worms
begotten of corruption, fed the vermin in his laboratory with meat of
very different kinds. In order to make his tests the more conclusive,
he exaggerated the largess of the dining hall. The diet was varied with
tiger and lion flesh, bear and leopard, fox and wolf, mutton and beef,
horseflesh, donkey flesh and many others, supplied by the rich menagerie
of Florence. This wastefulness was unnecessary: wolf and mutton are all
the same to an unprejudiced stomach.

A distant disciple of the maggot's biographer, I look at the problem
in a light which Redi never dreamt of. Any flesh of one of the higher
animals suits the fly's family. Will it be the same if the food supplied
be of a lower organism and consist of fish, for instance, of frog,
mollusk, insect, centipede? Will the worms accept these viands and,
above all, can they manage to liquefy them, which is the first and
foremost condition?

I serve a piece of raw whiting. The flesh is white, delicate, partly
translucent, easy for our stomachs to digest and no less suited to the
grub's dissolvent. It turns into an opalescent fluid, which runs like
water. In fact, it liquefies in much the same way as hard-boiled white
of egg. The worms at first wax fat, as long as the conditions allow of
some solid eyots remaining; then, when foothold fails, threatened with
drowning in the too fluid broth, they creep up the side of the glass,
anxious and restless to be off. They climb to the cotton-wool stopper of
the test-tube and try to bolt through the wadding. Endowed with stubborn
perseverance, nearly all of them decamp in spite of the obstacle. The
test-tube with the white of egg showed me a similar exodus. Although the
fare suits them, as their growth witnesses, the worms cease feeding and
make a point of escaping when death by drowning is imminent.

With other fish, such as skate and sardines, with the flesh of frogs and
tree frogs, the meat simply dissolves into a porridge. Hashes of slug,
Scolopendra or praying mantis furnish the same result.

In all these preparations, the dissolving agent of the worms is as much
in evidence as when butcher's meat is employed. Moreover, the grubs seem
satisfied with the queer dish which my curiosity prescribes for them;
they thrive amidst the victuals and undergo their transformation into
pupae.

The conclusion, therefore, is much more general than Redi imagined. Any
meat, no matter whether of a higher or lower order, suits the bluebottle
for the settlement of her family. The carcasses of furred and feathered
animals are the favorite victuals, probably because of their richness,
which allows of plentiful layings; but, should the occasion demand it,
the others are also accepted, without inconvenience. Any carrion
that has lived the life of an animal comes within the domain of these
scavengers.

What is their number to one mother? I have already spoken of a deposit
of three hundred, counted egg by egg. A quite fortuitous circumstance
enabled me to go much farther. In the first week of January 1905, we
experienced a sudden short cold snap of a severity very exceptional in
my part of the country. The thermometer fell to twelve degrees below
zero. While a fierce north wind was raging and beginning to redden the
leaves of the olive trees, came one and brought me a barn or screech
owl, which he had found on the ground, exposed to the air, not far from
my house. My reputation as a lover of animals made the donor believe
that I should be pleased with his gift.

I was, as a matter of fact, but for reasons whereof the finder certainly
never dreamt. The owl was untouched, with trim feathers and not the
least wound that showed. Perhaps he had died of cold. What made me
gratefully accept the present was exactly that which would have inclined
anyone but myself to refuse it. The owl's eyes, glazed in death, were
hidden under a thick mass of eggs, which I recognized as a bluebottle's.
Similar masses occupied the vicinity of the nostrils. If I wanted
maggots, here, of a certainty, was a richer crop than I had ever beheld.

I place the corpse on the sand of a pan, with a wire gauze cover, and
leave events to take their course. The laboratory in which I install my
bird is none other than my study. It is as cold in there, or nearly, as
outside, so much so that the water in the aquarium in which I used to
rear caddis worms has frozen into a solid block of ice. Under these
conditions of temperature, the owl's eyes keep their white veil of germs
unchanged. Nothing stirs, nothing swarms. Weary of waiting, I pay no
more attention to the carcass; I leave the future to decide whether the
cold has exterminated the fly's family or not.

Before the end of March, the packets of eggs have disappeared, I know
not how long. The bird, for that matter, seems to be intact. On the
ventral surface, which is turned to the air, the feathers keep their
smooth arrangement and their fresh coloring. I lift the thing. It is
light, very dry and gives a hard sound, like an old shoe tanned by the
summer sun in the fields. There is no smell. The dryness has vanquished
the stench, which, in any case, was never offensive during that time
of frost. On the other hand, the back, which touched the sand, is a
loathsome wreck, partly deprived of its feathers. The quills of the tail
are bare barreled; a few whitened bones show, deprived of their muscles.
The skin has turned into a dark leather, pierced with round holes like
those of a sieve. It is all hideously ugly, but most instructive.

The wretched owl, with his shattered backbone, teaches us, first of
all, that a temperature twelve degrees of frost does not endanger
the existence of the bluebottle's germs. The worms were born without
accident, despite the rude blast; they feasted copiously on extract
of meat; then, growing big and fat, they descended into the earth by
piercing round holes in the bird's skin. Their pupae must now be in the
sand of the pan.

They are, in point of fact, and in such numbers that I have to resort to
sifting in order to collect them. If I used the forceps, I should never
have done sorting so great a quantity. The sand passes through the
meshes of the sieve, the pupae remain above. To count them would wear
out my patience. I measure them by the bushel, that is to say, with a
thimble of which I know the holding capacity in pupae. The result of my
calculation is not far short of nine hundred.

Does this family proceed from one mother? I am quite ready to admit it,
so unlikely is it that the bluebottle, who is so rare inside our houses
during the severe cold of winter, should be frequent enough outside
to form into groups and to do business in common while an icy blast is
raging. A belated specimen, the plaything of the north wind, and one
alone must have deposited the burden of her ovaries on the owl's eyes.
This laying of nine hundred eggs, an incomplete laying perhaps, bears
witness to the mighty part played by the fly as a liquidator of corpses.

Before throwing away the screech owl treated by the worms, let us
overcome our repugnance and give a glance inside the bird. We see a
tortuous cavity, fenced in by nameless ruins. Muscles and bowels have
disappeared, converted into broth and gradually consumed by the teeming
throng. In every part, what was wet has become dry, what was solid
muddy. In vain my forceps ransacks every nook and corner: it does not
hit upon a single pupa. All the worms have emigrated, all, without
exception. From first to last, they have forsaken the refuge of the
corpse, so soft to their delicate skins; they have left the velvet for
the hard ground. Is dryness necessary to them at this stage? They had
it in the carcass, which was thoroughly drained. Would they protect
themselves against the cold and rain? No shelter could suit them
better than the thick quilt of the feathers, which has remained wholly
undamaged on the belly, the breast and every part that was not in touch
with the ground. It looks as though they had fled from comfort to seek
a less kindly dwelling place. When the hour of transformation came, all
left the owl, that most excellent lodging; all dived into the sand.

The exodus from the mortuary tabernacle was made through the round holes
wherewith the skin is pierced. Those holes are the worms' work: of that
there is no doubt; and yet we have lately seen the mothers refuse as a
bed for their eggs any part whereat the flesh is protected by a skin
of some thickness. The reason is the failure of the pepsin to act on
epidermic substances. In the absence of liquefaction at such points, the
nourishing gruel is unprocurable. On the other hand, the tiny worms are
not able--or at least do not know how--to dig through the integument
with their pair of guttural harpoons, to rend it and reach the
liquefiable flesh. The newborn lack strength and, above all, purpose.
But, as the time comes for descending into the earth, the worms, now
powerful and suddenly versed in the necessary art, well know how to eat
away patiently and clear themselves a passage. With the hooks of their
spikes they dig, scratch and tear. Instinct has flashes of inspiration.
What the animal did not know how to do at the start it learns without
apprenticeship when the time comes to practice this or that industry.
The maggot ripe for burial perforates a membranous obstacle which the
grub intent upon its broth would not even have attempted to attack with
either its pepsin or its grapnels.

Why does the worm quit the carcass, that capital shelter? Why does it go
and take up its abode in the ground? As the leading disinfector of dead
things, it works at the most important matter, the suppression of the
infection; but it leaves a plentiful residuum, which does not yield
to the reagents of its analytical chemistry. These remains have to
disappear in their turn. After the fly, anatomists come hastening, who
take up the dry relic, nibble skin, tendons and ligaments and scrape the
bones clean.

The greatest expert in this work is the Dermestes beetle, an
enthusiastic gnawer of animal remains. Sooner or later, he will come
to the joint already exploited by the fly. Now what would happen if the
pupae were there? The answer is obvious. The Dermestes, who loves hard
food, would dig his teeth into the horny little kegs and demolish them
at a bite. Even though he did not touch the contents, a live thing which
he probably dislikes, he would at least test the flavor of that lifeless
substance, the container. The future Fly would be lost, because her
casing would be pierced. Even so, in the storerooms of our silk mills,
a certain Dermestes (Dermestes vulpinus, FABR.) digs into the cocoons to
attack the horny covering of the chrysalis.

The maggot foresees the danger and makes itself scarce before the other
arrives. In what sort of memory does it house so much wisdom, indigent,
headless creature that it is, for it is only by extension that we can
give the name of head to the animal's pointed fore part? How did it
learn that, to safeguard the pupa, it must desert the carcass and that,
to safeguard the fly, it must not bury itself too far down?

To emerge from underground after the perfect insect is hatched, the
bluebottle's device consists in disjointing her head into two movable
halves, which, each distended with its great red eye, by turns separate
and reunite. In the intervening space, a large, glassy hernia rises and
disappears, disappears and rises. When the two move asunder, with one
eye forced back to the right, the other to the left, it is as though the
insect were splitting its brain pan in order to expel the contents. Then
the hernia rises, blunt at the end and swollen into a great knob. Next,
the forehead closes and the hernia retreats, leaving visible only a kind
of shapeless muzzle. In short, a frontal pouch, with deep pulsations
momentarily renewed, becomes the instrument of deliverance, the pestle
wherewith the newly hatched bluebottle bruises the sand and causes it
to crumble. Gradually the legs push the rubbish back and the insect
advances so much toward the surface.

A hard task, this exhumation by dint of the blows of a cleft and
palpitating head. Moreover, the exhausting effort has to be made at
the moment of greatest weakness, when the insect leaves that protecting
casket, its pupa. It emerges from it pale, flabby and unsightly, sorrily
clad in the wings which, folded lengthwise and made shorter by their
scalloped edge, only just cover the top of the back. Wildly bristling
with hairs and colored ashen-gray, it is a piteous sight. The large set
of wings, suitable for flight, will spread later. For the moment, it
would only be in the way amid the obstacles to be passed through. Later
also will come the faultless dress wherein the iridescent indigo-blue
stands out against the severity of the black.

The frontal hernia that crumbles the sand with its impact has a tendency
to make play for some time after the emergence from the ground. Take
hold with the forceps of one of the hind legs of a newly released
fly. Forthwith, the implement of the head begins to work, swelling and
subsiding as energetically as a moment ago, when it had to make a
hole in the sand. The insect, hampered in its movements as when it was
underground, struggles as best it can against the only obstacle that
it knows. With its heaving knob, it pounds the air even as but now it
pounded the earthy barrier. In all unpleasant circumstances, its one
resource is to cleave its head and produce its cranial hernia, which
moves out and in, in and out. For nearly two hours, interspersed with
halts due to fatigue, the little machine keeps throbbing in my forceps.

In the meantime, however, the desperate one is hardening her skin; she
spreads wide the sail of her wings and dons her deep mourning of black
and darkest blue. Then her eyes, warped sideways, come together and
resume their normal position. The cleft forehead closes; the delivering
blister goes in, never to show itself again. But there is one precaution
to be taken first. With its front tarsi, the insect carefully brushes
the bump about to disappear from view, lest grit should lodge in the
cranium when the two halves of the head are joined for good.

The maggot is aware of the trials that await it when, as a fly, it will
have to come up from under ground; it knows beforehand how difficult the
ascent will be with the feeble instrument at its disposal, so difficult,
in fact, as to become fatal should the journey be at all prolonged.
It foresees the dangers ahead of it and averts them as well as it can.
Gifted with two iron shod sticks in its throat, it can easily descend to
such depths as it pleases. The need for greater quiet and a less trying
temperature calls for the deepest possible home: the lower down it is,
the better for the welfare of the worm and the pupa, on condition that
descent be practicable. It is, perfectly; and yet, though free to obey
its inspiration, the grub refrains. I rear it in a deep pan, full of
fine, dry sand, easy to excavate. The interment never goes very far.
About a hand's breadth is all that the most progressive digger ventures
upon. Most of the interred remain nearer still to the surface. Here,
under a thin layer of sand, the grub's skin hardens and becomes a
coffin, a casket, wherein the transformation sleep is slept. A few
weeks later, the buried one awakes, transfigured but weak, having
naught wherewith to unearth herself but the throbbing hernia of her open
forehead.

What the maggot denies itself it is open to me to realize, should I
care to know the depth whence the fly is able to mount. I place fifteen
bluebottle pupae, obtained in winter, at the bottom of a wide tube
closed at one end. Above the pupae is a perpendicular column of fine,
dry sand, the height of which varies in different tubes. April comes and
the hatching begins.

A tube with six centimeters of sand, the shallowest of the columns under
experiment, yields the best result. Of the fifteen subjects interred
in the pupa stage, fourteen easily reach the surface when they become
flies. Only one of them perishes, one who has not even attempted the
ascent. With twelve centimeters of sand, four emerge. With twenty
centimeters, two, no more. The other flies, jaded with their exertions,
have died at a higher or lower stage of the road. Lastly, with yet
another tube wherein the column of sand measured sixty centimeters, I
obtained the liberation of only a single fly. The plucky creature must
have had a hard struggle to mount from so great a depth, for the other
fourteen did not even manage to burst the lid of their caskets.

I presume that the looseness of the sand and the consequent pressure
in every direction, similar to that exercised by fluids, have a certain
bearing on the difficulties of the exhumation. Two more tubes are
prepared, but this time supplied with fresh mould, lightly heaped up,
which has not the incoherence of sand, with the attendant drawback of
pressure. Six centimeters of mould give me eight flies for fifteen pupae
buried; twenty centimeters give me only one. There is less success than
with the sandy column. My device has diminished the pressure, but,
at the same time, increased the passive resistance. The sand falls of
itself under the impact of the frontal rammer; the unyielding mould
demands the cutting of a gallery. In fact, I perceive, on the road
followed, a shaft which continues indefinitely such as it is. The fly
has bored it with the temporary blister that throbs between her eyes.

In every medium, therefore, whether sand, mould or any earthy
combination, great are the sufferings that attend the exhumation of the
fly. And so the maggot shuns the depths which a desire for additional
security might seem to recommend. The worm has its own prudence:
foreseeing the dangers ahead, it refrains from making great descents
that might promote the welfare of the moment. It neglects the present
for the sake of the future.




CHAPTER XVI. A PARASITE OF THE MAGGOT

The dangers of the exhumation are not the only ones; the Bluebottle must
be acquainted with others. Life, when all is said, is a knacker's yard
wherein the devourer of today becomes the devoured of tomorrow; and the
robber of the dead cannot fail to be robbed of her own life when the
time comes. I know that she has one exterminator in the person of the
tiny Saprinus beetle, a fisher of fat sausages on the edge of the pools
formed by liquescent corpses. Here swarm in common the grubs of the
greenbottle, the flesh fly and the bluebottle. The Saprinus draws them
to him from the bank and gobbles them indiscriminately. They represent
to him morsels of equal value.

This banquet can be observed only in the open country, under the rays
of a hot sun. Saprini and greenbottles never enter our houses; the flesh
fly visits us but discreetly, does not feel at home with us; the only
one who comes fussing along is the bluebottle, who thus escapes the
tribute due to the consumer of plump sausages. But, in the fields, where
she readily lays her eggs upon any carcass that she finds, she, as well
as the others, sees her vermin swept away by the gluttonous Saprinus.

In addition, graver disasters decimate her family, if, as I do not
doubt, we can apply to the bluebottle what I have seen happen in the
case of her rival, the flesh fly. So far, I have had no opportunity of
actually perceiving with the first what I have to tell of the second;
still, I do not hesitate to repeat about the one what observation has
taught me about the other, for the larval analogies between the two
flies are very close.

Here are the facts. I have gathered a number of pupae of the flesh fly
in one of my vermin jars. Wishing to examine the pupa's hinder end,
which is hollowed into a cup and scalloped into a coronet, I stave in
one of the little barrels and force open the last segments with the
point of my pocketknife. The horny keg does not contain what I expected
to find: it is full of tiny grubs packed one atop the other with the
same economy of space as anchovies in a bottle. Save for the skin,
which has hardened into a brown shell, the substance of the maggot has
disappeared, changed into a restless swarm.

There are thirty-five occupants. I replace them in their casket.
The rest of my harvest, wherein, no doubt, are other pupae similarly
stocked, is arranged in tubes that will easily show me what happens. The
thing to discover is what genus of parasites the grubs enclosed belong
to. But it is not difficult, without waiting for the hatching of the
adults, to recognize their nature merely by their mode of life. They
form part of the family of Chalcididae, who are microscopic ravagers of
living entrails.

Not long ago, in winter, I took from the chrysalis of a great peacock
moth four hundred and forty-nine parasites belonging to the same group.
The whole substance of the future moth had disappeared, all but the
nymphal wrapper, which was intact and formed a handsome Russia-leather
wallet. The worm grubs were here heaped up and squeezed together to
the point of sticking to one another. The hair pencil extracts them in
bundles and cannot separate them without some difficulty. The holding
capacity is strained to the utmost; the substance of the vanished Moth
would not fill it better. That which died has been replaced by a living
mass of equal dimensions, but subdivided. The price of this colony's
existence is the conversion of the chrysalis into a sort of milk food of
doubtful constitution. The enormous udder has been drained outright.

You shudder when you think of that budding flesh nibbled bit by bit by
four or five hundred gormandizers; the horrified imagination refuses to
picture the anguish suffered by the tortured wretch. But is there really
any pain? We have leave to doubt it. Pain is a patent of nobility; it is
more pronounced in proportion as the sufferer belongs to a higher order.
In the lower ranks of animal life, it must be greatly reduced, perhaps
even nil, especially when life, in the throes of evolution, has not yet
acquired a stable equilibrium. The white of an egg is living matter, but
endures the prick of a needle without a quiver. Would it not be the
same with the chrysalis of the great peacock, dissected cell by cell by
hundreds of infinitesimal anatomists? Would it not be the same with the
pupa of the flesh fly? These are organisms put back into the crucible,
reverting to the egg state for a second birth. There is reason to
believe, therefore, that their destruction crumb by crumb is merciful.

Towards the end of August, the parasite of the flesh fly's grubs makes
her appearance out of doors in the adult form. She is a Chalcidid, as
I expected. She issues from the barrel through one or two little round
holes which the prisoners have pierced with a patient tooth. I count
some thirty to each pupa. There would not be enough room in the abode if
the family were larger.

The imp is a slim and elegant creature, but oh, how small! She measures
hardly two millimeters. Her garb is bronzed black, with pale legs and a
heart shaped, pointed, slightly pedunculate abdomen, with never a trace
of a probe for inoculating the eggs. The head is transversal, the width
exceeding the length.

The male is only half the size of the female; he is also very much less
numerous. Perhaps pairing is here, as we see elsewhere, a secondary
matter from which it is possible to abstain, in part, without injuring
the prospects of the race. Nevertheless, in the tube wherein I have
housed the swarm, the few males lost among the crowd ardently woo the
passing fair. There is much to be done outside, as long as the flesh
fly's season lasts; things are urgent; and each pigmy hurries as fast as
she can to take up her part as an exterminator.

How is the parasite's inroad into the flesh fly's pupae effected? Truth
is always veiled in a certain mystery. The good fortune that secured
me the ravaged pupa taught me nothing concerning the tactics of the
ravager. I have never seen the Chalcidid explore the contents of
my appliances; my attention was engaged elsewhere and nothing is so
difficult to see as a thing not yet suspected. But, though direct
observation be lacking, logic will tell us approximately what we want to
know.

It is evident, to begin with, that the invasion cannot have been made
through the sturdy amour of the pupae. This is too hard to be penetrated
by the means at the pigmy's disposal. Naught but the delicate skin of
the maggots lends itself to the introduction of the germs. An egg laying
mother, therefore, appears, inspects the surface of the pool of sanies
swarming with grubs, selects the one that suits her and perches on
it; then, with the tip of her pointed abdomen, whence emerges, for
an instant, a short probe kept hidden until then, she operates on the
patient, perforating his paunch with a dexterous wound into which the
germs are inserted. Probably, a number of pricks are administered, as
the presence of thirty parasites seems to demand.

Anyway, the maggot's skin is pierced at either one point or many; and
this happens while the grub is swimming in the pools formed by the
putrid flesh. Having said this, we are faced with a question of serious
interest. To set it forth necessitates a digression which seems to have
nothing to do with the subject in hand and is nevertheless connected
with it in the closest fashion. Without certain preliminaries, the
remainder would be unintelligible. So now for the preliminaries.

I was in those days busy with the poison of the Languedocian scorpion
and its action upon insects. To direct the sting toward this or the
other part of the victim and moreover to regulate its emission would be
absolutely impossible and also very dangerous, as long as the scorpions
were allowed to act as they pleased. I wished to be able myself to
choose the part to be wounded; I likewise wished to vary the dose
of poison at will. How to set about it? The scorpion has no jarlike
receptacle in which the venom is accumulated and stored, like that
possessed, for instance, by the wasp and the bee. The last segment of
the tail, gourd shaped and surmounted by the sting, contains only a
powerful mass of muscles along which lie the delicate vessels that
secrete the poison.

In default of a poison jar which I would have placed on one side and
drawn upon at my convenience, I detach the last segment, forming
the base of the sting. I obtain it from a dead and already withered
scorpion. A watch glass serves as a basin. Here, I tear and crush the
piece in a few drops of water and leave it to steep for four-and-twenty
hours. The result is the liquid which I propose to use for the
inoculation. If any poison remained in my animal's caudal gourd, there
must be at least some traces of it in the infusion in the watch glass.

My hypodermic syringe is of the simplest. It consists of a little glass
tube, tapering sharply at one end. By drawing in my breath, I fill it
with the liquid to be tested; I expel the contents by blowing. Its point
is almost as fine as a hair and enables me to regulate the dose to
the degree which I want. A cubic millimeter is the usual charge. The
injection has to be made at parts that are generally covered with horn.
So as not to break the point of my fragile instrument, I prepare the
way with a needle, with which I prick the victim at the spot required. I
insert the tip of the loaded injector in the hole thus made and I blow.
The thing is done in a moment, very neatly and in an orthodox fashion,
favorable to delicate experiments. I am delighted with my modest
apparatus.

I am equally delighted with the results. The scorpion himself, when
wounding with his sting, in which the poison is not diluted as mine is
in the watch glass, would not produce effects like those of my pricks.
Here is something more brutal, producing more convulsion in the
sufferer. The virus of my contriving excels the scorpion's.

The test is several times repeated, always with the same mixture, which,
drying up by spontaneous evaporation, then made to serve again by
the addition of a few drops of water, once more drained and once more
moistened, does duty for an indefinite length of time. Instead of
abating, the virulence increases. Moreover, the corpses of the
insects operated upon undergo a curious change, unknown in my earlier
observations. Then the suspicion comes to me that the actual poison of
the scorpion does not enter into the matter at all. What I obtain with
the end joint of the tail, with the gland at the base of the sting, I
ought to obtain with any other part of the animal.

I crush in a few drops of water a joint of the tail taken from the front
portion, far from the poison glands. After soaking it for twenty-four
hours, I obtain a liquid whose effects are absolutely the same as those
before, when I used the joint that bears the sting. I try again with the
scorpion's claws, the contents of which consist solely of muscle. The
results are just the same. The whole of the animal's body, therefore, no
matter which fragment be submitted to the steeping process, yields the
virus that so greatly pricks my curiosity.

Every part of the Spanish fly [Cantharis or blistering beetle], inside
and out, is saturated with the blistering element; but there is nothing
like this in the scorpion, who localizes his venom in his caudal gland
and has none of it elsewhere. The cause of the effects which I observe
is therefore connected with general properties which I ought to find in
any insect, even the most harmless.

I consult Oryctes nasicornis, the peaceable rhinoceros beetle, on
this subject. To get at the exact nature of the materials, instead of
pulverizing the whole insect in a mortar, I use merely the muscular
tissue obtained by scraping the inside of the dried Oryctes' corselet.
Or else I extract the dry contents of the hind legs. I do the same with
the desiccated corpses of the cockchafer, the Capricorn, or Cerambyx
beetle, and the Cetonia, or rosechafer. Each of my gleanings, with a
little water added, is left to soften for a couple of days in a watch
glass and yields to the liquid whatever can be extracted from it by
crushing and dissolving.

This time, we take a great step forward. All my preparations, without
distinction, are horribly virulent. Let the reader judge. I select as
my first patient the sacred beetle, Scarabaeus sacer, who thanks to his
size and sturdiness, lends himself admirably to an experiment of this
kind. I operate upon a dozen, in the corselet, on the breast, on the
belly and, by preference, on one of the hind legs, far removed from the
impressionable nervous centers. No matter what part my injector attacks,
the effect produced is the same, or nearly. The insect falls as
though struck by lightning. It lies on its back and wriggles its legs,
especially the hind legs. If I set it on its feet again, I behold a sort
of St. Vitus' dance. Scarabaeus lowers his head, arches his back, draws
himself up on his twitching legs. He marks time with his feet on the
ground, moves forward a little, moves as much backward, leans to the
right, leans to the left, in wild disorder, incapable of keeping his
balance or making progress. And this happens with sudden jerks and
jolts, with a vigor no whit inferior to that of the animal in perfect
health. It is a displacement of all the works, a storm that uproots the
mutual relations of the muscles.

Seldom have I witnessed such sufferings, in my career as a
cross-examiner of animals and, therefore, as a torturer. I should feel a
scruple, did I not foresee that the grain of sand shifted today may one
day help us by taking its place in the edifice of knowledge. Life is
everywhere the same, in the Dung beetle's body as in man's. To consult
it in the insect means consulting it in ourselves, means moving towards
vistas which we cannot afford to neglect. That hope justifies my cruel
studies, which, though apparently so puerile, are in reality worthy of
serious consideration.

Of my dozen sufferers, some rapidly succumb, others linger for a few
hours. They are all dead by tomorrow. I leave the corpses on the
table, exposed to the air. Instead of drying and stiffening, like the
asphyxiated insects intended for our collections, my patients, on the
contrary, turn soft and slacken in the joints, notwithstanding the
dryness of the surrounding air; they become disjointed and separate into
loose pieces, which are easily removed.

The results are the same with the Capricorn, the cockchafer, the
Procrustes [a large ground beetle], the Carabus [the true ground beetle,
including the gold beetle]. In all of them there is a sudden break-up,
followed by speedy death, a slackening of the joints and swift
putrefaction. In a non-horny victim, the quick chemical changes of
the tissues are even more striking. A Cetonia grub, which resists the
scorpion's sting, even though repeatedly administered, dies in a very
short time if I inject a tiny drop of my terrible fluid into any part
of its body. Moreover, it turns very brown and, in a couple of days,
becomes a mass of black putrescence.

The great peacock, that large moth who recks little of the scorpion's
poison, is no more able to resist my inoculations than the sacred beetle
and the others. I prick two in the belly, a male and a female. At first,
they seem to bear the operation without distress. They grip the trellis
work of the cage and hang without moving, as though indifferent. But
soon the disease has them in its grip. What we see is not the tumultuous
ending of the sacred beetle; it is the calm advent of death. With wings
slackly quivering, softly they die and drop from the wires. Next day,
both corpses are remarkably lax; the segments of the abdomen separate
and gape at the least touch. Remove the hairs and you shall see that
the skin, which was white, has turned brown and is changing to black.
Corruption is quickly doing its work.

This would be a good opportunity to speak of bacteria and cultures. I
shall do nothing of the sort. On the hazy borderland of the visible and
the invisible, the microscope inspires me with suspicion. It so easily
replaces the eye of reality by the eye of imagination; it is so ready to
oblige the theorists with just what they want to see. Besides, supposing
the microbe to be found, if that were possible, the question would be
changed, not solved. For the problem of the collapse of the structure
through the fact of a prick there would be substituted another no less
obscure: how does the said microbe bring about that collapse? In what
way does it go to work? Where lies its power?

Then what explanation shall I give of the facts which I have just set
forth? Why, none, absolutely none, seeing that I do not know of any. As
I am unable to do better, I will confine myself to a pair of comparisons
or images, which may serve as a brief resting place for the mind on the
dark billows of the unknown.

All of us, as children, have amused ourselves with the game of "card
friars." A number of cards, as many as possible, are bent lengthwise
into a semi-cylinder. They are placed on a table, one behind the
other, in a winding row, the spaces in which are suitably disposed.
The performance pleases the eye by its curved lines and its regular
arrangement. It possesses order, which is a condition of all animated
matter. You give a little tap to the first card. It falls and overturns
the second, which, in the same way, topsy-turvies the third; and so on,
right to the end of the row. In less than no time, the capsizing wave
spreads and the handsome edifice is shattered. Order is succeeded by
disorder, I might almost say, by death. What was needed thus to upset
the procession of friars? A very, very slight first push, out of all
proportion to the toppled mass.

Again, take a glass balloon containing a solution of alum supersaturated
by heat. It is closed, during the process of boiling, with a cork and
is then allowed to cool. The contents remain fluid and limpid for an
indefinite period. Mobility is here represented by a faint semblance
of life. Remove the cork and drop in a solid particle of alum, however
infinitesimal. Suddenly, the liquid thickens into a solid lump and gives
off heat. What has happened? This: crystallization has set in at the
first contact of the particle of alum, the center of attraction;
next, it has spread bit by bit, each solidified particle producing the
solidification of those around. The impulse comes from an atom; the mass
impelled is boundless. The very small has revolutionized the immense.

Of course, in the comparison between these two instances and the effects
of my injections, the reader must see no more than a figure of speech,
which, without explaining anything, tries to throw a glimmer of light
upon it. The long procession of card friars is knocked down by the mere
touch of the little finger to the first; the voluminous solution of alum
suddenly turns solid under the influence of an invisible particle.
In the same way, the victims of my operations succumb, thrown
into convulsions by a tiny drop of insignificant size and harmless
appearance.

Then what is there in that terrible liquid? First of all, there is
water, inactive in itself and simply a vehicle of the active agent. If
a proof were needed of its innocuousness, here is one: I inject into the
thigh of any one of the sacred beetle's six legs a drop of pure water
larger than that of the fatal inoculations. As soon as he is released,
he makes off and trots about as nimbly as usual. He is quite firm on
his legs. When put back to his pellet, he rolls it with the same zeal as
before the experiment. My injection of water makes no difference to him.

What else is there in the mixture in my watch glasses? There is the
disintegrated matter of the corpse, especially shreds of dried muscles.
Do these substances yield certain soluble elements to water? Or are they
simply reduced to a fine dust in the crushing? I will not decide this
question, nor is it really of importance. The fact remains that the
poison proceeds from those substances and from them alone. Animal
matter, therefore, which has ceased to live is an agent of destruction
within the organism. The dead cell kills the living cell; in the
delicate statics of life, it is the grain of sand which, refusing its
support, entails the collapse of the whole edifice.

In this connection, we may recall those dreadful dissecting room
accidents. Through awkwardness, a student of anatomy pricks himself with
his scalpel in the course of his work; or else, by inadvertence, he
has an insignificant scratch on his hand. A cut which one would hardly
notice, produced by the point of a pocket knife, a scratch of no
account, from a thorn or otherwise, now becomes a mortal wound, if
powerful antiseptics do not speedily remedy the ill. The scalpel is
soiled by its contact with the flesh of the corpse; so are the hands.
That is quite enough. The virus of corruption is introduced; and, if not
treated in time, the wound proves fatal. The dead has killed the living.
This also reminds us of the so-called carbuncle flies, the lancet of
whose mouth parts, contaminated with the sanies of corpses, produces
such terrible accidents.

My dealings as against insects are, when all is said, nothing but
dissecting room wounds and carbuncle flies' stings. In addition to
the gangrene that soon impairs and blackens the tissues, I obtain
convulsions similar to those produced by the scorpion's sting. In its
convulsive effects, the venomous fluid emitted by the sting bears
a close resemblance to the muscular infusions with which I fill my
injector. We are entitled, therefore, to ask ourselves if poisons,
generally speaking, are not themselves a produce of demolition, a
casting of the organism perpetually renewed, waste matter, in short,
which, instead of being gradually expelled, is stored for purposes of
attack and defense. The animal, in that case, would arm itself with its
own refuse in the same way as it sometimes builds itself a home with
its intestinal recrement. Nothing is wasted; life's detritus is used for
self defense.

All things considered, my preparations are meat extracts. If I replace
the flesh of the insect by that of another animal, the ox, for instance,
shall I obtain the same results? Logic says yes; and logic is right.
I dilute with a few drops of water a little Liebig's extract, that
precious standby of the kitchen. I operate with this fluid on six
Cetoniae or rosechafers, four in the grub stage, two in the adult stage.
At first, the patients move about as usual. Next day, the two Cetoniae
are dead. The larvae resist longer and do not die until the second day.
All show the same relaxed muscles, the same blackened flesh, signs of
putrefaction. It is probable, therefore, that, if injected into our own
veins, the same fluid would likewise prove fatal. What is excellent in
the digestive tubes would be appalling in the arteries. What is food in
one case is poison in the other.

A Liebig's extract of a different kind, the broth in which the liquefier
puddles, is of a virulence equal, if not superior, to that of my
products. All those operated upon, Capricorns, sacred beetles, ground
beetles, die in convulsions. This brings us back, after a long way
round, to our starting point, the maggot of the flesh fly. Can the worm,
constantly floundering in the sanies of a carcass, be itself in danger
of inoculation by that whereon it grows fat? I dare not rely upon
experiments conducted by myself: my clumsy implements and my shaky hand
make me fear that, with subjects so small and delicate, I might inflict
deep wounds which of themselves would bring about death.

Fortunately, I have a collaborator of incomparable skill in the
parasitic Chalcidid. Let us apply to her. To introduce her germs, she
has perforated the maggot's paunch, has even done so several times over.
The holes are extremely small, but the poison all around is excessively
subtle and has thus been able, in certain cases, to penetrate. Now what
has happened? The pupae, all from the same apparatus, are numerous. They
can be divided into three not very unequal classes, according to the
results supplied. Some give me the adult flesh fly, others the parasite.
The rest, nearly a third, give me nothing, neither this year nor next.

In the first two cases, things have taken their normal course: the grub
has developed into a fly, or else the parasite has devoured the grub. In
the third case, an accident has occurred. I open the barren pupae. They
are coated inside with a dark glaze, the remains of the dead maggot
converted into black rottenness. The grub, therefore, has undergone
inoculation by the virus through the fine openings effected by the
Chalcidid. The skin has had time to harden into a shell; but it was too
late, the tissues being already infected.

There you see it: in its broth of putrefaction, the worm is exposed
to grave dangers. Now there is a need for maggots in this world, for
maggots many and voracious, to purge the soil as quickly as possible
of death's impurities. Linnaeus tells us that 'Tres muscae consumunt
cadaver equi aeque cito ac leo.' [Three flies consume the carcass of a
horse as quickly as a lion could do it.] There is no exaggeration about
the statement. Yes, of a certainty, the offspring of the flesh fly and
the bluebottle are expeditious workers. They swarm in a heap, always
seeking, always snuffling with their pointed mouths. In those tumultuous
crowds, mutual scratches would be inevitable if the worms, like the
other flesh eaters, possessed mandibles, jaws, clippers adapted for
cutting, tearing and chopping; and those scratches, poisoned by the
dreadful gruel lapping them, would all be fatal.

How are the worms protected in their horrible work yard? They do not
eat: they drink their fill; by means of a pepsin which they disgorge,
they first turn their foodstuffs into soup; they practice a strange and
exceptional art of feeding, wherein those dangerous carving implements,
the scalpels with their dissecting room perils, are superfluous. Here
ends, for the present, the little that I know or suspect of the maggot,
the sanitary inspector in the service of the public health.




CHAPTER XVII. RECOLLECTIONS OF CHILDHOOD

Almost as much as insects and birds--the former so dear to the child,
who loves to rear his cockchafers and rose beetles on a bed of hawthorn
in a box pierced with holes; the latter an irresistible temptation, with
their nests and their eggs and their little ones opening tiny yellow
beaks--the mushroom early won my heart with its varied shapes and
colors. I can still see myself as an innocent small boy sporting my
first braces and beginning to know my way through the cabalistic mazes
of my reading book, I see myself in ecstasy before the first bird's nest
found and the first mushroom gathered. Let us relate these grave events.
Old age loves to meditate the past.

O happy days when curiosity awakens and frees us from the limbo of
unconsciousness, your distant memory makes me live my best years over
again. Disturbed at its siesta by some wayfarer, the partridge's young
brood hastily disperses. Each pretty little ball of down scurries off
and disappears in the brushwood; but, when quiet is restored, at the
first summoning note they all return under the mother's wing. Even so,
recalled by memory, do my recollections of childhood return, those other
fledglings which have lost so many of their feathers on the brambles of
life. Some, which have hardly come out of the bushes, have aching heads
and tottering steps; some are missing, stifled in some dark corner of
the thicket; some remain in their full freshness. Now of those which
have escaped the clutches of time the liveliest are the first-born. For
them the soft wax of childish memory has been converted into enduring
bronze.

On that day, wealthy and leisured, with an apple for my lunch and all
my time to myself, I decided to visit the brow of the neighboring hill,
hitherto looked upon as the boundary of the world. Right at the top is a
row of trees which, turning their backs to the wind, bend and toss about
as though to uproot themselves and take to flight. How often, from the
little window in my home, have I not seen them bowing their heads in
stormy weather; how often have I not watched them writhing like madmen
amid the snow dust which the north wind's broom raises and smoothes
along the hillside! 'What are they doing up there, those desolate trees?
I am interested in their supple backs, today still and upright against
the blue of the sky, tomorrow shaken when the clouds pass overhead. I
am gladdened by their calmness; I am distressed by their terrified
gestures. They are my friends. I have them before my eyes at every
hour of the day. In the morning, the sun rises behind their transparent
screen and ascends in its glory. Where does it come from? I am going to
climb up there and perhaps I shall find out.

I mount the slope. It is a lean grass sward close-cropped by the sheep.
It has no bushes, fertile in rents and tears, for which I should have to
answer on returning home, nor any rocks, the scaling of which involves
like dangers; nothing but large, flat stones, scattered here and there.
I. have only to go straight on, over smooth ground. But the sward is as
steep as a sloping roof. It is long, ever so long; and my legs are
very short. From time to time, I look up. My friends, the trees on the
hilltop, seem to be no nearer. Cheerily, sonny! Scramble away!

What is this at my feet? A lovely bird has flown from its hiding place
under the eaves of a big stone. Bless us, here's a nest made of hair
and fine straw! It's the first I have ever found, the first of the joys
which the birds are to bring me. And in this nest are six eggs, laid
prettily side by side; and those eggs are a magnificent blue, as though
steeped in a dye of celestial azure. Overpowered with happiness, I lie
down on the grass and stare.

Meanwhile, the mother, with a little clap of her gullet--'Tack!
Tack!'--flies anxiously from stone to stone, not far from the intruder.
My age knows no pity, is still too barbarous to understand maternal
anguish. A plan is running in my head, a plan worthy of a little beast
of prey. I will come back in a fortnight and collect the nestlings
before they can fly away. In the meantime, I will just take one of those
pretty blue eggs, only one, as a trophy. Lest it should be crushed, I
place the fragile thing on a little moss in the scoop of my hand. Let
him cast a stone at me that has not, in his childhood, known the rapture
of finding his first nest.

My delicate burden, which would be ruined by a false step, makes me give
up the remainder of the climb. Some other day I shall see the trees on
the hilltop over which the sun rises. I go down the slope again. At the
bottom, I meet the parish priest's curate reading his breviary as he
takes his walk. He sees me coming solemnly along, like a relic bearer;
he catches sight of my hand hiding something behind my back: 'What have
you there, my boy?' he asks.

All abashed, I open my hand and show my blue egg on its bed of moss.

'Ah!' says his reverence. 'A Saxicola's egg! Where did you get it?'

'Up there, father, under a stone.'

Question follows question; and my peccadillo stands confessed. By chance
I found a nest which I was not looking for. There were six eggs in it. I
took one of them--here it is--and I am waiting for the rest to hatch.
I shall go back for the others when the young birds have their quill
feathers.

'You mustn't do that, my little friend,' replies the priest. 'You
mustn't rob the mother of her brood; you must respect the innocent
little ones; you must let God's birds grow up and fly from the nest.
They are the joy of the fields and they clear the earth of its vermin.
Be a good boy, now, and don't touch the nest.'

I promise and the curate continues his walk. I come home with two good
seeds cast on the fallows of my childish brain. An authoritative word
has taught me that spoiling birds' nests is a bad action. I did not
quite understand how the bird comes to our aid by destroying vermin, the
scourge of the crops; but I felt, at the bottom of my heart, that it is
wrong to afflict the mothers.

'Saxicola,' the priest had said, on seeing my find.

'Hullo!' said I to myself. 'Animals have names, just like ourselves.
Who named them? What are all my different acquaintances in the woods and
meadows called? What does Saxicola mean?'

Years passed and Latin taught me that Saxicola means an inhabitant of
the rocks. My bird, in fact, was flying from one rocky point to the
other while I lay in ecstasy before its eggs; its house, its nest, had
the rim of a large stone for a roof. Further knowledge gleaned from
books taught me that the lover of stony hillsides is also called the
Motteux, or clodhopper, because, in the plowing season, she flies
from clod to clod, inspecting the furrows rich in unearthed grubworms.
Lastly, I came upon the Provencal expression Cul-blanc, which is also a
picturesque term, suggesting the patch on the bird's rump which spreads
out like a white butterfly flitting over the fields.

Thus did the vocabulary come into being that would one day allow me
to greet by their real names the thousand actors on the stage of the
fields, the thousand little flowers that smile at us from the wayside.
The word which the curate had spoken without attaching the least
importance to it revealed a world to me, the world of plants and animals
designated by their real names. To the future must belong the task of
deciphering some pages of the immense lexicon; for today I will content
myself with remembering the Saxicola, or stonechat.

On the west, my village crumbles into an avalanche of garden patches,
in which plums and apples ripen. Low bulging walls, blackened with the
stains of lichens and mosses, support the terraces. The brook runs at
the foot of the slope. It can be cleared almost everywhere at a bound.
In the wider parts, flat stones standing out of the water serve as
a foot bridge. There is no such thing as a whirlpool, the terror of
mothers when the children are away; it is nowhere more than knee deep.
Dear little brook, so tranquil, cool and clear, I have seen majestic
rivers since, I have seen the boundless sea; but nothing in my memories
equals your modest falls. About you clings all the hallowed pleasure of
my first impressions.

A miller has bethought him of putting the brook, which used to flow so
gaily through the fields, to work. Halfway up the slope, a watercourse,
economizing the gradient, diverts part of the water and conducts it into
a large reservoir, which supplies the mill wheels with motor power. This
basin stands beside a frequented path and is walled off at the end.

One day, hoisting myself on a playfellow's shoulders, I looked over
the melancholy wall, all bearded with ferns. I saw bottomless stagnant
waters, covered with slimy green. In the gaps in the sticky carpet, a
sort of dumpy, black-and-yellow reptile was lazily swimming. Today,
I should call it a salamander; at that time, it appeared to me the
offspring of the serpent and the dragon, of whom we were told such
bloodcurdling tales when we sat up at night. Hoo! I've seen enough:
let's get down again, quick!

The brook runs below. Alders and ash, bending forward on either bank,
mingle their branches and form a verdant arch. At their feet, behind
a porch of great twisted roots, are watery caverns prolonged by gloomy
corridors. On the threshold of these fastnesses shimmers a glint of
sunshine, cut into ovals by the leafy sieve above.

This is the haunt of the red-necktied minnows. Come along very gently,
lie flat on the ground and look. What pretty little fish they are, with
their scarlet throats! Clustering side by side, with their heads turned
against the stream, they puff their cheeks out and in, rinsing their
mouths incessantly. To keep their stationary position in the running
water, they need naught but a slight quiver of their tail and of the fin
on their back. A leaf falls from the tree. Whoosh! The whole troop has
disappeared.

On the other side of the brook is a spinney of beeches, with smooth,
straight trunks, like pillars. In their majestic, shady branches sit
chattering crows, drawing from their wings old feathers replaced by new.
The ground is padded with moss. At one's first step on the downy carpet,
the eye is caught by a mushroom, not yet full-spread and looking like
an egg dropped there by some vagrant hen. It is the first that I have
picked, the first that have I turned round and round in my fingers,
inquiring into its structure with that vague curiosity which is the
first awakening of observation.

Soon, I find others, differing in size, shape and color. It is a
real treat for my prentice eyes. Some are fashioned like bells, like
extinguishers, like cups; some are drawn out into spindles, hollowed
into funnels, rounded into hemispheres. I come upon some that are broken
and are weeping milky tears; I step on some that, instantly, become
tinged with blue; I see some big ones that are crumbling into rot and
swarming with worms. Others, shaped like pears, are dry and open at the
top with a round hole, a sort of chimney whence a whiff of smoke escapes
when I prod their under side with my finger. These are the most curious.
I fill my pockets with them to make them smoke at my leisure, until I
exhaust the contents, which are at last reduced to a kind of tinder.

What fun I had in that delightful spinney! I returned to it many a time
after my first find; and here, in the company of the crows, I received
my first lessons in mushroom lore. My harvests, I need hardly say, were
not admitted to the house. The mushroom, or the bouturel, as we called
it, had a bad reputation for poisoning people. That was enough to make
mother banish it from the family table. I could scarcely understand
how the bouturel, so attractive in appearance, came to be so wicked;
however, I accepted the experience of my elders; and no disaster ever
ensued from my rash friendship with the poisoner.

As my visits to the beech clump were repeated, I managed to divide my
finds into three categories. In the first, which was the most numerous,
the mushroom was furnished underneath with little radiating leaves. In
the second, the lower surface was lined with a thick pad pricked with
hardly visible holes. In the third, it bristled with tiny spots similar
to the papillae on a cat's tongue. The need of some order to assist the
memory made me invent a classification for myself.

Very much later there fell into my hands certain small books from which
I learnt that my three categories were well known; they even had Latin
names, which fact was far from displeasing to me. Ennobled by Latin
which provided me with my first exercises and translations, glorified
by the ancient language which the rector used in saying his mass, the
mushroom rose in my esteem. To deserve so learned an appellation, it
must possess a genuine importance.

The same books told me the name of the one that had amused me so much
with its smoking chimney. It is called the puffball in English, but its
French name is the vesse-de-loup. I disliked the expression, which to my
mind smacked of bad company. Next to it was a more decent denomination:
Lycoperdon; but this was only so in appearance, for Greek roots sooner
or later taught me that Lycoperdon means vesse-de-loup and nothing else.
The history of plants abounds in terms which it is not always desirable
to translate. Bequeathed to us by earlier ages less reticent than
ours, botany has often retained the brutal frankness of words that set
propriety at defiance.

How far off are those blessed times when my childish curiosity sought
solitary exercise in making itself acquainted with the mushroom! 'Eheu!
Fugaces labuntur anni!' said Horace. Ah, yes, the years glide fleeting
by, especially when they are nearing their end! They were the merry
brook that dallies among the willows on imperceptible slopes; today,
they are the torrent swirling a thousand straws along, as it rushes
towards the abyss. Fleeting though they be, let us make the most of
them. At nightfall, the woodcutter hastens to bind his last fagots.
Even so, in my declining days, I, a humble woodcutter in the forest
of science, make haste to put my bundle of sticks in order. 'What
will remain of my researches on the subject of instinct? Not much,
apparently; at most, one or two windows opened on a world that has not
yet been explored with all the attention which it deserves.

A worse destiny awaits the mushrooms, which were my botanical joys from
my earliest youth. I have never ceased to keep up my acquaintance with
them. To this day, for the mere pleasure of renewing it, I go, with a
halting step, to visit them on fine autumn afternoons. I still love
to see the fat heads of the boletes, the tops of the agarics and the
coral-red tufts of the clavaria emerge above the carpet pink with
heather.

At Serignan, my last stage, they have lavished their seductions upon me,
so plentiful are they on the neighboring hills, wooded with holm oak,
arbutus and rosemary. During these latter years, their wealth inspired
me with an insane plan: that of collecting in effigy what I was unable
to keep in its natural state in an herbarium. I began to paint life size
pictures of all the species in my neighborhood, from the largest to
the smallest. I know nothing of the art of painting in watercolors. No
matter: what I have never seen practiced I will invent, managing badly
at first, then a little better, at last well. The paintbrush will make a
change from the strain of my daily output of prose.

I end by possessing some hundreds of sheets representing the mushrooms
of the neighborhood in their natural size and colors. My collection has
a certain value. If it lacks artistic finish, at least it boasts the
merit of accuracy. It brings me visitors on Sundays, country people, who
stare at it in all simplicity, astounded that such fine pictures should
be done by hand, without a copy and without compasses. They at once
recognize the mushroom represented; they tell me its popular name, thus
proving the fidelity of my brush.

Well, what will become of this great pile of drawings, the object of
so much work? No doubt, my family will keep the relic for a time; but,
sooner or later, taking up too much space, shifted from cupboard to
cupboard, from attic to attic, gnawed by the rats, foxed, dirtied and
stained, it will fall into the hands of some little grandnephews who
will cut it into squares to make paper caps. It is the universal rule.
What our illusions have most fondly cherished comes to a pitiful end
under the claws of ruthless reality.




CHAPTER XVIII. INSECTS AND MUSHROOMS

It were out of place to recall my long relations with the bolete and
the agaric if the insect did not here enter into a question of grave
interest. Several mushrooms are edible, some even enjoy a great
reputation; others are formidable poisons. Short of botanical studies
that are not within everybody's reach, how are we to distinguish the
harmless from the venomous? There is a widespread belief which says that
any mushroom which insects, or, more frequently, their larvae, their
grubs, accept can be accepted without fear; any mushroom which they
refuse must be refused. What is wholesome food for them cannot fail to
be the same for us; what is poisonous to them is bound to be equally
baneful to ourselves. This is how people argue, with apparent logic, but
without reflecting upon the very different capabilities of stomachs in
the matter of diet. After all, may there not be some justification for
the belief? That is what I purpose examining.

The insect, especially in the larval stage, is the principal devourer of
the mushroom. We must distinguish between two groups of consumers. The
first really eat, that is to say, they break their food into little
bits, chew it and reduce it to a mouthful which is swallowed just as it
is; the second drink, after first turning their food into a broth, like
the bluebottles. The first are the less numerous. Confining myself to
the results of my observations in the neighborhood, I count, all told,
in the group of chewers, four beetles and a moth caterpillar. To
these may be added the mollusk, as represented by a slug, or, more
specifically, an arion, of medium size, brown and adorned with a red
edge to his mantle. A modest corporation, when all is said, but active
and enterprising, especially the moth.

At the head of the mushroom loving beetles, I will place a Staphylinid
(Oxyporus rufus, LIN.), prettily garbed in red, blue and black. Together
with his larva, which walks with the aid of a crutch at its back,
he haunts the fungus of the poplar (Pholiota aegerita, FRIES). He
specializes in an exclusive diet. I often come across him, both in
spring and autumn, and never any elsewhere than on this mushroom. For
that matter, he had made a wise choice, the epicure! This popular fungus
is one of our best mushrooms, despite its color of a doubtful white, its
skin which is often wrinkled and its gills soiled with rusty brown
at the spores. We must not judge people by appearances, nor mushrooms
either. This one, magnificent in shape and color, is poisonous; that
other, so poor to look at, is excellent.

Here are two more specialist beetles, both of small size. One is the
Triplax (Triplax russica, LIN.), who has an orange head and corselet
and black wing-cases. His grub tackles the hispid polyporus (Polyporus
hispidus, BULL.), a coarse and substantial dish, bristling at its top
with stiff hairs and clinging by its side to the old trunks of mulberry
trees, sometimes also of walnut and elm trees. The other is the
cinnamon-colored Anisotoma (Anisotoma cinnamomea, PANZ.). His larva
lives exclusively in truffles.

The most interesting of the mushroom-eating beetles is the Bolboceras
(Bolboceras gallicus, MUL.). I have described elsewhere his manner of
living, his little song that sounds like the chirping of a bird,
his perpendicular wells sunk in search of an underground mushroom
(Hydnocystis orenaria, TUL.), which constitutes his regular nourishment.
He is also an ardent lover of truffles. I have taken from between his
legs, at the bottom of his manor house, a real truffle the size of a
hazelnut (Tuber Requienii, TUL.). I tried to rear him in order to make
the acquaintance of his grub; I housed him in a large earthen pan
filled with fresh sand and enclosed in a bell cover. Possessing neither
hydnocistes nor truffles, I served him up sundry mushrooms of a rather
firm consistency, like those of his choice. He refused them all,
helvellae and clavariae, chanterelles and pezizae alike.

With a rhizopogon, a sort of little fungoid potato, which is frequent
in pine woods at a moderate depth and sometimes even on the surface, I
achieved complete success. I had strewn a handful of them on the sand of
my breeding pan. At nightfall, I often surprised the Bolboceras issuing
from his well, exploring the stretch of sand, choosing a piece not too
big for his strength and gently rolling it towards his abode. He would
go in again, leaving the rhizopogon, which was too large to take inside,
on the threshold, where it served the purpose of a door. Next day, I
found the piece gnawed, but only on the under side.

The Bolboceras does not like eating in public, in the open air; he needs
the discreet retirement of his crypt. When he fails to find his food
by burrowing under ground, he comes up to look for it on the surface.
Meeting with a morsel to his taste, he takes it home when its size
permits; if not, he leaves it on the threshold of his burrow and gnaws
at it from below, without reappearing outside. Up to the present,
hydnocistes, truffles and rhizopoga are the only food that I have
known him to eat. These three instances tell us at any rate that the
Bolboceras is not a specialist like the Oxyporus and the Triplax; he is
able to vary his diet; perhaps he feeds on all the underground mushrooms
indiscriminately.

The moth enlarges her domain yet further. Her caterpillar is a grub five
or six millimeters long, white, with a black shiny head. Colonies of it
abound in most mushrooms. It attacks by preference the top of the stem,
for epicurean reasons that escape me; thence it spreads throughout the
cap. It is the habitual boarder of the boletes, agarics, lactarii and
russulie. Apart from certain species and certain groups, everything
suits it. This puny grub, which will spin itself an infinitesimal
cocoon of white silk under the piece attacked and will later become an
insignificant moth, is the primordial ravager.

Let us next mention the arion, that voracious mollusk who also tackles
most mushrooms of some size. He digs himself spacious niches inside
them and there sits blissfully eating. Few in numbers, compared with the
other devourers, he usually sets up house alone. He has, by way of a set
of jaws, a powerful plane which creates great breaches in the object of
his depredations. It is he whose havoc is most apparent.

Now all these gnawers can be recognized by their leavings, such as
crumbs and worm holes. They dig clean passages, they slash and crumble
without a slimy trail, they are the pinkers. The others, the liquefiers,
are the chemists; they dissolve their food by means of reagents. All are
the grubs of flies and belong to the commonalty of the Muscidae. Many
are their species. To distinguish them from one another by rearing them
in order to obtain the perfect stage would involve a great expenditure
of time to little profit. We will describe them by the general name of
maggots.

To see them at work, I select, as the field of exploitation, the satanic
bolete (Boletus Satanas, LENZ.), one of the largest mushrooms that I can
gather in my neighborhood. It has a dirty-white cap; the mouths of
the tubes are a bright orange-red; the stem swells into a bulb with a
delicate network of carmine veins. I divide a perfectly sound specimen
into equal parts and place these in two deep plates, put side by side.
One of the halves is left as it is: it will act as a control, a term of
comparison. The other half receives on the pores of its undersurface a
couple of dozen maggots taken from a second bolete in full process of
decomposition.

The dissolving action of the grub asserts itself on the very day whereon
these preparations are made. The undersurface, originally a bright red,
turns brown and runs in every direction into a mass of dark stalactites.
Soon, the flesh of the cap is attacked and, in a few days, becomes a
gruel similar to liquid asphalt. It is almost as fluid as water. In this
broth the maggots wallow, wriggling their bodies and, from time to time,
sticking the breathing holes in their sterns above the water. It is an
exact repetition of what the liquefiers of meat, the grubs of the grey
flesh fly and the bluebottle, have lately shown us. As for the second
half of the bolete, the half which I did not colonize with vermin,
it remains compact, the same as it was at the start, except that its
appearance is a little withered by evaporation. The fluidity, therefore,
is really and truly the work of the grubs and of them alone.

Does this liquefaction imply an easy change? One would think so at
first, on seeing how quickly it is performed by the action of the grubs.
Moreover, certain mushrooms, the coprini, liquefy spontaneously and turn
into a black fluid. One of them bears the expressive name of the inky
mushroom (Coprinus atramentarius, BULL.) and dissolves into ink of its
own accord. The conversion, in certain cases, is singularly rapid. One
day, I was drawing one of our prettiest coprini (Coprinus sterquilinus,
FRIES), which comes out of a little purse or volva. My work was barely
done, a couple of hours after gathering the fresh mushroom, when the
model had disappeared, leaving nothing but a pool of ink upon the table.
Had I procrastinated ever so little, I should not have had time to
finish and I should have lost a rare and interesting find.

This does not mean that the other mushrooms, especially the boletes,
are of ephemeral duration and lacking in consistency. I made the attempt
with the edible bolete (Boletus edulis, BULL.), the famous cepe of our
kitchens, so highly esteemed for its flavor. I was wondering whether it
would not be possible to obtain from it a sort of Liebig's extract of
fungus, which would be useful in cooking. With this purpose, I had some
of these mushrooms cut into small pieces and boiled, on the one hand, in
plain water and, on the other, in water with bicarbonate of soda
added. The treatment lasted two whole days. The flesh of the bolete was
indomitable. To attack it, I should have had to employ violent drugs,
which were inadmissible in view of the result to be attained.

What prolonged boiling and the aid of bicarbonate of soda leave almost
intact the fly's grubs quickly turn into fluid, even as the flesh worms
fluidify hard-boiled white of egg. This is done in each instance without
violence, probably by means of a special pepsin, which is not the same
in both cases. The liquefier of meat has its own brand; the liquefier
of the bolete has another sort. The plate, then, is filled with a dark,
running gruel, not unlike tar in appearance. If we allow evaporation
free course, the broth sets, into a hard, easily crumbled slab,
something like toffee. Caught in this matrix, grubs and pupa perish,
incapable of freeing themselves. Analytical chemistry has proved fatal
to them. The conditions are quite different when the attack is delivered
on the surface of the ground. Gradually absorbed by the soil, the excess
of liquid disappears, leaving the colonists free. In my dishes, it
collects indefinitely, killing the inhabitants when it dries up into a
solid layer.

The purple bolete (Boletus purpureus, FRIES), when subjected to the
action of the maggots, gives the same result as the Satanic bolete,
namely, a black gruel. Note that both mushrooms turn blue if broken and
especially if crushed. With the edible bolete, whose flesh invariably
remains white when cut, the product of its liquefaction by the vermin is
a very pale brown. With the oronge, or imperial mushroom, the result is
a broth which the eye would take for a thin apricot jam. Tests made
with sundry other mushrooms confirm the rule: all, when attacked by the
maggot, turn into a more or less fluid mess, which varies in color.

Why do the two boletes with the red tubes, the purple bolete and the
satanic bolete, change into a dark gruel? I have an inkling of the
reason. Both of them turn blue, with an admixture of green. A third
species, the bluish bolete (Boletus cyanescens, BULL., var. lacteus,
LEVEILLE), possess remarkable color sensitiveness. Bruise it ever
so lightly, no matter where, on the cap, the stem, the tubes of the
undersurface: forthwith, the wounded part, originally a pure white, is
tinted a beautiful blue. Place this bolete in an atmosphere of carbonic
acid gas. We can now knock it, crush it, reduce it to pulp; and the
blue no longer shows. But extract a fragment from the crushed mass:
immediately, at the first contact with the air, the matter turns a most
glorious blue. It reminds us of a process employed in dyeing. The indigo
of commerce, steeped in water containing lime and sulfate of iron, or
copperas, is deprived of a part of its oxygen; it loses its color and
becomes soluble in water, as it was in the original indigo plant, before
the treatment which the plant underwent. A colorless liquid results.
Expose a drop of this liquid to the air. Straightway, oxidization works
upon the product: the indigo is reformed, insoluble and blue.

This is exactly what we see in the boletes that turn blue so readily.
Could they, in fact, contain soluble, colorless indigo? One would say
so, if certain properties did not give grounds for doubt. When subjected
to prolonged exposure to the air, the boletes that are apt to turn blue,
particularly the most remarkable, Boletus cyanescens, lose their color,
instead of retaining the deep blue which would be a sign of real indigo.
Be this as it may, these mushrooms contain a coloring principle which is
very liable to change under the influence of the air. Why should we not
regard it as the cause of the black tint when the maggots have liquefied
the boletes which turn blue? The others, those with the white flesh, the
edible bolete, for instance, do not assume this asphalty appearance once
they are liquefied by the grubs.

All the boletes that change to blue when broken have a bad reputation;
the books treat them as dangerous, or at least open to suspicion. The
name of Satanic awarded to one of them is an ample proof of our fears.
The caterpillar and the maggot are of another opinion: they greedily
devour what we hold in dread. Now here is a strange thing: those
passionate devotees of Boletus Satanas absolutely refuse certain
mushrooms which we find delightful eating, including the most celebrated
of all, the oronge, the imperial mushroom, which the Romans of the
empire, past masters in gluttony, called the food of the gods, cibus
deorum, the agaric of the Caesars, Agaricus caesareus. It is the most
elegant of all our mushrooms. When it prepares to make its appearance by
lifting the fissured earth, it is a handsome ovoid formed by the outer
wrapper, the volva. Then this purse gently tears and the jagged opening
partly reveals a globular object of a magnificent orange. Take a hen's
egg, boil it, remove the shell: what remains will be the imperial
mushroom in its purse. Remove a part of the white at the top, uncovering
a little of the yolk. Then you have the nascent imperial. The likeness
is perfect. And so the people of my part, struck by the resemblance,
call this mushroom lou rousset d'iou, or, in other words, yolk of egg.
Soon, the cap emerges entirely and spreads into a disk softer than satin
to the touch and richer to the eye than all the fruit of the Hesperides.
Appearing amid the pink heather, it is an entrancing object.

Well, this gorgeous agaric (Amanita caesarea, SCOP.), this food of the
gods the maggot absolutely refuses. My frequent examinations have
never shown me an imperial attacked by the grubs in the field. It needs
imprisonment in a jar and the absence of other victuals to provoke the
attempt; and even then the treacle hardly seems to suit them. After the
liquefaction, the grubs try to make off, showing that the fare is not
to their liking. The Mollusk also, the Arion, is anything but an ardent
consumer. Passing close to an imperial mushroom and finding nothing
better, he stops and takes a bite, without lingering. If, therefore, we
required the evidence of the insect, or even of the Slug, to know which
mushrooms are good to eat, we should refuse the best of them all. Though
respected by the vermin, the glorious imperial is nevertheless ruined
not by larvae, but by a parasitic fungus, the Mycogone rosea, which
spreads in a purply stain and turns it into a putrid mass. This is the
only despoiler that I know it to possess.

A second amanita, the sheathed amanita (Amanita vaginata, BULL.),
prettily streaked on the edges of the cap, is of an exquisite flavor,
almost equal to the imperial. It is called lou pichot gris, the
grayling, in these parts, because of its coloring, which is usually an
ashen gray. Neither the maggot nor the even more enterprising Moth
ever touches it. They likewise refuse the mottled amanita (Amanita
pantherina, D. C.), the vernal amanita (Amanita verna, FRIES) and the
lemon-yellow amanita (Amanita citrina, SCHAEFF.), all three of which are
poisonous. In short, whether it be to us a delicious dish or a deadly
poison, no amanita is accepted by the grubs. The arion alone sometimes
bites at it. The cause of the refusal escapes us. It were vain, speaking
of the mottled amanita, for instance, to allege as a reason the presence
of an alkaloid fatal to the grubs, for we should have to ask ourselves
why the imperial, the amanita of the Caesars, which is wholly free from
poison, is rejected no less uncompromisingly than the venomous species.
Could it perhaps be lack of relish, a deficiency of seasoning for
stimulating the appetite? In point of fact, when eaten raw, the amanitas
have no particular flavor.

What shall we learn from the sharper-flavored mushrooms? Here, in the
pinewoods, is the woolly milk mushroom (Lactarius torminosus, SCHAEFF.),
turned in at the edges and wrapped in a curly fleece. Its taste is
biting, worse than Cayenne pepper. Torminosus means colic producing.
The name is very suitable. Unless he possessed a stomach built for the
purpose, the man who touched such food as this would have a singularly
bad time before him. Well, that stomach the vermin possess: they
revel in the pungency of the woolly milk mushroom even as the spurge
caterpillar browses with delight on the loathsome leaves of the
euphorbiae. As for us, we might as well, in either case, eat live coals.

Is a condiment of this kind necessary to the grubs? Not at all. Here,
in the same pinewoods, is the "delicious" milk mushroom (Lactarius
deliciosus, LIN.), a glorious orange-red crater, adorned with concentric
zones. If bruised, it assumes a verdigris hue, possibly a variant of the
indigo tint peculiar to the blue-turning boletes. From its flesh laid
bare by being broken or cut ooze blood-red drops, a well-defined
characteristic peculiar to this milk mushroom. Here the violent spices
of the woolly milk mushroom disappear; the flesh has a pleasant taste
when eaten raw. No matter: the vermin devour the mild milk mushroom with
the same zest with which they devour the horribly peppered one. To them
the delicate and the strong, the insipid and the peppery are all alike.

The epithet 'delicious' applied to the mushroom whose wound weeps tears
of blood is highly exaggerated. It is edible, no doubt, but it is coarse
eating and difficult to digest. My household refuses it for cooking
purposes. We prefer to put it to soak in vinegar and afterwards to use
it as we might use pickled gherkins. The real value of this mushroom is
largely overrated thanks to a too laudatory epithet.

Is a certain degree of consistency required, to suit the grubs:
something midway between the softness of the amanitas and the firmness
of the milk mushrooms? Let us begin by questioning the olive tree agaric
or luminous mushroom (Pleurotus phosphoreus, BATT.), a magnificent
mushroom colored jujube red. Its popular name is not particularly
appropriate. True, it frequently grows at the base of old olive trees,
but I also pick it at the foot of the box, the holm oak, the plum tree,
the cypress, the almond tree, the Guelder rose and other trees and
shrubs. It seems fairly indifferent to the nature of the support. A
more remarkable feature distinguishes it from all the other European
mushrooms: it is phosphorescent. On the lower surface and there only, it
sheds a soft, white gleam, similar to that of the glowworm. It lights
up to celebrate its nuptials and the emission of its spores. There is no
question of chemist's phosphorus here. This is a slow combustion, a
sort of more active respiration than usual. The luminous emission is
extinguished in the unbreathable gases, nitrogen and carbonic acid; it
continues in aerated water; it ceases in water deprived of its air by
boiling. It is exceedingly faint, however, so much so that it is not
perceptible except in the deepest darkness. At night and even by day, if
the eyes have been prepared for it by a preliminary wait in the darkness
of a cellar, this agaric is a wonderful sight, looking indeed like a
piece of the full moon.

Now what do the vermin do? Are they drawn by this beacon? In no wise:
maggots, caterpillars and slugs never touch the resplendent mushroom.
Let us not be too quick to explain this refusal by the noxious
properties of the olive tree agaric, which is said to be extremely
poisonous. Here, in fact, on the pebbly ground of the wastelands, is the
eryngo agaric (Pleurotus eryngii, D. C.), which has the same consistency
as the other. It is the berigoulo of the Provencaux, one of the most
highly esteemed mushrooms. Well, the vermin will have none of it: what
is a treat to us is detestable to them.

It is superfluous to continue this method of investigation: the reply
would be everywhere the same. The insect, which feeds on one sort of
mushroom and refuses others, cannot tell us anything about the kinds
that are good or bad for us. Its stomach is not ours. It pronounces
excellent what we find poisonous; it pronounces poisonous what we think
excellent. That being so, when we are lacking in the botanical knowledge
which most of us have neither time nor inclination to acquire, what
course are we to take? The course is extremely simple.

During the thirty years and more that I have lived at Serignan, I have
never heard of one case of mushroom poisoning, even the mildest, in the
village; and yet there are plenty of mushrooms eaten here, especially
in autumn. Not a family but, when on a walk in the mountains, gathers
a precious addition to its modest alimentary resources. What do these
people gather? A little of everything. Often, when rambling in the
neighboring woods, I inspect the baskets of the mushroom pickers, who
are delighted for me to look. I see things fit to make mycological
experts stand aghast. I often find the purple bolete, which is classed
among the dangerous varieties. I made the remark one day. The man
carrying the basket stared at me in astonishment: 'That a poison! The
wolf's bread!' he said, patting the plump bolete with his hand. 'What
an idea! It's beef marrow, sir, regular beef marrow!' [Author's note:
People use them indiscriminately for cooking purposes, after removing
the tubes on the under side, which are easily separated from the rest of
the mushroom.]

He smiled at my apprehensions and went away with a poor opinion of my
knowledge in the matter of mushrooms.

In the baskets aforesaid, I find the ringed agaric (Armillaria mellea,
FRIES), which is stigmatized as valde venenatus by Persoon, an expert
on the subject. It is even the mushroom most frequently made use
of, because of its being so plentiful, especially at the foot of the
mulberry trees. I find the Satanic bolete, that dangerous tempter; the
belted milk mushroom (Lactarius zonarius, BULL.), whose burning flavor
rivals the pepper of its woolly kinsman; the smooth-headed amanita
(Amanita leiocophala, D. C.), a magnificent white dome rising out of
an ample volva and fringed at the edges with floury relics resembling
flakes of casein. Its poisonous smell and soapy aftertaste should lead
to suspicion of this ivory dome; but nobody seems to mind them.

How, with such careless picking, are accidents avoided? In my village
and for a long way around, the rule is to blanch the mushrooms, that is
to say, to bring them to the boil in water with a little salt in it.
A few rinsings in cold water conclude the treatment. They are then
prepared in whatever manner one pleases. In this way, what might at
first be dangerous becomes harmless, because the preliminary boiling and
rinsing have removed the noxious elements.

My personal experience confirms the efficacy of this rustic method.
At home, we very often make use of the ringed agaric, which is reputed
extremely dangerous. When rendered wholesome by the ordeal of boiling
water, it becomes a dish of which I have naught but good to say. Then
again the smooth-headed amanita frequently appears upon my table, after
being duly boiled: if it were not first treated in this fashion, it
would be hardly safe. I have tried the blue-turning boletes, especially
the purple bolete and the Satanic. They answered very well to the
eulogistic term of beef marrow applied to them by the mushroom picker
who scouted my prudent counsels. I have sometimes employed the mottled
amanita, so ill famed in the books, without disastrous result. One of
my friends, a doctor, to whom I communicated my ideas about the boiling
water treatment, thought that he would make the experiment on his
own account. He chose the lemon-yellow amanita, which has as bad a
reputation as the mottled variety, and ate it at supper. Everything went
off without the slightest inconvenience. Another, a blind friend, in
whose company I was one day to taste the Cossus of the Roman epicures,
treated himself to the olive tree agaric, said to be so formidable. The
dish was, if not excellent, at least harmless.

It results from these facts that a good preliminary boiling is the
best safeguard against accidents arising from mushrooms. If the insect,
devouring one species and refusing another, cannot guide us in any way,
at least rustic wisdom, the fruit of long experience, prescribes a rule
of conduct which is both simple and efficacious. You are tempted by a
basketful of mushrooms, but you do not feel very sure as to their
good or evil properties. Then have them blanched, well and thoroughly
blanched. When it leaves the purgatory of the stewpan, the doubtful
mushroom can be eaten without fear.

But this, you will tell me, is a system of cookery fit for savages: the
treatment with boiling water will reduce the mushrooms to a mash; it
will take away all their flavor and all their succulence. That is a
complete mistake. The mushroom stands the ordeal exceedingly well.
I have described my failure to subdue the cepes when I was trying
to obtain an extract from them. Prolonged boiling, with the aid of
bicarbonate of soda, so far from reducing them to a mess, left them very
nearly intact. The other mushrooms whose size entitles them to culinary
consideration offer the same degree of resistance. In the second place,
there is no loss of succulence and hardly any of flavor. Moreover, they
become much more digestible, which is a most important condition in
a dish generally so heavy for the stomach. For this reason, it is the
custom, in my family, to treat them one and all with boiling water,
including even the glorious imperial.

I am a Philistine, it is true, a barbarian caring little for the
refinements of cookery. I am not thinking of the epicure, but of the
frugal man, the husbandman especially. I should consider myself amply
repaid for my persistent observations if I succeeded in popularizing,
however little, the wise Provencal recipe for mushrooms, an excellent
food that makes a pleasant change from the dish of beans or potatoes,
when we can overcome the difficulty of distinguishing between the
harmless and the dangerous.

[Recorder's note: Modern mycologists warn against Fabre's claim that
boiling neutralizes all mushroom poisons.]




CHAPTER XIX. A MEMORABLE LESSON

I take leave of the mushrooms with regret: there would be so many other
questions to solve concerning them! Why do the maggots eat the Satanic
bolete and scorn the imperial mushroom? How is it that they find
delicious what we find poisonous and why is it that what seems exquisite
to our taste is loathsome to theirs? Can there be special compounds in
mushrooms, alkaloids, apparently, which vary according to the botanical
genus? Would it be possible to isolate them and study their properties
fully? Who knows whether medical science could not employ them in
relieving our ailments, even as it employs quinine, morphia and other
alkaloids? One might inquire into the cause of the liquefaction of the
coprini, which is spontaneous, and that of the boletes, which is brought
about by the maggots. Do both cases come within the same category?
Does the coprinus digest itself by virtue of a pepsin similar to the
maggots'? One would like to discover the oxidizable substance that gives
the luminous mushroom its soft, white light, which is like the beams of
the full moon. It would be interesting to know whether certain boletes
turn blue owing to the presence of an indigo which is more liable
to change than dyers' indigo and whether the green of the so-called
delicious milk mushroom when bruised is due to a like cause.

All these patient chemical investigations would tempt me, if the
rudimentary equipment of my laboratory and especially the irrevocable
flight of age-worn hopes permitted it. The day has passed for it now;
there is no time left to me. No matter: let us talk chemistry once more,
for a little while; and, for want of something better, let us revive old
memories. If the historian, now and again, takes a small place in the
story of his animals, the reader will kindly excuse him: old age is
prone to these reminiscences, the bloom of later days.

I have received, in all, two lessons of a scientific character in the
course of my life: one in anatomy and one in chemistry. I owe the first
to the learned naturalist Moquin-Tandon, who, on our return from
a botanizing expedition to Monte Renoso, in Corsica, showed me the
structure of a Snail in a plate filled with water. It was short and
fruitful. From that moment, I was initiated. Henceforth, I was to wield
the scalpel and decently to explore an animal's interior without any
other guidance from a master. The second lesson, that of chemistry, was
less fortunate. I will tell you what happened.

In my normal school, the scientific teaching was on an exceedingly
modest scale, consisting mainly of arithmetic and odds and ends
of geometry. Physics was hardly touched. We were taught a little
meteorology, in a summary fashion: a word or two about a red moon, a
white frost, dew, snow and wind; and, with this smattering of rustic
physics, we were considered to know enough of the subject to discuss the
weather with the farmer and the plowman.

Of natural history, absolutely nothing. No one thought of telling us
anything about flowers and trees, which give such zest to one's aimless
rambles, nor about insects, with their curious habits, nor about stones,
so instructive with their fossil records. That entrancing glance through
the windows of the world was refused us. Grammar was allowed to strangle
life.

Chemistry was never mentioned either: that goes without saying. I knew
the word, however. My casual reading, only half-understood for want of
practical demonstration, had taught me that chemistry is concerned with
the shuffle of matter, uniting or separating the various elements. But
what a strange idea I formed of this branch of study! To me it smacked
of sorcery, of alchemy and its search for the philosopher's stone. To my
mind, every chemist, when at work, should have had a magic wand in his
hand and the wizard's pointed, star studded cap on his head.

An important personage who sometimes visited the school, in his capacity
as an honorary lecturer, was not the man to rid me of those foolish
notions. He taught physics and chemistry at the grammar school. Twice a
week, from eight to nine o'clock in the evening, he held a free public
class in an enormous building adjacent to our schoolhouse. This was
the former Church of Saint-Martial, which has today become a Protestant
meeting house.

It was a wizard's cave certainly, just as I had pictured it. At the top
of the steeple, a rusty weathercock creaked mournfully; in the dusk,
great Bats flew all around the edifice or dived down the throats of the
gargoyles; at night, Owls hooted upon the copings of the leads. It was
inside, under the immensities of the vault, that my chemist used to
perform. What infernal mixtures did he compound? Should I ever know?

It is the day for his visit. He comes to see us with no pointed cap:
in ordinary garb, in fact, with nothing very queer about him. He bursts
into our schoolroom like a hurricane. His red face is half-buried in the
enormous stiff collar that digs into his ears. A few wisps of red hair
adorn his temples; the top of his head shines like an old ivory ball. In
a dictatorial voice and with wooden gestures, he questions two or three
of the boys; after a moment's bullying, he turns on his heel and goes
off in a whirlwind as he came. No, this is not the man, a capital fellow
at heart, to inspire me with a pleasant idea of the things which he
teaches.

Two windows of his laboratory look out upon the garden of the school.
One can just lean on them; and I often come and peep in, trying to make
out, in my poor brain, what chemistry can really be. Unfortunately,
the room into which my eyes penetrate is not the sanctuary but a mere
outhouse where the learned implements and crockery are washed. Leaden
pipes with taps run down the walls; wooden vats occupy the corners.
Sometimes, those vats bubble, heated by a spray of steam. A reddish
powder, which looks like brick dust, is boiling in them. I learn that
the simmering stuff is a dyer's root, known as madder, which will
be converted into a purer and more concentrated product. This is the
master's pet study.

What I saw from the two windows was not enough for me. I wanted to see
farther, into the very classroom. My wish was satisfied. It was the end
of the scholastic year. A stage ahead in the regular work, I had just
obtained my certificate. I was free. A few weeks remain before the
holidays. Shall I go and spend them out of doors, in all the gaiety of
my eighteen summers? No, I will spend them at the school which, for two
years past, has provided me with an untroubled roof and my daily crust.
I will wait until a post is found for me. Employ my willing service as
you think fit, do with me what you will: as long as I can study, I am
indifferent to the rest.

The principal of the school, the soul of kindness, has grasped my
passion for knowledge. He encourages me in my determination; he proposes
to make me renew my acquaintance with Horace and Virgil, so long since
forgotten. He knows Latin, he does; he will rekindle the dead spark
by making me translate a few passages. He does more: he lends me an
Imitation with parallel texts in Latin and Greek. With the first text,
which I am almost able to read, I will puzzle out the second and thus
increase the small vocabulary which I acquired in the days when I was
translating Aesop's Fables. It will be all the better for my future
studies. What luck! Board and lodging, ancient poetry, the classical
languages, all the good things at once!

I did better still. Our science master--the real, not the honorary
one--who came twice a week to discourse of the rule of three and
the properties of the triangle, had the brilliant idea of letting
us celebrate the end of the school year with a feast of learning. He
promised to show us oxygen. As a colleague of the chemist in the grammar
school, he obtained leave to take us to the famous laboratory and there
to handle the object of his lesson under our very eyes. Oxygen, yes,
oxygen, the all-consuming gas; that was what we were to see on the
morrow. I could not sleep all night for thinking of it.

Thursday afternoon came at last. As soon as the chemistry lesson is
over, we were to go for a walk to Les Angles, the pretty village over
yonder, perched on a steep rock. We were therefore in our Sunday best,
our out-of-doors clothes: black frock coats and tall hats. The whole
school was there, some thirty of us, in the charge of an usher, who knew
as little as we did of the things which we were about to see. We crossed
the threshold of the laboratory, not without excitement. I entered a
great nave with a Gothic roof, an old, bare church through which one's
voice echoed, into which the light penetrated discreetly through stained
glass windows set in ribs and rosettes of stone. At the back were huge
raised benches, with room for an audience of many hundreds; at the other
end, where the choir once was, stood an enormous chimney mantel; in the
middle was a large, massive table, corroded by the chemicals. At one end
of this table was a tarred tub, lined inside with lead and filled with
water. This, I at once learned, was the pneumatic trough, the vessel in
which the gases were collected.

The professor begins the experiment. He takes a sort of large, long
glass bulb, bent abruptly in the region of the neck. This, he informs
us, is a retort. He pours into it, from a screw of paper, some black
stuff that looks like powdered charcoal. This is manganese dioxide,
the master tells us. It contains in abundance, in a condensed state
and retained by combination with the metal, the gas which we propose to
obtain. An oily looking liquid, sulfuric acid, an excessively powerful
agent, will set it at liberty. Thus filled, the retort is placed on a
lighted stove. A glass tube brings it into communication with a bell jar
full of water on the shelf of the pneumatic trough. Those are all the
preparations. What will be the result? We must wait for the action of
heat.

My fellow pupils gather eagerly round the apparatus, cannot come close
enough to it. Some of them play the part of the fly on the wheel and
glory in contributing to the success of the experiment. They straighten
the retort, which is leaning to one side; they blow with their mouths on
the coals in the stove. I do not care for these familiarities with the
unknown. The good natured master raises no objection; but I have never
been able to endure the thronging of a crowd of gapers, who are very
busy with their elbows and force their way to the front row to see
whatever is happening, even though it be merely a couple of mongrels
fighting. Let us withdraw and leave these officious ones to themselves.
There is so much to see here, while the oxygen is being prepared. Let
us make the most of the occasion and take a look round the chemist's
arsenal.

Under the spacious chimney mantel is a collection of queer stoves, bound
round with bands of sheet iron. There are long and short ones, high
and low ones, all pierced with little windows that are closed with
a terracotta shutter. This one, a sort of little tower, is formed of
several parts placed one above the other and each supplied with big
round handles to hold them by when you take the monument to pieces.
A dome, with an iron chimney, tops the whole edifice, which must
be capable of producing a very hell fire to roast a stone of no
significance. Another, a squat one, stretches out like a curved spine.
It has a round hole at either end; and a thick porcelain tube sticks
out from each. It is impossible to conceive the purpose which such
instruments as these can serve. The seekers of the philosopher's stone
must have had many like them. They are torturers' engines, tearing the
metals' secrets from them.

The glass things are arranged on shelves. I see retorts of different
sizes, all with necks bent at a sudden angle. In addition to their long
beak, some of them have a narrow little tube coming out of their bulb.
Look, youngster, and do not try to guess the object of these curious
vessels. I see glasses with feet to them, funnel-shaped and deep; I
stand amazed at strange looking bottles with two or three mouths to
each, at phials swelling into a balloon with a long, narrow tube. What
an odd array of implements! And here are glass cupboards with a host
of bottles and jars, filled with all manner of chemicals. The labels
apprise me of their contents: molybdenite of ammonia, chloride of
antimony, permanganate of potash and ever so many other strange terms.
Never, in all my reading, have I met with such repellent language.

Suddenly, bang! And there is running and stamping and shouting and cries
of pain! What has happened? I rush up from the back of the room. The
retort has burst, squirting its boiling vitriol in every direction. The
wall opposite is all stained with it. Most of my fellow pupils have been
more or less struck. One poor youth has had the splashes full in his
face, right into his eyes. He is yelling like a madman. With the help of
a friend who has come off better than the others, I drag him outside by
main force, take him to the sink, which fortunately is close at hand,
and hold his face under the tap. This swift ablution serves its purpose.
The horrible pain begins to be allayed, so much so that the sufferer
recovers his senses and is able to continue the washing process for
himself.

My prompt aid certainly saved his sight. A week later, with the help of
the doctor's lotions, all danger was over. How lucky it was that I took
it into my head to keep some way off! My isolation, as I stood looking
into the glass case of chemicals, left me all my presence of mind,
all my readiness of resource. What are the others doing, those who got
splashed through standing too near the chemical bomb? I return to the
lecture hall. It is not a cheerful spectacle. The master has come off
badly: his shirtfront, waistcoat and trousers are covered with smears,
which are all smoldering and burning into holes. He hurriedly divests
himself of a portion of his dangerous raiment. Those of us who possess
the smartest clothes lend him something to put on so that he can go home
decently.

One of the tall, funnel-shaped glasses which I was admiring just now is
standing, full of ammonia, on the table. All, coughing and sniveling,
dip their handkerchiefs into it and rub the moist rag over their hats
and coats. In this way, the red stains left by the horrible compound
are made to disappear. A drop of ink will presently restore the color
completely.

And the oxygen? There was no more question, I need hardly say, of that.
The feast of learning was over. Never mind: the disastrous lesson was a
mighty event for me. I had been inside the chemist's laboratory; I
had had a glimpse of those wonderful jars and tubes. In teaching, what
matters most is not the thing taught, whether well or badly grasped:
it is the stimulus given to the pupil's latent aptitudes; it is the
fulminate awakening the slumbering explosives. One day, I shall obtain
on my own account that oxygen which ill luck has denied me; one day,
without a master, I shall yet learn chemistry.

Yes, I shall learn this chemistry, which started so disastrously. And
how? By teaching it. I do not recommend that method to anybody. Happy
the man who is guided by a master's word and example! He has a smooth
and easy road before him, lying straight ahead. The other follows a
rugged path, in which his feet often stumble; he goes groping into the
unknown and loses his way. To recover the right road, if want of success
have not discouraged him, he can rely only on perseverance, the sole
compass of the poor. Such was my fate. I taught myself by teaching
others, by passing on to them the modicum of seed that had ripened on
the barren moor cleared, from day to day, by my patient plowshare.

A few months after the incident of the vitriol bomb, I was sent to
Carpentras to take charge of junior classes at the college there. The
first year was a difficult one, swamped as I was by the excessive number
of pupils, a set of duffers kept out of the more advanced classes and
all at different stages in spelling and grammar. Next year, my school is
divided into two; I have an assistant. A weeding-out takes place in my
crowd of scatterbrains. I keep the older, the more intelligent ones;
the others are to have a term in the preparatory division. From that day
forward, things are different. Curriculum there is none. In those happy
times, the master's personality counted for something; there was no such
thing as the scholastic piston working with the regularity of a machine.
It was left for me to act as I thought fit. Well, what should I do to
make the school earn its title of 'upper primary'?

Why, of course! Among other things, I shall do some chemistry! My
reading has taught me that it does no harm to know a little chemistry,
if you would make your furrows yield a good return. Many of my pupils
come from the country; they will go back to it to improve their land.
Let us show them what the soil is made of and what the plant feeds on.
Others will follow industrial careers; they will become tanners,
metal founders, distillers; they will sell cakes of soap and kegs of
anchovies. Let us show them pickling, soap making, stills, tannin and
metals. Of course, I know nothing about these things, but I shall learn,
all the more so as I shall have to teach them to the boys; and your
schoolboy is a little demon for jeering at the master's hesitation.

As it happens, the college boasts a small laboratory, containing just
what is strictly indispensable: a receiver, a dozen glass balloons, a
few tubes and a niggardly assortment of chemicals. That will do, if I
can have the run of it. But the laboratory is a sanctum reserved for the
use of the sixth form. No one sets foot in it except the professor and
his pupils preparing for their degree. For me, the outsider, to enter
that tabernacle with my band of young imps would be most unseemly; the
rightful occupant would never think of allowing it. I feel it myself:
elementary teaching dare not aspire to such familiarity with the higher
culture. Very well, we will not go there, so long as they will lend me
the things.

I confide my plan to the principal, the supreme dispenser of those
riches. He is a classics man, knows hardly anything of science, at
that time held in no great esteem, and he does not quite understand the
object of my request. I humbly insist and exert my powers of persuasion.
I discreetly emphasize the real point of the matter. My group of pupils
is a numerous one. It takes more meals at the schoolhouse--the real
concern of a principal--than any other section of the college. This
group must be encouraged, lured on, increased if possible. The prospect
of disposing of a few more platefuls of soup wins the battle for me;
my request is granted. Poor science! All that diplomacy to gain your
entrance among the despised ones, who have not been nourished on Cicero
and Demosthenes!

I am authorized to move, once a week, the material required for my
ambitious plans. From the first floor, the sacred dwelling of the
scientific things, I shall take them down to a sort of cellar where I
give my lessons. The troublesome part is the pneumatic trough. It has
to be emptied before it is carried downstairs and to be filled again
afterwards. A day scholar, a zealous acolyte, hurries over his dinner
and comes to lend me a hand an hour or two before the class begins. We
effect the move between us.

What I am after is oxygen, the gas which I once saw fail so lamentably.
I thought it all out at my leisure, with the help of a book. I will do
this, I will do that, I will go to work in this or the other fashion.
Above all, we will run no risks, perhaps of blinding ourselves; for it
is once more a question of heating manganese dioxide with sulfuric acid.
I am filled with misgivings at the recollection of my old school fellow
yelling like mad. Who cares? Let us try for all that: fortune favors the
brave! Besides, we will make one prudent condition, from which I
shall never depart: no one but myself shall come near the table. If an
accident happen, I shall be the only one to suffer; and, in my opinion,
it is worth a burn or two to make acquaintance with oxygen.

Two o'clock strikes; and my pupils enter the classroom. I purposely
exaggerate the likelihood of danger. They are all to stay on their
benches and not stir. This is agreed. I have plenty of elbow room. There
is no one by me, except my acolyte, standing by my side, ready to help
me when the time comes. The others look on in profound silence, reverent
towards the unknown.

Soon the gaseous bubbles come "gloo-glooing" through the water in the
bell jar. Can it be my gas? My heart beats with excitement. Can I have
succeeded without any trouble at the first attempt? We will see. A
candle blown out that moment and still retaining a red tip to its wick
is lowered by a wire into a small test jar filled with my product.
Capital! The candle lights with a little explosion and burns with
extraordinary brilliancy. It is oxygen right enough.

The moment is a solemn one. My audience is astounded and so am I, but
more at my own success than at the relighted candle. A puff of vainglory
rises to my brow; I feel the fire of enthusiasm run through my veins.
But I say nothing of these inner sensations. Before the boys' eyes, the
master must appear an old hand at the things he teaches. What would the
young rascals think of me if I allowed them to suspect my surprise,
if they knew that I myself am beholding the marvelous subject of
my demonstration for the first time in my life? I should lose their
confidence, I should sink to the level of a mere pupil.

Sursum corda! Let us go on as if chemistry were a familiar thing to me.
It is the turn of the steel ribbon, an old watch spring rolled corkscrew
fashion and furnished with a bit of tinder. With this simple lighted
bait, the steel should take fire in a jar filled with my gas. And it
does burn; it becomes a splendid firework, with cracklings and a blaze
of sparks and a cloud of rust that tarnishes the jar. From the end of
the fiery coil a red drop breaks off at intervals, shoots quivering
through the layer of water left at the bottom of the vessel and embeds
itself in the glass which has suddenly grown soft. This metallic tear,
with its indomitable heat, makes every one of us shudder. All stamp and
cheer and applaud. The timid ones place their hands before their faces
and dare not look except through their fingers. My audience exults; and
I myself triumph. Ha, my friends, isn't it grand, this chemistry!

All of us have red letter days in our lives. Some, the practical men,
have been successful in business; they have made money and hold their
heads high in consequence. Others, the thinkers, have gained ideas;
they have opened a new account in the ledger of nature and they silently
taste the hallowed joys of truth. One of my great days was that of my
first acquaintance with oxygen. On that day, when my class was over and
all the materials put back in their place, I felt myself grow several
inches taller. An untrained workman, I had shown, with complete success,
that which was unknown to me a couple of hours before. No accident
whatever, not even the least stain of acid.

It is, therefore, not so difficult nor so dangerous as the pitiful
finish of the Saint Martial lesson might have led me to believe. With
a vigilant eye and a little prudence, I shall be able to continue. The
prospect is enchanting.

And so, in due season, comes hydrogen, carefully contemplated in my
reading, seen and reseen with the eye of the mind before being seen with
the eyes of the body. I delight my little rascals by making the hydrogen
flame sing in a glass tube, which trickles with the drops of water
resulting from the combustion; I make them jump with the explosions of
the thunderous mixture. Later, I show them, with the same invariable
success, the splendors of phosphorus, the violent powers of chlorine,
the loathsome smells of sulfur, the metamorphoses of carbon and so on.
In short, in a series of lessons, the principal nonmetallic elements and
their compounds are passed in review during the course of the year.

The thing was bruited abroad. Fresh pupils came to me, attracted by the
marvels of the school. Additional places were laid in the dining hall;
and the principal, who was more interested in the profits on his beans
and bacon than in chemistry, congratulated me on this accession of
boarders. I was fairly started. Time and an indomitable will would do
the rest.




CHAPTER XX. INDUSTRIAL CHEMISTRY

Everything happens sooner or later. When, through the low windows
overlooking the garden of the school, my eye glanced at the laboratory,
where the madder vats were steaming; when, in the sanctuary itself,
I was present, by way of a first and last chemistry lesson, at the
explosion of the retort of sulfuric acid that nearly disfigured every
one of us, I was far indeed from suspecting the part which I was
destined to play under that same vaulted roof. Had a prophet foretold
that I should one day succeed the master, never would I have believed
him. Time works these surprises for us.

Stones would have theirs too, if anything were able to astonish them.
The Saint Martial building was originally a church; it is a protestant
place of worship now. Men used to pray there in Latin; today they pray
in French. In the intervening period, it was for some years in the
service of science, the noble orison that dispels the darkness. What has
the future in store for it? Like many another in the ringing city, to
use Rabelais' epithet, will it become a home for the fuller's teasels,
a warehouse for scrap iron, a carrier's stable? Who knows? Stones have
their destinies no less unexpected than ours.

When I took possession of it as a laboratory for the municipal course of
lectures, the nave remained as it was at the time of my former short and
disastrous visit. To the right, on the wall, a number of black stains
struck the eye. It was as though a madman's hand, armed with the inkpot,
had smashed its fragile projectile at that spot. I recognized the stains
at once. They were the marks of the corrosive which the retort had
splashed at our heads. Since those days of long ago, no one had thought
fit to hide them under a coat of whitewash. So much the better: they
will serve me as excellent counselors. Always before my eyes, at every
lesson, they will speak to me incessantly of prudence.

For all its attractions, however, chemistry did not make me forget a
long cherished plan well suited to my tastes, that of teaching natural
history at a university. Now, one day, at the grammar school, I had a
visit from a chief inspector which was not of an encouraging nature. My
colleagues used to call him the Crocodile. Perhaps he had given them a
rough time in the course of his inspections. For all his boorish ways,
he was an excellent man at heart. I owe him for a piece of advice which
greatly influenced my future studies.

That day, he suddenly appeared, alone, in the schoolroom, where I was
taking a class in geometrical drawing. I must explain that, at this
time, to eke out my ridiculous salary and, at all costs, to provide a
living for myself and my large family, I was a mighty pluralist, both
inside the college and out. At the college in particular, after two
hours of physics, chemistry or natural history, came, without respite,
another two hours' lesson, in which I taught the boys how to make a
projection in descriptive geometry, how to draw a geodetic plane, a
curve of any kind whose law of generation is known to us. This was
called graphics.

The sudden irruption of the dread personage causes me no great flurry.
Twelve o'clock strikes, the pupils go out and we are left alone. I know
him to be a geometrician. The transcendental curve, perfectly drawn, may
work upon his gentler mood. I happen to have in my portfolio the
very thing to please him. Fortune serves me well in this special
circumstance. Among my boys, there is one who, though a regular dunce at
everything else, is a first rate hand with the square, the compass and
the drawing pen: a deft-fingered numskull, in short.

With the aid of a system of tangents of which I first showed him the
rule and the method of construction, my artist has obtained the ordinary
cycloid, followed by the interior and the exterior epicycloid and,
lastly, the same curves both lengthened and shortened. His drawings are
admirable Spider's webs, encircling the cunning curve in their net. The
draftsmanship is so accurate that it is easy to deduce from it beautiful
theorems, which would be very laborious to work out by the calculus.

I submit the geometrical masterpieces to my chief inspector, who is
himself said to be smitten with geometry. I modestly describe the method
of construction, I call his attention to the fine deductions which the
drawing enables one to make. It is labor lost: he gives but a heedless
glance at my sheets and flings each on the table as I hand it to him.

'Alas!' said I to myself. 'There is a storm brewing; the cycloid won't
save you; it's your turn for a bite from the Crocodile!'

Not a bit of it. Behold the bugbear growing genial. He sits down on a
bench, with one leg here, another there, invites me to take a seat by
his side and, in a moment, we are discussing graphics. Then, bluntly:
'Have you any money?' he asks.

Astounded at this strange question, I answer with a smile.

'Don't be afraid,' he says. 'Confide in me. I'm asking you in your own
interest. Have you any capital?'

'I have no reason to be ashamed of my poverty, monsieur l'inspecteur
general. I frankly admit, I possess nothing; my means are limited to my
modest salary.'

A frown greets my answer; and I hear, spoken in an undertone, as though
my confessor were talking to himself: 'That's sad, that's really very
sad.'

Astonished to find my penury treated as sad, I ask for an explanation: I
was not accustomed to this solicitude on the part of my superiors.

'Why, yes, it's a great pity,' continues the man reputed so terrible. 'I
have read your articles in the Annales des sciences naturelles. You have
an observant mind, a taste for research, a lively style and a ready pen.
You would have made a capital university professor.'

'But that's just what I'm aiming at!'

'Give up the idea.'

'Haven't I the necessary attainment?'

'Yes, you have; but you have no capital.' The great obstacle stands
revealed to me: woe to the poor in pocket! University teaching demands a
private income. Be as ordinary, as commonplace as you please, but, above
all, possess the coin that lets you cut a dash. That is the main thing;
the rest is a secondary condition.

And the worthy man tells me what poverty in a frock coat means. Though
less of a pauper than I, he has known the mortification of it; he
describes it to me, excitedly, in all its bitterness. I listen to him
with an aching heart; I see the refuge which was to shelter my future
crumbling before my eyes: 'You have done me a great service, sir,' I
answered. 'You put an end to my hesitation. For the moment, I give up my
plan. I will first see if it is possible to earn the small fortune which
I shall need if I am to teach in a decent manner.'

Thereupon we exchanged a friendly grip of the hand and parted. I never
saw him again. His fatherly arguments had soon convinced me: I was
prepared to hear the blunt truth. A few months earlier, I had received
my nomination as an assistant lecturer in zoology at the university of
Poitiers. They offered me a ridiculous salary. After paying the costs of
moving, I should have had hardly three francs a day left; and, on this
income, I had to keep my family, numbering seven in all. I hastened to
decline the very great honor.

No, science ought not to practice these jests. If we humble persons are
of use to her, she should at least enable us to live. If she can't do
that, then let her leave us to break stones on the highway. Oh, yes, I
was prepared for the truth when that honest fellow talked to me of frock
coated poverty! I am telling the story of a not very distant past. Since
then, things have improved considerably; but, when the pear was properly
ripened, I was no longer of an age to pick it.

And what was I to do now, to overcome the difficulty mentioned by my
inspector and confirmed by my personal experience? I would take up
industrial chemistry. The municipal lectures at Saint Martial placed
a spacious and fairly well-equipped laboratory at my disposal. Why not
make the most of it?

The chief manufacture of Avignon was madder. The farmer supplied the
raw material to the factories, where it was turned into purer and more
concentrated products. My predecessor had gone in for it and done well
by it, so people said. I would follow in his footsteps and use the vats
and furnaces, the expensive plant which I had inherited. So to work.

What should I set myself to produce? I proposed to extract the coloring
substance, alizarin, to separate it from the other matters found with it
in the root, to obtain it in the pure state and in a form that allowed
of the direct printing of the stuffs, a much quicker and more artistic
method than the old dyeing process.

Nothing could be simpler than this problem, once the solution was known;
but how tremendously obscure while it had still to be solved! I dare
not call to mind all the imagination and patience spent upon endless
endeavors which nothing, not even the madness of them, discouraged. What
mighty meditations in the somber church! What glowing dreams, soon to be
followed by sore disappointment, when experiment spoke the last word and
upset the scaffolding of my plans. Stubborn as the slave of old amassing
a peculium for his enfranchisement, I used to reply to the check of
yesterday by the fresh attempt of tomorrow, often as faulty as
the others, sometimes the richer by an improvement, and I went on
indefatigably, for I too cherished the indomitable ambition to set
myself free.

Should I succeed? Perhaps so. I at last had a satisfactory answer. I
obtained, in a cheap and practical fashion, the pure coloring matter,
concentrated in a small volume and excellent for both printing and
dyeing. One of my friends took up my process on a large scale in
his works; a few calico factories adopted the produce and expressed
themselves delighted with it. The future smiled at last; a pink rift
opened in my gray sky. I should possess the modest fortune without which
I must deny myself the pleasure of teaching in a university. Freed of
the torturing anxiety about my daily bread, I should be able to live at
ease among my insects.

In the midst of the joys of seeing these problems solved by chemistry,
yet another ray of sunshine was reserved for me, adding its gladness
to that of my success. Let us go back a couple of years. The chief
inspectors visited our grammar school. These personages travel in pairs:
one attends to literature, the other to science. When the inspection was
over and the books checked, the staff was summoned to the principal's
drawing room, to receive the parting admonitions of the two luminaries.
The man of science began. I should be sadly put to it to remember what
he said. It was cold professional prose, made up of soulless words
which the hearer forgot once the speaker's back was turned, words merely
boring to both. I had heard enough of these chilly sermons in my time;
one more of them could not hope to make an impression on me.

The inspector in literature spoke next. At the first words which he
uttered, I said to myself: 'Oho! This is a very different business!'

The speech was alive and vigorous and full of images; indifferent to
scholastic commonplaces, the ideas soared, hovering gently in the serene
heights of a kindly philosophy. This time, I listened with pleasure;
I even felt stirred. Here was no official homily: it was full of
impassioned zeal, of words that carried you with them, uttered by an
honest man accomplished in the art of speaking, an orator in the true
sense of the word. In all my school experience, I had never had such a
treat.

When the meeting broke up, my heart beat faster than usual: 'What a
pity,' I thought, 'that my side, the science side, cannot bring me into
contact, some day, with that inspector! It seems to me that we should
become great friends.'

I inquired his name of my colleagues, who were always better informed
than I. They told me it was Victor Duruy.

Well, one day, two years later, as I was looking after my Saint Martial
laboratory in the midst of the steam from my vats, with my hands the
color of boiled lobster claws from constant dipping in the indelible
red of my dyes, there walked in, unexpectedly, a person whose features
straightway seemed familiar. I was right, it was the very man, the chief
inspector whose speech had once stirred me. M. Duruy was now minister
of public instruction. He was styled, 'Your excellency;' and this style,
usually an empty formula, was well deserved in the present case, for our
new minister excelled in his exalted functions. We all held him in high
esteem. He was the workers' minister, the man for the humble toiler.

'I want to spend my last half-hour at Avignon with you,' said my
visitor, with a smile. 'That will be a relief from the official bowing
and scraping.'

Overcome by the honor paid me, I apologized for my costume--I was in my
shirt sleeves--and especially for my lobster claws, which I had tried,
for a moment, to hide behind my back.

'You have nothing to apologize for. I came to see the worker. The
working man never looks better than in his overall, with the marks of
his trade on him. Let us have a talk. What are you doing just now?'

I explained, in a few words, the object of my researches; I showed
my product; I executed under the minister's eyes a little attempt at
printing in madder red. The success of the experiment and the simplicity
of my apparatus, in which an evaporating dish, maintained at boiling
point under a glass funnel, took the place of a steam chamber, caused
him some surprise.

'I will help you,' he said. 'What do you want for your laboratory?'

'Why, nothing, monsieur le ministre, nothing! With a little application,
the plant I have is ample.'

'What, nothing! You are unique there! The others overwhelm me with
requests; their laboratories are never well enough supplied. And you,
poor as you are, refuse my offers!'

'No, there is one thing which I will accept.'

'What is that?'

'The signal honor of shaking you by the hand.'

'There you are, my friend, with all my heart. But that's not enough.
What else do you want?'

'The Paris Jardin des Plantes is under your control. Should a crocodile
die, let them keep the hide for me. I will stuff it with straw and hang
it from the ceiling. Thus adorned, my workshop will rival the wizard's
cave.'

The minister cast his eyes round the nave and glanced up at the Gothic
vault: 'Yes, it would look very well.' And he gave a laugh at my sally.
'I now know you as a chemist,' he continued. 'I knew you already as a
naturalist and a writer. I have heard about your little animals. I am
sorry that I shall have to leave without seeing them. They must wait for
another occasion. My train will be starting presently. Walk with me to
the station, will you? We shall be alone and we can chat a bit more on
the way.'

We strolled along, discussing entomology and madder. My shyness had
disappeared. The self sufficiency of a fool would have left me dumb;
the fine frankness of a lofty mind put me at my ease. I told him of my
experiments in natural history, of my plans for a professorship, of my
fight with harsh fate, my hopes and fears. He encouraged me, spoke to
me of a better future. We reached the station and walked up and down
outside, talking away delightfully.

A poor old woman passed, all in rags, her back bent by age and years of
work in the fields. She furtively put out her hand for alms. Duruy
felt in his waistcoat, found a two franc piece and placed it in the
outstretched hand; I wanted to add a couple of sous as my contribution,
but my pockets were empty, as usual. I went to the beggar woman and
whispered in her ear: 'Do you know who gave you that? It's the emperor's
minister.

The poor woman started; and her astounded eyes wandered from the
open-handed swell to the piece of silver and from the piece of silver to
the open-handed swell. What a surprise! What a windfall!

'Que lou bon Dieu ie done longo vido e santa, pecaire!' she said, in her
cracked voice.

And, curtseying and nodding, she withdrew, still staring at the coin in
the palm of her hand.

'What did she say?' asked Duruy.

'She wished you long life and health.' 'And pecaire?'

'Pecaire is a poem in itself: it sums up all the gentler passions.'

And I myself mentally repeated the artless vow. The man who stops so
kindly when a beggar puts out her hand has something better in his soul
than the mere qualities that go to make a minister.

We entered the station, still alone, as promised, and I quite without
misgivings. Had I but foreseen what was going to happen, how I should
have hastened to take my leave! Little by little, a group formed in
front of us. It was too late to fly; I had to screw up my courage.
Came the general of division and his officers, came the prefect and his
secretary, the mayor and his deputy, the school inspector and the pick
of the staff. The minister faced the ceremonial semicircle. I stood
next to him. A crowd on one side, we two on the other. Followed the
regulation spinal contortions, the empty obeisances which my dear Duruy
had come to my laboratory to forget. When bowing to St. Roch, in his
corner niche, the worshipper at the same time salutes the saint's humble
companion. I was something like St. Roch's dog in the presence of those
honors which did not concern me. I stood and looked on, with my awful
red hands concealed behind my back, under the broad brim of my felt hat.

After the official compliments had been exchanged, the conversation
began to languish; and the minister seized my right hand and gently drew
it from the mysterious recesses of my wide awake.

'Why don't you show those gentlemen your hands?' he said. 'Most people
would be proud of them.'

'Workman's hands,' said the prefect's secretary. 'Regular workman's
hands.'

The general, almost scandalized at seeing me in such distinguished
company, added: 'Hands of a dyer and cleaner.'

'Yes, workman's hands,' retorted the minister, 'and I wish you many like
them. Believe me, they will do much to help the chief industry of your
city. Skilled as they are in chemical work, they are equally capable of
wielding the pen, the pencil, the scalpel and the lens. As you here seem
unaware of it, I am delighted to inform you.'

This time, I should have liked the ground to open and swallow me up.
Fortunately, the bell rang for the train to start. I said goodbye to the
minister and, hurriedly taking to flight, left him laughing at the trick
which he had played me.

The incident was noised about, could not help being so, for the
peristyle of a railway station keeps no secrets. I then learned to what
annoyances the shadow of the great exposes us. I was looked upon as an
influential person, having the favor of the gods at my disposal. Place
hunters and canvassers tormented me. One wanted a license to sell
tobacco and stamps, another a scholarship for his son, another an
increase of his pension. I had only to ask and I should obtain, said
they.

O simple people, what an illusion was yours! You could not have hit upon
a worse intermediary. I figuring as a postulant! I have many faults,
I admit, but that is certainly not one of them. I got rid of the
importunate people as best I could, though they were utterly unable
to fathom my reserve. What would they have said had they known of the
minister's offers with regard to my laboratory and my jesting reply, in
which I asked for a crocodile skin to hang from my ceiling! They would
have taken me for an idiot.

Six months elapsed; and I received a letter summoning me to call upon
the minister at his office. I suspected a proposal to promote me to a
more important grammar school and wrote begging that I might be left
where I was, among my vats and my insects. A second letter arrived,
more pressing than the first and signed by the minister's own hand. This
letter said: 'Come at once, or I shall send my gendarmes to fetch you.'

There was no way out of it. Twenty-four hours later, I was in M. Duruy's
room. He welcomed me with exquisite cordiality, gave me his hand and,
taking up a number of the Moniteur: 'Read that,' he said. 'You refused
my chemical apparatus; but you won't refuse this.

I looked at the line to which his finger pointed. I read my name in the
list of the Legion of Honor. Quite stupid with surprise, I stammered the
first words of thanks that entered my head.

'Come here,' said he, 'and let me give you the accolade. I will be your
sponsor. You will like the ceremony all the better if it is held in
private, between you and me: I know you!'

He pinned the red ribbon to my coat, kissed me on both cheeks, made me
telegraph the great event to my family. What a morning, spent with that
good man!

I well know the vanity of decorative ribbonry and tinware, especially
when, as too often happens, intrigue degrades the honor conferred; but,
coming as it did, that bit of ribbon is precious to me. It is a relic,
not an object for show. I keep it religiously in a drawer.

There was a parcel of big books on the table a collection of the reports
on the progress of science drawn up for the International Exhibition of
1867, which had just closed.

'Those books are for you,' continued the minister. 'Take them with you.
You can look through them at your leisure: they may interest you. There
is something about your insects in them. You're to have this too: it
will pay for your journey. The trip which I made you take must not be
at your own expense. If there is anything over, spend it on your
laboratory.'

And he handed me a roll of twelve hundred francs. In vain I refused,
remarking that my journey was not so burdensome as all that; besides,
his embrace and his bit of ribbon were of inestimable value compared
with my disbursements. He insisted: 'Take it,' he said, 'or I shall be
very angry. There's something else: you must come to the emperor's with
me tomorrow, to the reception of the learned societies.'

Seeing me greatly perplexed and as though demoralized by the prospect of
an imperial interview: 'Don't try to escape me,' he said, 'or look out
for the gendarmes of my letter! You saw the fellows in the bearskin caps
on your way up. Mind you don't fall into their hands. In any case, lest
you should be tempted to run away, we will go to the Tuileries together,
in my carriage.'

Things happened as he wished. The next day, in the minister's company, I
was ushered into a little drawing room at the Tuileries by chamberlains
in knee breeches and silver-buckled shoes. They were queer people to
look at. Their uniforms and their stiff gait gave them the appearance,
in my eyes, of beetles who, by way of wing cases, wore a great,
gold-laced dress coat, with a key in the small of the back. There were
already a score of persons from all parts waiting in the room. These
included geographical explorers, botanists, geologists, antiquaries,
archeologists, collectors of prehistoric flints, in short, the usual
representatives of provincial scientific life.

The emperor entered, very simply dressed, with no parade about him
beyond a wide, red, watered silk ribbon across his chest. No sign of
majesty, an ordinary man, round and plump, with a large moustache and
a pair of half-closed, drowsy eyelids. He moved from one to the other,
talking to each of us for a moment as the minister mentioned our
names and the nature of our occupations. He showed a fair amount of
information as he changed his subject from the ice floes of Spitzbergen
to the dunes of Gascony, from a Carlovingian charter to the flora of
the Sahara, from the progress in beetroot growing to Caesar's
trenches before Alesia. When my turn came, he questioned me upon the
hypermetamorphosis of the Meloidae [a beetle family including the oil
beetle and the Spanish fly], my last essay in entomology. I answered as
best I could, floundering a little in the proper mode of address, mixing
up the everyday monsieur with sire, a word whose use was so entirely new
to me. I passed through the dread straits and others succeeded me. My
five minutes' conversation with an imperial majesty was, they tell me, a
most distinguished honor. I am quite ready to believe them, but I never
had a desire to repeat it.

The reception came to an end, bows were exchanged and we were dismissed.
A luncheon awaited us at the minister's house. I sat on his right, not
a little embarrassed by the privilege; on his left was a physiologist
of great renown. Like the others, I spoke of all manner of things,
including even Avignon Bridge. Duruy's son, sitting opposite me, chaffed
me pleasantly about the famous bridge on which everybody dances; he
smiled at my impatience to get back to the thyme-scented hills and the
gray olive yards rich in Grasshoppers.

'What!' said his father. 'Won't you visit our museums, our collections?
There are some very interesting things there.'

'I know, monsieur le ministre, but I shall find better things, things
more to my taste, in the incomparable museum of the fields.'

'Then what do you propose to do?'

'I propose to go back tomorrow.

I did go back, I had had enough of Paris: never had I felt such tortures
of loneliness as in that immense whirl of humanity. To get away, to get
away was my one idea.

Once home among my family, I felt a mighty load off my mind and a great
joy in my heart, where rang a peal of bells proclaiming the delights of
my approaching emancipation. Little by little, the factory that was to
set me free rose skywards, full of promises. Yes, I should possess the
modest income which would crown my ambition by allowing me to descant on
animals and plants in a university chair.

'Well, no,' said Fate, 'you shall not acquire the freedman's peculium;
you shall remain a slave, dragging your chain behind you; your peal of
bells rings false!'

Hardly was the factory in full swing when a piece of news was
bruited, at first a vague rumor, an echo of probabilities rather than
certainties, and then a positive statement leaving no room for doubt.
Chemistry had obtained the madder dye by artificial means; thanks to a
laboratory concoction, it was utterly overthrowing the agriculture and
industries of my district. This result, while destroying my work and my
hopes, did not surprise me unduly. I myself had toyed with the problem
of artificial alizarin and I knew enough about it to foresee that, in
no very distant future, the work of the chemist's retort would take the
place of the work of the fields.

It was finished; my hopes were dashed to the ground. What to do next?
Let us change our lever and begin to roll Sisyphus' stone once more. Let
us try to draw from the ink pot what the madder vat declines to yield.
Laboremus!





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Life of the Fly, by J. Henri Fabre

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE LIFE OF THE FLY ***

***** This file should be named 3422.txt or 3422.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/4/2/3422/

Produced by Gerry Rising

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
