The Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of an Ostrich, by Judd Isaacs

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Story of an Ostrich
       An Allegory and Humorous Satire in Rhyme.

Author: Judd Isaacs

Illustrator: Edmund Nolcini

Release Date: September 25, 2011 [EBook #37530]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF AN OSTRICH ***




Produced by Chris Curnow, Anna Hall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)









[Illustration]

  THE
  STORY OF AN OSTRICH

  AN ALLEGORY
  AND
  HUMOROUS SATIRE
  IN RHYME

  INTERPRETED AND ILLUSTRATED
  BY
  EDMUND NOLCINI


  PUBLISHED BY THE
  HAND PRINT BOOK FOLK,
  BACK BAY, BOSTON, MASS.


  COPYRIGHTED, 1903,
  BY THE
  HAND PRINT BOOK FOLK, BOSTON, MASS.


ALL THE ILLUSTRATIONS HERE SHOWN, INCLUDING THE TITLE PAGE, ARE
REPRODUCED FROM PEN DRAWINGS MADE EXPRESSLY FOR THIS BOOK, AT GREAT
EXPENSE, AND ALL PERSONS ARE HEREBY NOTIFIED NOT TO REPRODUCE THEM
WITHOUT PERMISSION




PUBLISHER'S PREFACE

[Illustration]


Whatever other merit may be discovered in this book, the publishers
desire to call attention to the fact that, as a whole, it is a
production altogether unique in a field of endeavor where something new
is being constantly sought, but seldom found.

The poem is entirely hand-printed in large and legible letters,
designedly kept free from ornate fancies and, therefore, particularly
easy to read. The hand-printing accords with the adjoining illustrations
as angular and machine-made type never does, giving a pleasing and
harmonious effect to the entire page, a result not to be obtained by the
ordinary art of the printer.

Attention is also called to the illustrations of the volume. Their
merely mechanical arrangement upon the page is in itself unusual, we
might almost say unknown to the reading public, while the imaginative
story that the artist has told in the illustrations that he has
contributed, is not only of the real and material world, but also of
powers behind the scenes, which offer the motives and even supply the
cues of most, if not all of the actors, who perform upon the great stage
of life. In this, too, the book is unusual, if not unique, and offers a
fertile field to the imagination of a discerning public in connection
with the delicious humor of the poem itself.

While, therefore, fully conscious of how far short the volume falls from
what might be done in the direction in which it only points the way, the
publishers offer it as one of a series now in preparation, of similar
works which, it is believed, will be found worthy of more than a few
moments of the amused attention of the reader.

THE HAND PRINT BOOK FOLK.

_Back Bay, Boston, Mass., October, 1903._

[Illustration]




Artist's Announcement

[Illustration]


If the reader will pardon an unconventional obtrusion upon his attention
for a brief moment, he may be interested to follow somewhat the train of
thought in the artist's mind prior to his beginning to illustrate this
book.

When "The Story of an Ostrich" was put into his hands, his first
impression was, "Here is a merely juvenile theme, to be treated with
light, conventional and ornamental drawings, as an adornment to a fairy
tale."

As he read it, he gradually perceived a deeper significance concealed
beneath the laugh that must inevitably be aroused at the thought of the
ridiculous figure of the foolish ostrich pecking away at his homely
feet, under the delusion that they are not his own.

The longer he studied and pondered over it, the more was he impressed
with the conviction that underneath the simple phraseology of the poem,
the author had conveyed a lesson that humanity might well pause and
heed.... In these days of "making many books," how welcome should be that
one whose story aims to raise the burden that weighs down the surcharged
heart, or seeks to still the fever coursing through the blood of men and
women struggling with the complicated problems of life!

"The Story of an Ostrich" is so simple in its form that children may
read it with pleasure and profit, thereby drawing the simpler moral
from the tale; while there is also suggested a possible condition of
society that shall be attuned to the perfect chord of divine law,
through the subordination of individualism in such manner as to produce
complete harmony in all human affairs.

In the pride and dominance of the head over the rest of the body, in its
scorn of the feet, equally indispensable with the head to the welfare of
the whole, the poem has struck at the discordant note of all our human
disaffection and rebellion.

When the artist had thus searched and found between the lines the real
motive of the poem, it at once became pregnant with allusions and
references that suggested artistic elaboration, or pen analysis, of the
large area of social life, which the allegory, in its semi-humorous,
satirical vein, assumes to cover.

If his pencil seems at times to wander far afield, either in elaboration
or disregard of the canon principles of art, his plea must be that the
interpretation he has given is according to his carefully studied
conception of what the author must have had in mind when writing "The
Story of an Ostrich."

[Illustration]




[Illustration]

  _Thou sluggard in bonds to a vision of night,
  Be not a king's fool, but a proud man of might:
  Arise like a lord, that ye may not be slain,
  No door shall imprison, no hope be in vain;
  The world is for conquest, who seeks for such goal,
  Will find the chain riven, the key in his soul!_




_The unknown spake out of the firmament, saying,--"Choose ye one
instrument first, and then attune another one to it. This accomplished,
attune then a third instrument to them; after that a fourth, and so on;
and ye shall be all attuned alike."_

_Thereupon, the musicians set to work, but could not agree as to whose
should be the first instrument._

_A pillar of fire descended from Heaven and stood in the midst of the
musicians; and in the centre of the pillar of fire there appeared an
instrument called the All Perfect. The instrument gave forth one note
and all the musicians attuned to it. The Voice said, "I have given the
keynote, find ye the rest!"_

_The pillar of fire departed. The instruments thus attuned in harmony
played rapturously._

_This I perceive,--to make the man and wife one, to make the village
one, to make the state one, to make the empire one,--all in harmony as
one instrument, cannot be done without a Central Son, a Creator to
attune to. When a man is attuned to Him, and a woman is attuned to Him,
they will themselves be as one. When the family and the village are
attuned to Him, it is easy. Without Him harmony cannot be._

_He, the Creator, then, must be first in all things, first in all
places. He must be the nearest of all things, the nearest of all places.
In our rites and ceremonies, He must be the All Ideal Perfection, the
embodiment of a Perfect Person._--Book of Saphah.




  The Story of an Ostrich

  [Illustration]

  BY
  JUDD ISAACS,
      FORMERLY EDITOR OF THE YANKEE BLADE,
      NEW ENGLAND MAGAZINE, NICKELL MAGAZINE.




[Illustration]

The Story of an Ostrich.


    A robust old ostrich, with head little bigger
    Than that of some creatures of far frailer figure,
    With two legs complete, and a speed very fleet,
    Once caught a short peep at his feet, in the street.

    So far from his head did they seem to be located,
    He failed to take note that upon each were notated
    Scales, warts and abrasions, nails, ossification,
    Which proved them a part of his own corporation.

    He noticed, however, wherever he went,
    They came along, too, and he asked what it meant?
    Though he walked through the town, or he stalked o'er the heath
    He observed they remained, always, right underneath.
    He thrust out his bust and inside he just cussed,
    When they strode along and kept kicking up dust;
    But in vain did he feign to abstain from disdain,
    As he dined with the twain in the wind and the rain;

_Copyrighted by the Hand Print Book Folk, Boston, Mass._

[Illustration]

    Or stared around therein, while wearing a bear-grin,
    Evincing an evident, ill-concealed chagrin.

    So very ungainly were they, like a tumor,
    The ostrich, at last, got in very bad humor;
    And, failing to recognise them as his own,
    Made a peck with his beak that went clear to the bone,
    Which gave all his nerves such a terrible thrill,
    He quick pecked another hard peck with his bill;
    With each peck a quiver, his frame shook with shivers,
    As if his limp liver were pierced with slim slivers,--
    Till both his great feet with his heart's blood were red,
    Oozing out on the ground, as he'd painfully tread.

    It was strange that his feet, thus, he blindly maltreated,
    Debased his escheat and his comfort defeated!
    As a matter of fact, he never had noticed
    How he'd got around; and he'd not the remotest
    Idea that his own high position depended
    On two ugly feet that his good taste offended.




The Undertone

[Illustration]


_I._

The thoughtful student of modern, social, and economic conditions, who
reads the accompanying rhymed satire, "The Story of an Ostrich," will
discover in it much more than the mere words would ordinarily convey,
and will read into it such measure of philosophy as his own experience
and critical study of the problem of human existence may have prepared
him for.

When, ten thousand years ago, the owl sat in the light of the moon and
unknown deities spat wisdom into the philosophies of Hermes and
Zoroaster and their more or less erudite predecessors, the earliest
gods, with their bird-like heads and male bodies, were yet vehicles of
truth, elevating the frail stock of humanity over which they threw their
benign influences.

Since recorded history began, the world has had many gods, and many
books concerning them have been written, determining by much labor of
the head which should be worshiped, rather than impressing the heart
with sincere desire to travel in divinely appointed ways. As "the mere
grasses," priests and kings have trampled upon the masses--have been at
once their masters, their deities and interpreters of deity. Their rank
materialism has always complacently overrated itself, while the world,
which labors and runs, has ever been chained to and crushed beneath it.
Man knew not the power of God within himself.


_II._

Many unthinking as well as vicious men, in both ancient and modern
times, who have by accident of birth and condition been set in authority
over their fellows, or, who have by their own efforts been raised to
positions of power and responsibility in the state and among the great
captains of industry, have thought to ignore their dependence upon the
lower orders of society for the very altitude they have enjoyed--the
head refusing, as it were, to consider the feet as a part of the body
corporate and entitled to no more than the pleasure of mere existence.
Such heads apply no healing balms to weak and wounded


[Illustration]

    Although, from his youth up, they'd always been going,
    His mental inertia prevented his knowing
    That all lofty heads must have good understanding,
    To retain, out of hand, a position commanding;
    So, he would still peck, though it hurt, and despise them,
    And swear, by the gods, he would not recognise them!

    But those homely feet, which for long had done duty:
    Mid lowly conditions, lay'ng no claim to beauty
    Of pinion, or plume, yet upholding together
    The framework of bone, with its blood, flesh and feather,--
    The which makes an ostrich of wit and assurance,--
    At last reached the limit of patient endurance.

    They turned about, then,--the proverbial worm,--
    And punched his head hard,--to use a slang term;
    So forceful and rapid they got in their work,
    The ostrich, in agony, let out a "quirk!"
    As, weakened by suff'ring, disheartened by pain,
    A hint of the truth dawned upon his dull brain.

[Illustration]

    Self-centred, astounded, indignant, demented,
    The ostrich, not yet half acquainted, resented
    The silent upheaval, he'd felt, of the masses,
    He'd, heretofore, held to be as the mere grasses;
    They having objected, he'd make no contention,
    Though he wondered how he'd interpose intervention
    Enough to protect him from any more kicking
    Like that, which was, now, in his mem'ry still sticking.

    Overwhelmed with emotion he could not command,
    The hurt ostrich buried his head in the sand,--
    Away from his sight shut his two mangled feet out,
    Lest they his own ostrich fool brains should quite beat out,--
    Thus hiding himself, as he thought, in his shame,
    From the world, though he still stood revealed just the same.

    'Twas then a near neighbor, who'd watched with close scrutiny,
    The clumsy feet operate during the mutiny,
    Interfered to propose they adopt arbitration,
    And settle their difference with more moderation.


extremities, but proffer, instead, the scourge, _i.e._, starvation, long
days of poorly remunerated toil, squalid surroundings,--in ancient times
the guillotine, the gallows and the rack; in modern days, ostracism, the
prison and the electric chair. The blood of Christ's divinity flowed
that love and mercy might be exemplified, but it cannot sprinkle the
world with saving grace, so long as its own herald, the church,
continues to say, "Amen!" to the master, and "Peace, be still!" to the
slave.

When there crept into the world the first dull, unreasoning sense of
injury,--when the underlings of humanity first began to assimilate from
the common vein of intelligence that made them one with the body, a
sensible desire for recognition on the ground of equality, they were
promptly denied any part whatsoever in the material and spiritual
accretions of generations of labor; and then was inaugurated the revolt
that has been prolific through all past time, of war and misery, of
violence, pillage and murder.


_III._

In the light of experience the heads of humanity have seldom profited by
the tutelage of whips and blood and torture. Without respect for rights
and demands when opposed to their selfish material interests, they have
held not their Bibles in their hands, where the light might illumine its
pages, but have placed the sacred book under their feet while making
prayers to stocks and bonds.

But the knights-errant are in the saddle, and with the true spirit of
knighthood they may be found in the thick of the politic battle, where
they are making clear the path for greater powers that shall follow with
purging force to cleanse the great body and through a long and cruel
strife establish the contentious parts in truth and unity.


_IV._

Mighty powers of the state are asleep at the post of duty, when, lo! an
issue arises,--the mice are in the government meal-bag,--the spirits of
fire and distraction are abroad; wealth and power are being attacked
from beneath! The great hand of the law reaches forth to seize upon the
offender and to snuff out his little, palpitating human life, that, far
from being the cause, is only a symptom of the real malady. The cause
still exists, the cancer of the state still invites new vermin to feed
upon its sore.


[Illustration]

    "Observe," said the neighbor, "your gesticulations,
    Your dearth of debate and gymnastic gyrations
    Encroach, with a frequency highly alarming,
    Upon my estate, which I value for farming;
    If your two extremities keep on contending,
    Bye and bye, we shall have nothing left worth defending."

    The plan was considered by all the combatants,--
    In silence the feet, by the head's usual blatance,
    Which presently muttered, "I may yet surprise you!"
    And mentally uttered, "I'll not recognize you!"
    But agreed, after all, with becoming alacrity,
    Despite the bald fact that both feet were still there, gritty
    And soiled with innumerable days of hard working,
    Transporting their load overland without shirking.

    Then a toad, a sly fox, a snail, peacock and hatter,
    Turned-to to investigate what was the matter;
    Selecting a sand-pit within which to meet,
    They invited the ostrich to come,--with his feet,

[Illustration]

    And tell how it happened the quarrel arose,
    Which, they'd been informed, culminated in blows.

    The peacock was asked to preside at the hearing,
    Decide the disputes, in despite of the jeering
    That, betimes, with his rulings, increased to a gale,
    When he, perchance, winked with the eyes of his tail.

    The ostrich appeared and made the assertion,
    In voluble language of animadversion,
    That, while he'd been, quietly, minding his business,
    His damp, dirty feet had occasioned him dizziness,
    Obtruding each, vulgarly, on his attention,
    Thereby, in so doing, creating contention--
    "I' faith, 'pon my word," the ostrich said, squawking,
    "I fear me, each wants a kid shoe and silk stocking."

    At this point, the peacock his tail feathers flaunted;
    The ostrich, however, continued undaunted,--
    "I know of no reason for this state of things,
    Nor why my two feet should expect, by their flings,


The knight prophesies and expostulates in the public ear, but Uncle Sam
still sleeps, though perchance with uneasy dreams. The great forces
which evolve the tramp and the ignorant emigrant are still at work,
while the devil holds the match to the combustible elements of soulless
greed. Bye and bye there will be a great hue and cry of fire, with much
ringing of bells.


_V._

Uncle Sam is now awake and doing in earnest. The rankness of materialism
breeding from the earth, a thing of great and dreaded power, of craft
and slime, recoils upon the land of which it has been begotten and now
boldly erects its head to encompass the state in its death-constricting
coils.

Even the old lady, who is wont to knit her stockings in peace by a
hardwood fire, or by the glowing coals of an open grate, in city or
town, alike, peaceful and content, and without consideration of the
vexing problems of supply and demand, awakens suddenly to the fact that
even a comfortable competence is no surety against want and cold, when
the serpent has dragged himself into the garden and garner house of
God.

The farmer is aroused and indignant, but when he makes his protest, the
serpent flies pursuit, and with a changing policy under the guise of a
great, foolish bird and a well assumed air of innocence, buries its
small and crafty head for a season in the sand.


_VI._

Really, it seems ridiculous that this incessant warfare of man against
man should go on,--the head casting aspersions upon the feet, and the
feet kicking against their own head, to the mutual affliction of
themselves and the great body that holds them together in the firm
compact of common life.... This is not God's law, but man's supreme
selfishness,--his disobedience and his curse. After all, kid shoes and
silk stockings are not elective privileges; and poorer humanity, turning
under its cross and chains, appeals to Heaven, not in vain, if we read
aright the signs of the times. The air resounds with optimistic
teachings and words of love and cheer that, as yet, have no guarantee in
actual deeds. In contra-distinction to the Christian creed, "we must
look out for ourselves," is the rasping gospel of our latter-day faith.


[Illustration]

    To dictate to me with whom I shall travel,
    Annoy me by constantly scratching the gravel,
    And trench on my courtesy, when I decline,
    For reasons sufficient, to treat them as mine;
    Please notice, your honors, their mode of attack,--
    I hold they've no grievance and shouldn't kick back!"

    While the ostrich was talking, in tones hoarse and wheezy,
    His feet, from their pecking still sore, grew uneasy;
    Unfitted by nature to talk, they, by grace,
    In eloquent silence presented their case.

    The judges, thrown now on their own wisdom, turned
    To next take account of how much they had learned;
    The peacock, as chairman, assuming dominion,
    Invited from each a judicial opinion;
    Whereupon, in his turn, each his own views expressed,
    Then sat down and looked around, wise, at the rest.

    The fox was the first to arise to his feet,
    To announce that his own mind was made up complete;

[Illustration]

    He seized the occasion his own reputation
    To clear of a cloud of ill-got defamation
    Alleging that he had habitually crept
    Round henroosts, at midnight, when honest folk slept;
    Which libel had darkened his whole life's existence,
    And made it much harder to gain a subsistence;
    He thought it a shame that a poor tempted sinner,
    Like him, should thus suffer for getting his dinner.

    While he spake, his eyes rested, in manner abiding,
    Upon the slim neck of the peacock presiding,
    Which ruffled its feathers and spread out its tail,
    Though feeling itself round the gills growing pale.

    The next to express an opinion, invoked
    By the peacock presiding, the toad gruffly croaked
    His belief that beneath stillest tongue there lay hid,
    Most often, the softest and tenderest quid;
    For his part, he thought that the ostrich inclined
    To lay too much stress on his power of mind;


But there are those who work as well as preach, and to such may yet be
recorded the service of universal peace.


_VII._

In solemn convocation met, stand the mighty men of our realm, with the
policy of the bull, of the bear, of the wolf and of the fox, each
animal, according to the nature of its disposition, awaiting the
opportunity of power and spoliation, by which he may grasp and hold to
himself, as his own personal increment, all that can be wrested from the
state and humanity at large. The state, itself, in principle wise,
majestic and supreme, petitions peace of the leering devil, who
constantly juggles with the tape of human selfishness, as waiting angels
record the devious courses that nations and individuals take.

Behold, how pressed on all sides is the man of the hour in the grasp of
the huge, overbrooding, material powers of self-interest.


_VIII._

Confusion still reigns, but labor has risen from the cross and comes to
legislation. He dreams of conquests that are chimerical, where the
shadowy knight of honor contests the field with the disgruntled spirit
of melancholy, who pessimistically broods the unhatched egg of
arbitration. Agitators and agitations still hold sway, while Satan in
their midst dominates the human idea of progress and reform with the
accursed principle of Self, that is in itself Self-destroying.


_IX._

When, now, the monster spirit of protest begins to show its gigantic
figure, high, low, and middle classes are alarmed. Prices fluctuate,
business goes down, work and bread are scarce. Behold, in the heavens
appear the gruesome phantoms of war. But so far, in every crisis,
messengers from worlds beyond have sanctified the impending woe to the
world's welfare.

The tides of progress are in the hands of the Infinite, who measures
from cycle to cycle their ebb and flow; while the ever rising tide-mark
signifies the ultimate inundation of the millenium. How great is God!
How small is man in his own councils!


_X._

By the loss of men and money mighty men are upset, and the wise among
them are made to look grave. In


[Illustration]

    Its all very well for them as can do it,
    To strive after learning and try to construe it,
    But an ostrich's presumption is, clearly, mere shoddy,
    His head is too small for the size of his body."

    The snail next emerged from his shell, to announce
    His opinion, in words he could scarcely pronounce;
    He spake without grace and his voice was not strong,
    While his sentences dragged themselves slowly along;
    "An estredge," he said, "is er monstrus big creeter,
    Who'd kill you all dead, as you'd kill er muskeeter;
    Ef he stepped his gret foot on your body and shell,
    I'm sure you would never, again, feel so well;"
    The snail then withdrew to his shell's deep recesses,
    With the same staid demeanor he ever possesses.

    The hatter essayed, now, to speak, in his turn,
    In serious words, that evinced his concern,
    Lest justice miscarry and leave their decision
    A subject for mirth, if not open derision.

[Illustration]

    "My friends," he began, "I'm pleased with your brevity,
    But you treat the matter with far too much levity;
    Its plainly the duty of those of our station,
    To recomend that which deserves commendation;"

    "The world is a large one, and all who are in it
    Should join in this principle, this very minute,--
    That nature, or Providence, made no mistake
    In giving an ostrich a head that will ache,
    In order that when he slips off from his trolley,
    Some well sustained kicks may reveal him his folly."

    "I perceive in this case a well defined principle,--
    Divinely appointed, eternal, invincible,--
    To wit,--adaptation of means to an end,
    By reason of which, all effect and cause blend,--
    Which gave the dumb feet an integument bony,
    To travel in dirt and o'er ground rough and stony,
    And set in the head, held aloft in the main,
    The delicate eye for the convolute brain,


the day of judgment, in the overturning of the kingdom and principles of
the world they inhabit, no one knows what to think. Apprehension and
gloom are on all the faces that meet in the populous thoroughfares of
trade; but the public school, the pen, and the power of the press have
so raised the standard of common intelligence, that there is a steady
advance and progress, animated by its inspiring, though still shackled
Spirit of Protest. It has entered of its own volition into the service
which makes for the unity of powers working jointly in Heaven and upon
the earth, and our beautiful flag shows only the transfigured light of
the stars.


_XI._

To separate the head from the feet, labor from capital, or to inaugurate
war between them, brings about such confusion and distress as can only
be likened to the great body of humanity being continually brewed by
Satan in an enormous caldron kept hot by the fires of revolution. All
evil being ultimate good, the process, though one of renovation and
purification, is bitterly painful to the innocent as well as to the
guilty. In the determined revolt of the feet of humanity against the
head, it has always been discovered that the head was too small for the
size of the body; and that the bulky feet carry with them, when aroused
to action along the lines of self-defence, a tremendous barbaric force
and cruelty. Witness the fearful revolts of society that have brought
the issue to a test. In the cosmical alembic of human jurisprudence,
there must be mixed with lofty and divine sentiments a recognition of
our mutual dependence and accountability, not of man to man, only, but
to something higher than his humanity, a perfect and divine law to which
that humanity may be harmoniously attuned. God, dominant in love that is
not calculating, but universal and free as the air we breathe and
without taint of prejudice, can alone amalgamate the differences of
these varying tones,--wielding them together into a perfectly melodious
theme.

He is, indeed, the tuning fork that shall put the instruments into
perfect tune.


_XII._

The age has reached a point of reason so far as councils may serve to
settle the differences between the head and the feet; and the waiting
world stands with attentive ear


[Illustration]

    To detect at a distance impending disaster,
    Fulfilling the duties assigned to the master,
    Of guiding the feet toward smooth paths, every day,
    And making as easy as may be their way."

    The peacock had listened with bated emotion,
    While each indicated and stated his notion;
    But when they were done, he screeched out with a flout,
    "You, none of you, know what you're talking about!"
    With which allegation he gravely begun
    To strut up and down, back and forth, in the sun,
    And spread out his frail and great, glimmering tail,
    Till it shone like a beautiful, shimmering veil.

    "Excuse me," he said, in tones harsh and discordant,
    Ill-concealing a feeling sarcastic and mordant
    That listeners all noted, "if, I implore you,
    I perambulate gorgeously round here before you,
    To show you that beauty of plumage and figure
    Have nothing in common with prosaic vigor;

[Illustration]

    Creation, which wisely decreed that the feet
    Were made to be used in the dust of the street,
    Has, also, ordained that they shall sustain
    Superior cellular tissue and brain
    Above and away from the gross things of earth,--
    Evincing, thereby, a superlative birth;
    And why should I be, then, so terribly blamed,
    If I, of my feet, am a good deal ashamed;"
    As he ended, the floor of the sand-pit he spurned,
    And abruptly announced arbitration adjourned.

    Although no agreement was reached, as a whole,
    Discussion is generally good for the soul;
    The ostrich, ere adjudication was through,
    Unconsciously passing his acts in review,
    Had arrived, independently, at the decision,
    That he'd been a fool; and he laughed in derision,
    To think he'd permitted his weak self-conceit,
    To lead him to pecking his own faithful feet.


to hear the judgment of such councils of mankind; great and small are
its representatives, and progress will be made only so far as the
religious idea proclaimed in Judea shall be allowed to influence the
pride and passions of men.


_XIII._

The waiting knight, emblem of the new manhood just entering upon its
estate of resolution and responsibility, is the type of a generation now
setting forth in quest of high and honorable adventure. Satan is at his
back, thrusting forward a bag of gold and counselling the pursuit of
wealth; "Put money in thy purse!" saith the devil; "all else counts but
little,--put money in thy purse!" At his left hand stands the priest in
his splendid robes of office, proffering the symbol of suffering and
self-renunciation. The knight sees the frozen church with ascetic and
veiled superstition as its hand-maidens; the star of Bethlehem still
shines out of the dark upon a mighty hand reaching out of the clouds to
shake to its foundations the edifice of Christ, emblazoned with the
letter and the creed, but supported by the pomp and pride of a purely
material world. "The zeal of his house hath eaten him up," and in the
majestic temple sits the money changer, absorbed in his trade and his
material enterprises. Before him kneels the imploring angel of Freedom,
raising the flag of the great republic, with all its portents and
promises, symbolically arrayed in its stripes and stars. Uncle Sam is
but a puzzled and quizzical spectator of future events.


_XIV._

The battle between the head and the feet results, at last, in the fall
of Satan, that is, Self, under the God-principle of self-renunciation,
working in all human creeds and canticles, foreshadowing the unity of
the race in the power of the religious idea that has, at last, become
dominant in the head. The cross, no longer an emblem of suffering but of
power, unites with the crown in a final union of church and state. Here
behold the wedded bliss of the long divorced pair, presaging a new and
glorified race of man. Then, indeed, the baptismal story of man's hoary
and ancient glory in Eden shall usher in that gracious day, when the
lamb and the lion shall gambol together, and there shall be in all the
earth neither murder, nor theft, nor plunder, nor war.


[Illustration]

    Thereafter, the ostrich, with feet and head sore,
    Resolved he would not peck his feet any more;
    He's learned by experience, virtue superior
    Lies, often, concealed under coarsest exterior;
    That modest and unostentatious assumption,
    Betimes, will outweigh overweening presumption;
    That the feet of an ostrich, no less than his head,--
    Though that be, perchance, more or less better bred
    And adapted by nature to study astronomy,--
    Are important two members of ostrich economy,
    With which no wise bird, be his head ere so comely,
    Should quarrel, because they are dirty and homely.

    Having reached this conclusion, our ostrich became
    A modified ostrich in all but the name;
    From old misconceptions of merest mendacity,
    He grew to be kindly and lost his loquacity,
    More humble in spirit, imbued with true charity,--
    Which, under the sun, is the thing of most rarity.

[Illustration]

    Lest any imagine this measure devoid
    Of meaning they'd quicker detect unalloyed,
    It is meet to observe that 'twas writ with design,
    Well knowing wise men its intent will divine.

    By the ostrich is meant mankind, great and small,
    Weak and strong, rich and poor, thin and fat, short and tall,
    Let loose for awhile, in earth's paddock confined,
    An attempt of the gods to rear more of their kind;
    I infer the experiment still is in doubt,
    For very few gods have, as yet, been hatched out.

    But some men, there are, with great purposes fraught,
    Who have pushed back afar the world's frontier of thought;
    And others, whose deeds, speaking louder than words,
    Show how much of God human nature affords,
    Foretelling of Heaven,--e'en giving a glimpse
    Of seraphim, cherubim, angels and nymphs,--
    Till the heart of humanity, lifted up, sings
    In tune with the Infinite nature of things.

    The End.


  Transcriber's note:
  "wifh ail its portents and promises" has been corrected to "with all its portents and
  promises".





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Story of an Ostrich, by Judd Isaacs

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE STORY OF AN OSTRICH ***

***** This file should be named 37530.txt or 37530.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/3/7/5/3/37530/

Produced by Chris Curnow, Anna Hall and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team at http://www.pgdp.net (This
file was produced from images generously made available
by The Internet Archive)


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
http://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need, are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at http://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
http://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at http://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit http://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit: http://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart is the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     http://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
