The Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Prophet Joseph by His Mother, by 
Lucy Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: History of the Prophet Joseph by His Mother

Author: Lucy Smith

Editor: George A. Smith
        Elias Smith

Release Date: May 9, 2014 [EBook #45619]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY PROPHET JOSEPH BY MOTHER ***




Produced by the Mormon Texts Project. See
http://mormontextsproject.org/ for a complete list of
Mormon texts available on Project Gutenberg, to help
proofread similar books, or to report typos. Special thanks
to Trevor Nysetvold for proofreading.






History of the Prophet Joseph by his Mother

Lucy Smith

As Revised By George A. Smith and Elias Smith.

IMPROVEMENT ERA: Salt Lake City, Utah, 1902.



INTRODUCTION.

This history of the Prophet Joseph Smith, originally entitled, "The
History of Mother Smith, by Herself," was written at the dictation of
Lucy Smith, mother of the Prophet, by Mrs. Martha Jane Knowlton Coray
who acted as her amanuensis. It was taken from the words of Mother
Smith and dictated from memory mostly, but she also made use of such
historical memoranda of the events related as were within her reach.
Of the original manuscript one copy was taken which was left with Lucy
Smith, while the original was retained by the writer. This original,
Mrs. Coray held in her possession until her arrival in Utah, when she
subsequently deposited a copy of it with President Brigham Young.

Lucy Smith died near Nauvoo, May 5, 1855; but years prior to this date,
some of her effects were left in the hands of her son, William Smith,
among them being the manuscript copy of this history. From William
(who was the last surviving brother of the Prophet, and whose death
occurred at Osterdock, Clayton county, Iowa, November 13, 1893,) the
document fell (surreptitiously it is declared by George A. Smith) into
the hands of Isaac Sheen, who was at one time a member of the Church,
in Michigan. When, in September, 1852, Apostle Orson Pratt went on a
mission to England, he called on Mr. Sheen on his way East, and, being
shown the manuscript copy, he purchased it for a certain sum of money,
took it to Liverpool with him, where, without revision and without the
consent or knowledge of President Young or any of the Twelve, it was
published under his direction, in 1853. It was afterwards discovered
that the book contained errors, occasioned by its not being carefully
compared with historical data. Some of the statements in the preface
written by Elder Pratt were also in error; one especially that the book
was mostly written in the lifetime of the Prophet, and that he had read
it with approval, was incorrect, since it was written in 1845, the year
following his martyrdom. For these reasons, and others mostly of a
financial character, it was disapproved by President Young, on August
23, 1865, and the edition was suppressed or destroyed. While some
statements contained in the work were considered somewhat overdrawn,--a
circumstance easily accounted for when we remember the age of Mother
Smith, the losses she had sustained in the death of a husband and
four sons, and the consequent lapses of her memory,--its many merits
were fully recognized by the authorities, many of whom were greatly
disappointed at the necessity of issuing the order to temporarily
suppress its further circulation.

Subsequently, a committee of revision was appointed by President Young,
consisting of President George A. Smith and Judge Elias Smith, cousins
of the Prophet, men personally familiar with the family, and thoroughly
conversant with Church history. They were instructed carefully to
revise and correct the original work throughout, which they did,
reporting their labors to President Brigham Young, to his entire
satisfaction. The revised and only authentic copy thus prepared and
reported upon was retained by President George A. Smith, and shortly
after his death, September 1, 1875, it was committed into my keeping,
where it has remained until now.

Recently the question of printing the work as a serial in the
Improvement Era came up for consideration, and there was a unanimous
sentiment among the members of the General Board of Y. M. M. I. A.
favorable to its publication. The subject was accordingly submitted and
explained to President Lorenzo Snow, who gave his sanction, and his
hearty approval of the enterprise.

By the presentation of this work to the public, a worthy record is
preserved, and the testimony of a noble and faithful woman--a mother
indeed, and heroine in Israel--is perpetuated. The book, besides giving
an extended account of the progenitors of the Prophet, and the Smith
and Mack families, contains much interesting and valuable information,
found in no other publication, relating to the life of the Prophet
Joseph Smith, who, through the will of God, was the chosen instrument
to perform the foundation labor for the "marvelous work and a wonder"
which God has established as his Church, in the last days.

Believing that both old and young will be pleased as well as benefitted
by the perusal of its pages, and praying that it may inspire them with
renewed zeal, and create in them additional faith in the great work of
the Lord, I commend to the reader this History of the Prophet Joseph.

Joseph F. Smith.

Salt Lake City, October 8, 1901.



CONTENTS.

Introduction

CHAPTER I.

Solomon Mack, the Father of Lucy Mack--Extract from his
Narrative

CHAPTER II.

History of Jason Mack

CHAPTER III.

Lovisa and Lovina Mack

CHAPTER IV.

Life of Stephen Mack

CHAPTER V.

Lydia Mack, third Daughter of Solomon Mack

CHAPTER VI.

Daniel Mack--He Rescues Three Men from a Watery Grave

CHAPTER VII.

Solomon Mack

CHAPTER VIII.

Early Life of Lucy Mack--Her Marriage with Joseph Smith

CHAPTER IX.

Seven Generations of the Smith Family--Four Generations of
the Mack Family

CHAPTER X.

A Present of One Thousand Dollars, from John Mudget and
Stephen Mack, to the Author

CHAPTER XI.

Sickness in Randolph

CHAPTER XII.

Joseph Smith, Senior, Loses his Property and Becomes
Poor--Receives a Visit from Jason Mack--The History of the Latter
Concluded

CHAPTER XIII.

The Author's Dream

CHAPTER XIV.

First Vision of Joseph Smith, Senior--The Box--Second
Vision--The Tree and the Spacious Building

CHAPTER XV.

Sickness at Lebanon--Sophronia's Miraculous Recovery

CHAPTER XVI.

The Sufferings of Joseph Smith, Junior, with a Fever
Sore--Extraction of Large Fragments of Bone from one of his Legs

CHAPTER XVII.

Joseph Smith, Senior, removes to Norwich, thence to
Palmyra--His Dream of the Images--of the Judgment

CHAPTER XVIII.

History of Joseph the Prophet Commences--Seventh Vision
of Joseph Smith, Senior

CHAPTER XIX.

The Angel Visits Joseph again--Joseph Tells his
Father what he has Seen and Heard--He is Permitted to Behold the
Plates--Receives Further Instructions--Communicates the Same to the
Family--Takes the Plates into his Hands--They are Taken from him and he
is Reproved--His Disappointment

CHAPTER XX.

Alvin's Sickness and Death

CHAPTER XXI.

Religious Excitement--Joseph's Prophecy--He Works for Mr.
Stoal--Becomes Acquainted with Emma Hale

CHAPTER XXII.

Joseph Smith, Senior, Loses his Farm--Joseph, Junior,
is Married--Has Another Interview with the Angel, by Whom he is
Chastised--Receives Further Instructions

CHAPTER XXIII.

Joseph Obtains the Plates

CHAPTER XXIV.

Joseph Brings Home the Breast-plate--Martin Harris and
his Wife Introduced--The Translation Commences--Mrs. Harris Begins to
Oppose the Work

CHAPTER XXV.

Martin Harris is Permitted to take the Manuscript Home
with him--He Loses it--The Season of Mourning which Ensued

CHAPTER XXVI.

Martin Harris's Perfidy

CHAPTER XXVII.

The Urim and Thummim are Taken from Joseph--He Receives
them Again

CHAPTER XXVIII.

Oliver Cowdery Commences Writing for Joseph--They
Attend to the Ordinance of Baptism

CHAPTER XXIX.

Mrs. Harris Prosecutes Joseph--Ex-parte Examination

CHAPTER XXX.

Joseph and Oliver Remove to Waterloo--They Finish the
Translation

CHAPTER XXXI.

The Plates are Shown to Twelve Witnesses--Joseph Makes
Arrangements for Printing the Book of Mormon

CHAPTER XXXII.

The Printing is Begun--A Meeting of the Citizens Held in
Reference to the Book

CHAPTER XXXIII.

Esquire Cole's Dogberry Paper--Second Meeting of the
Citizens

CHAPTER XXXIV.

The Church Organized

CHAPTER XXXV.

Joseph Smith, Senior, and Don Carlos Visit Stockholm

CHAPTER XXXVI.

Joseph Smith, Senior, Imprisoned--An Attempt to Take
Hyrum

CHAPTER XXXVII.

The Family of Joseph Smith, Senior, Remove to Waterloo

CHAPTER XXXVIII.

The First Western Mission--Joseph Smith, Junior, Moves
to Kirtland

CHAPTER XXXIX.

The Different Branches of the Church Remove to
Kirtland--Miracle at Buffalo

CHAPTER XL.

Samuel Smith's First Mission to Missouri

CHAPTER XLI.

Lucy Smith Visits Detroit

CHAPTER XLII.

An Extract from the History of Joseph the Prophet--Sidney
Rigdon's Transgression--Trouble in Jackson County

CHAPTER XLIII.

Building of a House--Joseph and Hyrum Return from
Missouri--They Rehearse the History of their Trouble

CHAPTER XLIV.

The Lord's House at Kirtland Commenced--A Letter from the
Prophet to his Uncle Silas

CHAPTER XLV.

The House of the Lord Completed--A Division in the Church

CHAPTER XLVI.

Joseph Smith, Senior, and his Brother John, go on a
Mission to the East--The Death of Jerusha Smith

CHAPTER XLVII.

The Persecution Revives--Don Carlos and his Father Fly
from their Enemies--Joseph Moves to Missouri

CHAPTER XLVIII.

Joseph Smith, Senior, Moves with his Family to
Missouri--Commencement of the Persecution in Caldwell

CHAPTER XLIX.

Testimony of Hyrum Smith

CHAPTER L.

Removal of the Smith Family to Illinois

CHAPTER LI.

Joseph and Hyrum Escape from their Persecutors, and Return
to their Families

CHAPTER LII.

A Purchase Made in the Town of Commerce--Joseph the
Prophet Goes to Washington--Death of Joseph Smith, Senior

CHAPTER LIII.

Joseph Arrested at Quincy--Discharged at Monmouth--Joseph
Charged with an Attempt to Assassinate ex-Governor Boggs

CHAPTER LIV.

Joseph and Hyrum Assassinated

APPENDIX.

A Journal Kept by Don C. Smith while on a Mission with George A. Smith,
his Cousin

Letters of Don C. Smith to his Wife, Agnes

Elegy on the Death of Joseph Smith, Senior, the Patriarch

Lines on the Death of Don Carlos Smith

Lines Written on the Martyrdom of Joseph and Hyrum Smith



CHAPTER I.

SOLOMON MACK, THE FATHER OF LUCY MACK--EXTRACT FROM HIS NARRATIVE.

My father, Solomon Mack, was born in the town of Lyme, New London
county, State of Connecticut, September 26, 1735. His father, Ebenezer
Mack, was a man of considerable property, and lived in good style,
commanding all the attention and respect which are ever shown to those
who live in fine circumstances, and habits of strict morality. For a
length of time he fully enjoyed the fruits of his industry. But this
state of things did not always continue for a series of misfortunes
visited my grand-parents, by which they were reduced to that extremity,
that a once happy and flourishing family were compelled to disperse,
and throw themselves upon the charity of a cold, unfeeling world.

My father was taken into the family of a neighboring farmer, where he
remained until he was nearly twenty-one years of age, about which time
he enlisted in the service of his country.

I have a sketch of my father's life, written by himself, in which
is detailed an account of his several campaigns, and many of his
adventures, while in the army. From this, I extract the following:

    At the age of twenty-one years, I left my master. Shortly after
    which, I enlisted in the services of my country, under the command
    of Captain Henry, and was annexed to the regiment commanded by Col.
    Whiting.

    From Connecticut, we marched to Fort Edwards, in the state of New
    York. We were in a severe battle, fought at Half-way Brook in 1855
    [should likely read 1775--Transcriber]. During this expedition, I
    caught a heavy cold, which rendered me unfit for business until the
    return of warm weather. I was carried the ensuing spring to Albany.

    In the year 1757, I had two teams in the King's service, which was
    employed in carrying the general's baggage. While thus engaged,
    I went one morning to yoke my team, but three of my oxen were
    missing. When this knowledge came to the officer, he was very
    angry, and drawing his sword, threatened to run it through me. He
    then ordered me to get three other oxen, which I accordingly did,
    and proceeded with the baggage to Fort Edwards, and the next day I
    returned in order to find my missing oxen.

    While I was performing this trip, the following circumstance
    occurred. About half way from Stillwater to Fort Edwards, I espied
    four Indians nearly thirty rods distant, coming out of the woods;
    they were armed with scalping knives, tomahawks and guns. I was
    alone, but about twenty rods behind me was a man by the name of
    Webster. I saw my danger, and that there was no way to escape,
    unless I could do it by stratagem; so I rushed upon them, calling
    in the mean time at the top of my voice, Rush on! rush on my boys!
    we'll have the devils. The only weapon I had, was a walking staff,
    yet I ran toward them, and as the other man appeared just at that
    instant, it gave them a terrible fright, and I saw no more of them.

    I hastened to Stillwater the next day, as aforementioned, and
    finding my oxen soon after I arrived there, I returned the same
    night to Fort Edwards, a distance of seven miles, the whole of
    which was a dense forest.

    In 1758, I enlisted under Major Spenser, and went immediately over
    Lake George, with a company who crossed in boats, to the western
    side, where we had a bloody and hot engagement with the enemy, in
    which Lord Howe fell at the onset of the battle. His bowels were
    taken out and buried, but his body was embalmed, and carried to
    England.

    The next day we marched to the breastworks, but were unsuccessful,
    being compelled to retreat with a loss of five hundred men killed,
    and as many more wounded.

    In this contest I narrowly escaped--a musket ball passed under
    my chin, within half an inch of my neck. The army then returned
    to Lake George, and, on its way thither, a large scouting party
    of the enemy came round by Skeenesborough, and, at Half-way
    Brook, destroyed a large number of both men and teams. Upon this,
    one thousand of our men were detached to repair immediately to
    Skeenesborough in pursuit of them; but when we arrived at South
    Bay, the enemy were entirely out of our reach.

    The enemy then marched to Ticonderoga, New York, in order to
    procure supplies, after which they immediately pursued us, but we
    eluded them by hastening to Woodcreek, and thence to Fort Ann,
    where we arrived on the 13th day of the month. We had just reached
    this place, when the sentry gave information that the enemy was all
    around us, in consequence of which we were suddenly called to arms.
    Major Putman led the company, and Major Rogers brought up the rear.
    We marched but three-quarters of a mile, when we came suddenly
    upon a company of Indians that were lying in ambush. Major Putman
    marched his men through their ranks, whereupon the Indians fired,
    which threw our men into some confusion. Major Putnam was captured
    by them, and would have been killed by an Indian, had he not been
    rescued by a French lieutenant.

    The enemy rose like a cloud, and fired a whole volley upon us, and
    as I was in the foremost rank, the retreat of my company brought me
    in the rear, and the tomahawks and bullets flew around me like hail
    stones. As I was running, I saw not far before me a windfall, which
    was so high that it appeared to me insurmountable, however, by
    making great exertions, I succeeded in getting over it. Running a
    little farther, I observed a man who had in this last conflict been
    badly wounded, and the Indians were close upon him; nevertheless
    I turned aside for the purpose of assisting him, and succeeded in
    getting him into the midst of our army, in safety.

    In this encounter, a man named Gersham Bowley, had nine bullets
    shot through his clothes but received no personal injury. Ensign
    Worcester received nine wounds, was scalped and tomahawked,
    notwithstanding which, he lived, and finally recovered.

    The above engagement commenced early in the morning, and continued
    until about three o'clock p. m., in which half of our men were
    either killed, wounded or taken prisoners. In consequence of this
    tremendous slaughter we were compelled to send to Fort Edwards for
    men, in order to assist in carrying our wounded, which were about
    eighty in number.

    The distance we had to carry them, was nearly fourteen miles. To
    carry so many thus far, was truly very fatiguing, insomuch that
    when we arrived at the place of destination, my strength was about
    exhausted.

    I proceeded immediately to Albany, for the purpose of getting
    supplies, and returned again to the army as soon as circumstances
    would admit.

    Autumn having now arrived I went home, where I tarried the ensuing
    winter.

    In the spring of 1759, the army marched to Crownpoint, where I
    received my discharge. In the same year, I became acquainted with
    an accomplished young woman, a school teacher, by the name of
    Lydia Gates. She was the daughter of Nathan Gates, who was a man
    of wealth, living in the town of East Haddam, Connecticut. To this
    young woman I was married shortly after becoming acquainted with
    her.

    Having received a large amount of money for my services in the
    army, and deeming it prudent to make an investment of the same in
    real estate, I contracted for the whole town of Granville, in the
    state of New York. On the execution of the deed, I paid all the
    money that was required in the stipulation, which stipulation also
    called for the building of a number of log houses. I accordingly
    went to work to fulfill this part of the contract, but after
    laboring a short time, I had the misfortune to cut my leg, which
    subjected me, during that season, to the care of the physician. I
    hired a man to do the work, and paid him in advance, in order to
    fulfill my part of the contract; but he ran away with the money,
    without performing the labor, and the consequence was, I lost the
    land altogether.

    In 1761, we moved to the town of Marlow, where we remained until
    we had four children. When we moved there it was no other than a
    desolate and dreary wilderness. Only four families resided within
    forty miles. Here I was thrown into a situation to appreciate more
    fully the talents and virtues of my excellent wife; for, as our
    children were deprived of schools, she assumed the charge of their
    education, and performed the duties of an instructress as none,
    save a mother, is capable of. Precepts accompanied with examples
    such as hers, were calculated to make impressions on the minds of
    the young, never to be forgotten.

    She, besides instructing them in the various branches of an
    ordinary education, was in the habit of calling them together both
    morning and evening, and teaching them to pray; meanwhile urging
    upon them the necessity of love toward each other, as well as
    devotional feelings towards Him who made them.

    In this manner my first children became confirmed in habits of
    piety, gentleness, and reflection, which afforded great assistance
    in guiding those who came after them, into the same happy channel.
    The education of my children would have been a more difficult
    task, if they had not inherited much of their mother's excellent
    disposition.

    In 1776, I enlisted in the service of my country and was for a
    considerable length of time in the land forces, after which I went
    with my two sons, Jason and Stephen, on a privateering expedition,
    commanded by Captain Havens. Soon after, we set sail we were driven
    upon Horseneck. We succeeded, however, in getting some of our
    guns on shore, and bringing them to bear upon the enemy, so as to
    exchange many shots with them; yet they cut away our rigging, and
    left our vessel much shattered.

    We then hauled off and cast anchor; but, in a short time we espied
    two row-gallies, two sloops, and two schooners. We quickly weighed
    anchor, and hauled to shore again, and had barely time to post
    four cannon in a position in which they could be used, before a
    sanguinary, contest commenced. The balls from the enemy's guns tore
    up the ground, cutting asunder the saplings in every direction.
    One of the row-gallies went round a point of land with the view of
    hemming us in, but we killed forty of their men, with our small
    arms, which caused the enemy to abandon their purpose.

    My son Stephen, in company with the cabin boys, was sent to a house
    not far from the shore, with a wounded man. Just as they entered
    the house, an eighteen-pounder followed them. A woman was engaged
    in frying cakes, at the time, and being somewhat alarmed, she
    concluded to retire into the cellar, saying, as she left, that the
    boys might have the cakes, as she was going below.

    The boys were highly delighted at this, and they went to work
    cooking and feasting upon the lady's sweet cakes, while the
    artillery of the contending armies was thundering in their ears,
    dealing out death and destruction on every hand. At the head of
    this party of boys, was Stephen Mack, my second son, a bold and
    fearless stripling of fourteen.

    In this contest the enemy was far superior to us in point of
    numbers, yet we maintained our ground with such valor that they
    thought it better to leave us, and accordingly did so. Soon after
    this, we hoisted sail and made for New London.

    When hostilities ceased and peace and tranquility were again
    restored, we freighted a vessel for Liverpool. Selling both ship
    and cargo in this place, we embarked on board Captain Foster's
    vessel, which I afterwards purchased; but, in consequence of storms
    and wrecks, I was compelled to sell her, and was left completely
    destitute.

    I struggled a little longer to obtain property, in making
    adventures, then returned to my family, after an absence of four
    years, about pennyless. After this I determined to follow phantoms
    no longer, but devote the rest of my life to the service of God and
    my family.

I shall now lay aside my father's journal, as I have made such extracts
as are adapted to my purpose, and take up the history of his children.



CHAPTER II.

HISTORY OF JASON MACK.

Jason, my oldest brother, was a studious and manly boy. Before he had
attained his sixteenth year, he became what was then called a Seeker,
and believing that by prayer and faith the gifts of the gospel, which
were enjoyed by the ancient disciples of Christ, might be attained, he
labored almost incessantly to convert others to the same faith. He was
also of the opinion that God would, at some subsequent period, manifest
his power as he had anciently done--in signs and wonders.

At the age of twenty, he became a preacher of the gospel. And in a
short time after this, he formed an acquaintance with a young woman
of wealthy parentage.[A] She was the pride of the place in which she
resided, not so much on account of her splendid appearance, as the
soundness of her mind, and her stately deportment, joined with an
unaffected mildness of disposition, and a condescension of manners,
which were admirably suited to the taste and principles of my brother.
Jason became deeply in love with her, insomuch that his heart was
completely hers, and it would have been as easy to have convinced him
that he could exist without his head, as that he could live and enjoy
life, without being united with her in marriage. These feelings, I
believe, were mutual, and Jason and she entered into an engagement to
be married, but, as they were making arrangements for the solemnization
of their nuptials, my father received a letter from Liverpool,
containing information that a large amount of money was collected for
him, and that it was ready for his reception.

[Footnote A: The name of this young woman was Esther Bruce; she was from
the state of New Hampshire.]

On account of this intelligence, it was agreed that the marriage of
my brother, as my father desired that he should accompany him to
Liverpool, should be deferred until their return. Accordingly, my
brother left his affianced bride, with a heavy heart, and with this
promise, that he would write to her and his sister conjointly, at
least once in three months during his absence. In three months after
his departure, according to agreement, a letter arrived, which indeed
met with a very warm reception, but it was never followed by another
from him. A young man who kept the post office where she received her
letters, formed in his heart a determination to thwart my brother, if
possible, in his matrimonial prospects, in order to obtain the prize
himself. He commenced by using the most persuasive arguments against
her marrying my brother; but not succeeding in this, he next detained
his letters, and then reproached him for neglecting her. Being still
unsuccessful, he forged letters purporting to be from a friend of
Jason, which stated that he (Jason Mack) was dead, and his friends
might cease to expect him. He then urged his suit again, but she still
rejected him, and continued to do so until within four months of
Jason's return, when she concluded that she had wronged the young man,
and that he was really more worthy than she had expected. The time also
which Jason was to be absent having expired without his return, she
believed that the reports concerning his death must be true. So she
accepted the hand of this young man, and they were united in the bonds
of matrimony.

As soon as Jason arrived, he repaired immediately to her father's
house. When he arrived there, she was gone to her brother's funeral;
he went in, and seated himself in the same room where he had once paid
his addresses to her. In a short time, she came home; when she first
saw him she did not know him, but when she got a full view of his
countenance, she recognized him, and instantly fainted. From this time
forward, she never recovered her health, but, lingering for two years,
died the victim of disappointment.

Jason remained in the neighborhood a short time, and then went to sea,
but he did not follow the sea a great while. He soon left the main, and
commenced preaching again, which he continued until his death.



CHAPTER III.

LOVISA AND LOVINA MACK.

The history of Lovisa and Lovina, my two oldest sisters, is so
connected and interwoven that I shall not attempt to separate it.

They were one in faith, in love, in action, and in hope of eternal
life. They were always together, and when they were old enough to
understand the duties of a Christian, they united their voices in
prayer and songs of praise to God. This sisterly affection increased
with their years, and strengthened with the strength of their minds.
The pathway of their lives was never clouded with a gloomy shadow until
Lovisa's marriage, and removal from home, which left Lovina very lonely.

In about two years after Lovisa's marriage, she was taken very sick,
and sent for Lovina. Lovina, as might be expected, went immediately,
and remained with her sister during her illness, which lasted two
years, baffling the skill of the most experienced physicians; but at
the expiration of this time she revived a little, and showed some
symptoms of recovery.

I shall here relate a circumstance connected with her sickness, which
may try the credulity of some of my readers, yet hundreds were eye
witnesses, and doubtless many are now living, who, if they would, could
testify to the fact which I am about to mention.

As before stated, after the space of two years she began to manifest
signs of convalescence, but soon a violent re-attack brought her
down again, and she grew worse and worse, until she became entirely
speechless, and so reduced that her attendants were not allowed to
even turn her in bed. She took no nourishment except a very little
rice water. She lay in this situation three days and two nights. On
the third night, about two o'clock, she feebly pronounced the name
of Lovina, who had all the while watched over her pillow, like an
attendant angel, observing every change and symptom with the deepest
emotion. Startled at hearing the sound of Lovisa's voice, Lovina now
bent over the emaciated form of her sister, with thrilling interest,
and said, "my sister! my sister! what will you?"

Lovisa then said emphatically, "the Lord has healed me, both soul and
body--raise me up and give me my clothes, I wish to get up."

Her husband told those who were watching with her, to gratify her, as
in all probability it was a revival before death, and he would not have
her crossed in her last moments.

They did so, though with reluctance, as they supposed she might live
a few moments longer, if she did not exhaust her strength too much by
exerting herself in this manner.

Having raised her in bed, they assisted her to dress; and although,
when they raised her to her feet, her weight dislocated both of her
ankles, she would not consent to return to her bed, but insisted upon
being set in a chair, and having her feet drawn gently in order to have
her ankle joints replaced. She then requested her husband to bring her
some wine, saying, if he would do so she would do quite well for the
present.

Soon after this, by her own request, she was assisted to cross the
street to her father-in-law's, who was at that time prostrated upon a
bed of sickness. When she entered the house he cried out in amazement,
"Lovisa is dead, and her spirit is now come to warn me of my sudden
departure from this world." "No, father," she exclaimed, "God has
raised me up, and I have come to tell you to prepare for death." She
conversed an hour or so with him, then, with the assistance of her
husband and those who attended upon her that night, she crossed the
street back again to her own apartment.

When this was noised abroad, a great multitude of people came together,
both to hear and see concerning the strange and marvelous circumstance
which had taken place. She talked to them a short time, and then sang a
hymn, after which she dismissed them, promising to meet them the next
day at the village church, where she would tell them all about the
strange manner in which she had been healed.

The following day according to promise, she proceeded to the meeting
house, and when she arrived there a large congregation had collected.
Soon after she entered, the minister arose and remarked, that as many
of the congregation had doubtless come to hear a recital of the strange
circumstance which had taken place in the neighborhood, and as he
himself felt more interested in it than in hearing a gospel discourse,
he would open the meeting and then give place to Mrs. Tuttle.

The minister then requested her to sing a hymn; she accordingly did
so, and her voice was as high and clear as it had ever been. Having
sung, she arose and addressed the audience as follows:--"I seemed to be
borne away to the world of spirits, where I saw the Savior, as through
a veil, which appeared to me about as thick as a spider's web, and he
told me that I must return again to warn the people to prepare for
death; that I must exhort them to be watchful as well as prayerful;
that I must declare faithfully unto them their accountability before
God, and the certainty of their being called to stand before the
judgment seat of Christ; and that if I would do this, my life should
be prolonged." After which, she spoke much to the people upon the
uncertainty of life.

When she sat down, her husband and sister, also those who were with
her during the last night of her sickness, arose and testified to her
appearance just before her sudden recovery.

Of these things she continued to speak boldly for the space of three
years. At the end of which time she was seized with the consumption
which terminated her earthly existence.

A short time before Lovisa was healed in the miraculous manner
before stated, Lovina was taken with a severe cough which ended in
consumption. She lingered three years. During which time she spoke
with much calmness of her approaching dissolution, contemplating death
with all that serenity which is characteristic of the last moments of
those who fear God, and walk uprightly before him. She conjured her
young friends to remember that life upon this earth cannot be eternal.
Hence the necessity of looking beyond this vale of tears, to a glorious
inheritance, "where moths do not corrupt, nor thieves break through and
steal."

The care of Lovina, during her illness, devolved chiefly upon myself.
The task, though a melancholy one, I cheerfully performed, and,
although she had much other attention, I never allowed myself to go
an hour, at a time, beyond the sound of her voice while she was sick.
A short time before she breathed out her last moments, which was in
the night, she awakened me, and requested that I would call father and
mother, for she wished to see them, as she would soon be gone. When
they came, she said, "Father and mother, now I am dying, and I wish
you to call my young associates, that I may speak to them before I
die." She then requested me to place her in a chair, and as soon as the
young people who were called in, were seated, she commenced speaking.
After talking a short time to them, she stopped, and, turning to her
mother, said, "Mother, will you get me something to eat? it is the last
time you will ever bring me nourishment in this world." When my mother
had complied with her request, she eat a small quantity of food, with
apparent appetite, then gave back the dish, saying, "There, mother, you
will never get me anything to eat again."

After which, she turned to the company, and proceeded with her remarks,
thus:--"I do not know when I received any material change of heart,
unless it was when I was ten years old. God, at that time, heard my
prayers, and forgave my sins; and ever since then I have endeavored to
serve him according to the best of my abilities. And I have called you
here to give you my last warning--to bid you all farewell, and beseech
you to endeavor to meet me where parting shall be no more."

Shortly after this, holding up her hands, and looking upon them as
one would upon a trifling thing unobserved before, she said, with
a smile upon her countenance, "See, the blood is settling under my
nails." Then, placing the fingers of her left hand across her right she
continued thus, "Tis cold to there--soon this mortal flesh will be
food for worms." Then, turning to me, she said, "Now, sister Lucy, will
you help me into bed."

I did as I was directed, carrying her in my arms just as I would a
child. Although I was but thirteen years old, she was so emaciated that
I could carry her with considerable ease.

As I was carrying her to bed, my hand slipped. At this she cried out,
"Oh! Sister, that hurt me." This, indeed, gave me bitter feelings.
I was well assured, that this was the last sad office I should ever
perform for my sister, and the thought that I had caused her pain in
laying her on her death bed, wounded me much.

Soon after this, she passed her hand over her face, and again remarked,
"My nose is now quite cold." Then, slightly turning and straightening
herself in bed, she continued, "Father, mother, brother, sister, and
dear companions, all farewell, I am going to rest--prepare to follow
me; for

    "Death! 'tis a melancholy day
    To those that have no God,
    When the poor soul is forced away
    To seek her last abode.

    "In vain to heaven she lifts her eyes;
    But guilt, a heavy chain,
    Still drags her downwards from the skies,
    To darkness, fire, and pain

    "Awake and mourn, ye heirs of hell,
    Let stubborn sinners fear;
    You must be driven from earth, and dwell
    A long Forever there!

    "See how the pit gapes wide for you,
    And flashes in your face;
    And thou, my soul, look downward too,
    And sing recovering grace.

    "He is a God of sov'reign love,
    Who promised heaven to me,
    And taught my thoughts to soar above,
    Where happy spirits be.

    "Prepare me, Lord for thy right hand,
    Then come the joyful day,
    Come, death, and some celestial band,
    To bear my soul away."

After repeating this hymn, she folded her hands across her breast, and
then closed her eyes for ever.

Having led my readers to the close of Lovina's life, I shall return to
Lovisa, of whom there only remains the closing scene of her earthly
career.

In the course of a few months subsequent to the death of sister Lovina,
my father received a letter from South Hadley, stating that Lovisa was
very low of the consumption, and that she earnestly desired him to come
and see her as soon as possible, as she expected to live but a short
time.

My father set out immediately, and when he arrived there, he found her
in rather better health than he expected. In a few days after he got
there, she resolved in her heart to return with him at all hazards. To
this her father unwillingly consented, and, after making the requisite
preparations, they started for Gilsum.

They traveled about four miles, and came to an inn kept by a man by
the name of Taff. Here her father halted, and asked her if she did
not wish to tarry a short time to rest herself. She replied in the
affirmative. By the assistance of the landlord, she was presently
seated in an easy chair. My father then stepped into the next room to
procure a little water and wine for her. He was absent but a moment;
however, when he returned it was too late, her spirit had fled from its
earthly tabernacle to return no more, until recalled by the trump of
the archangel.

My father immediately addressed a letter to mother, informing her of
Lovisa's death, lest the shock of seeing the corpse unexpectedly should
overcome her. And as soon as he could get a coffin, he proceeded on his
journey for Gilsum, a distance of fifty miles.

She was buried by the side of her Sister Lovina, according to her own
request.

The following is part of a hymn composed by herself, a few days
previous to her decease:--

    Lord, may my thoughts be turned to thee--
    Lift thou my heavy soul on high;
    Wilt thou, O Lord, return to me
    In mercy, Father, ere I die!
    My soaring thoughts now rise above--
    Oh fill my soul with heavenly love.

    Father and mother, now farewell;
    And husband, partner of my life,
    Go to my father's children, tell
    That lives no more on earth thy wife,
    That while she dwelt in cumbrous clay,
    For them she prayed both night and day.

    My friends, I bid you all adieu;
    The Lord hath called, and I must go--
    And all the joys of this vain earth,
    Are now to me of little worth:
    'Twill be the same with you as me,
    When brought as near eternity.

Thus closes this mournful recital, and when I pass with my readers into
the next chapter, with them probably may end the sympathy aroused by
this rehearsal, but with me it must last while life endures.



CHAPTER IV.

LIFE OF STEPHEN MACK.

My brother Stephen, who was next in age to Jason, was born in the town
of Marlow, June 15, 1766.

I shall pass his childhood in silence, and say nothing about him until
he attained the age of fourteen, at which time he enlisted in the army,
the circumstances of which were as follows:

A recruiting officer came into the neighborhood to draft soldiers for
the Revolutionary war, and he called out a company of militia to which
my brother belonged, in order to take therefrom such as were best
qualified to do military duty. My brother, being very anxious to go into
the army at this time, was so fearful that he would be passed by on
account of his age, that the sweat stood in large drops on his face,
and he shook like an aspen leaf. Fortunately the officer made choice of
him among others, and he entered the army and continued in the service
of his country until he was seventeen. During this time he was in many
battles, both on land and sea, and several times narrowly escaped death
by famine; but, according to his own account, whenever he was brought
into a situation to fully realize his entire dependence upon God, the
hand of Providence was always manifested in his deliverance.

Not long since I met with an intimate acquaintance of my brother
Stephen, and requested him to furnish me such facts as were in his
possession in relation to him; and he wrote the following brief, yet
comprehensive account, for the gratification of my readers:

    I, Horace Stanly, was born in Tunbridge, Orange county, Vermont,
    August 21, 1798. I have been personally acquainted with Major Mack
    and his family ever since I can remember, as I lived in the same
    township, within one mile and a half of the Major's farm, and two
    miles from his store, and eight miles from Chelsea, the county seat
    of Orange county, where he conducted the mercantile and tinning
    business.

    My eldest brother went to learn the tinning business of the Major's
    workmen. The Major being a man of great enterprise, energetic in
    business, and possessed of a high degree of patriotism, launched
    forth on the frontiers of Detroit, in the year 1800 (if I recollect
    rightly), where he immediately commenced trading with the Indians.

    He left his family in Tunbridge, on his farm, and while he was
    engaged in business at Detroit he visited them--sometimes once in a
    year, in eighteen months, or in two years, just as it happened.

    I visited Detroit, November 1, 1820, where I found the Major
    merchandising upon quite an extensive scale, having six clerks in
    one store; besides this, he had many other stores in the territory
    of Michigan, as well as in various parts of Ohio.

    His business at Pontiac was principally farming and building, but
    in order to facilitate these two branches of business, he set in
    operation a saw and flour mill, and afterwards added different
    branches of mechanism. He made the turnpike road from Detroit to
    Pontiac at his own expense. He also did considerable other public
    work, for the purpose of giving employment to the poor.

    He never encouraged idleness, or the man above his business. In
    1828, having been absent from Detroit a short time, I returned.
    The Major was then a member of the Council of the territory, and
    had acted a very conspicuous part in enhancing its prosperity and
    enlarging its settlement; and it was a common saying, that he had
    done much more for the territory than any other individual.

    In short, the Major was a man of talents of the first order. He was
    energetic and untiring. He always encouraged industry, and was very
    cautious how he applied his acts of charity.

    Respectfully by

    Horace Stanly.

My brother was in the city of Detroit in 1812, the year in which Hull
surrendered the territory to the British crown. My brother being
somewhat celebrated for his prowess, was selected by General Hull to
take the command of a company, as captain. After a short service in
this office, he was ordered to surrender. At this his indignation was
roused to the highest pitch. He broke his sword across his knee, and
throwing it into the lake, exclaimed that he would never submit to such
a disgraceful compromise while the blood of an American continued to
run through his veins.

This drew the especial vengeance of the army upon his head; and his
property, doubtless, would have been sacrificed to their resentment,
had they known the situation of his affairs. But this they did not
know, as his housekeeper deceived them by a stratagem, related by Mr.
Stanly, as follows:

    At the surrender of Detroit, not having as yet moved his family
    hither, Major Mack had an elderly lady, by the name of Trotwine,
    keeping house for him. The old lady took in some of the most
    distinguished British officers as boarders. She justified them in
    their course of conduct towards the Yankees, and, by her shrewdness
    and tact, she gained the esteem of the officers, and thus secured
    through them the good will of the soldiery, so far as to prevent
    their burning (what they supposed to be) her store and dwelling,
    both of which were splendid buildings.

    The Major never forgot this service done him by the old lady, for
    he ever afterwards supported her handsomely.

Thus was a great amount of goods and money saved from the hands of his
enemies. But this is not all: the news came to her ears that they were
about to burn another trading establishment belonging to the Major,
and, without waiting to consult him, she went immediately to the store,
and took from the counting-room several thousand dollars, which she
secreted until the British left the city. The building and goods were
burned.

As soon as the English left the territory, he recommenced business, and
removed his family from Tunbridge to Detroit. Here they remained but a
short time, when he took them to Pontiac; and as soon as they were well
established or settled in this place, he himself went to the city of
Rochester, where he built a sawmill.

But, in the midst of his prosperity, he was called away to experience
another state of existence, with barely a moment's warning, for he was
sick only four days from the time he was first taken ill until he died,
and even on the fourth day, and in the last hour of his illness, it
was not supposed to be at all dangerous, until his son, who sat by his
bedside, discovered he was dying.

He left his family with an estate of fifty thousand dollars, clear of
encumbrance.



CHAPTER V.

LYDIA MACK, THIRD DAUGHTER OF SOLOMON MACK.

Of my sister Lydia I shall say but little; not that I loved her less,
or that she was less deserving of honorable mention; but she seemed
to float more with the stream of common events than those who have
occupied the foregoing pages; hence fewer incidents of a striking
character are furnished for the mind to dwell upon.

She sought riches and obtained them; yet in the day of prosperity she
remembered the poor, for she dealt out her substance to the needy, with
a liberal hand, to the end of her days, and died the object of their
affection. As she was beloved in life, so she was bewailed in death.



CHAPTER VI.

DANIEL MACK--HE RESCUES THREE MEN FROM A WATERY GRAVE.

Daniel comes next in order. He was rather worldly-minded, yet he was
not vicious; and if he had any peculiar trait of character, it was
this--he possessed a very daring and philanthropic spirit, which led
him to reach forth his hand to the assistance of those whose lives were
exposed to danger, even to the hazard of his own life. For instance:
he in company with several others, was once standing on the bank
of Miller's river, in the town of Montague, when one of the number
proposed taking a swim. Daniel objected, saying it was a dangerous
place to swim in, yet they were determined, and three went in; but,
going out into the stream rather too far they were overpowered by
the current, and a kind of eddy which they fell into, and they sank
immediately.

At this, Daniel said, "Now, gentlemen, these men are drowning; who
will assist them at the risk of his life?" No one answered. At this,
he sprang into the water, and, diving to the bottom, found one of them
fastened to some small roots. Daniel took hold of him, and tore up the
roots to which he was clinging, and brought him out, and then told the
by-standers to get a barrel, for the purpose of rolling him on it, in
order to make him disgorge the water which he had taken. He then went
in again, and found the other two in the same situation as the first,
and saved them in like manner.

After rolling them a short time on the barrel, he took them to a house,
and gave them every possible attention, until they had so far recovered
as to be able to speak. As soon as they could talk, one of them fixing
his eyes upon Daniel, said, "Mr. Mack, we have reason to look upon you
as our savior, for you have delivered us from a watery tomb; and I
would that I could always live near you. We are now assured that you
have not only wisdom to counsel, but when men have spurned your advice,
you still have that greatness of soul which leads you to risk your own
life to save your fellow man. No, I will never leave you as long as I
live, for I wish to convince you that I ever remember you, and that I
will never slight your counsel again."

In this they were all agreed, and they carried out the same in their
future lives.



CHAPTER VII.

SOLOMON MACK.

My youngest brother, Solomon, was born and married in the town of
Gilsum, state of New Hampshire, where he is still living; and although
he is now very aged, he has never traveled farther than Boston, to
which place his business leads him twice a year.

He has gathered to himself in this rocky region, fields, flocks, and
herds, which multiply and increase upon the mountains. He has been
known at least twenty years, as Captain Solomon Mack, of Gilsum; but
as he lives to speak for himself, and as I have to do chiefly with the
dead, and not the living, I shall leave him, hoping that, as he has
lived peaceably with all men, he may die happily.

I have now given a brief account of all my father's family, save
myself; and what I have written has been done with the view of
discharging an obligation which I considered resting upon me, inasmuch
as they have all passed off this stage of action, except myself and
youngest brother. And seldom do I meet with an individual with whom
I was even acquainted in my early years, and I am constrained to
exclaim--"The friends of my youth! where are they?" The tomb replies,
"Here are they!" But, through my instrumentality,

    Safely truth to urge her claims, presumes
    On names now found alone on books and tombs.



CHAPTER VIII.

EARLY LIFE OF LUCY MACK--HER MARRIAGE WITH JOSEPH SMITH.

I shall now introduce the history of my own life. I was born in the
town of Gilsum, Cheshire county, state of New Hampshire, on the eighth
of July, 1776.

When I arrived at the age of eight years, my mother had a severe fit
of sickness. She was so low that she, as well as her friends, entirely
despaired of her recovery. During this sickness she called her children
around her bed, and, after exhorting them always to remember the
instructions which she had given them--to fear God and walk uprightly
before him, she gave me to my brother Stephen, requesting him to take
care of me, and bring me up as his own child, then bade each of us
farewell.

This my brother promised to do; but, as my mother shortly recovered,
it was not necessary, and I consequently remained at my father's house
until my sister Lovisa was married. Some time after this event I went
to South Hadley, to pay Lovisa, who was living there, a visit.

I returned home to my parents in about six months, and remained with
them in Gilsum until the death of Lovina. Soon after which, my brother
Stephen, who was living at Tunbridge, Vermont, came to my father's on a
visit; and he insisted so earnestly on my accompanying him home, that
my parents consented. The grief occasioned by the death of Lovina was
preying upon my health, and threatened my constitution with serious
injury, and they hoped that to accompany my brother home might serve to
divert my mind and thus prove a benefit to me. For I was pensive and
melancholy, and often in my reflections I thought that life was not
worth possessing.

In the midst of this anxiety of mind, I determined to obtain that which
I had heard spoken so much of from the pulpit--a change of heart.

To accomplish this, I spent much of my time reading the Bible, and
praying; but notwithstanding my great anxiety to experience a change of
heart, another matter would always interpose in all my meditations--if
I remain a member of no church, all religious people will say I am of
the world; and if I join some one of the different denominations, all
the rest will say I am in error. No church will admit that I am right,
except the one with which I am associated. This makes them witnesses
against each other; and how can I decide in such a case as this, seeing
they are all unlike the Church of Christ, as it existed in former days!

While I remained at Tunbridge, I became acquainted with a young man by
the name of Joseph Smith, to whom I was subsequently married.

I continued with my brother one year, then went home. I was at home
but a short time, when my brother came after me again, and insisted so
hard upon my returning with him, that I concluded to do so. And this
time I remained with him until I was married, which took place the next
January.



CHAPTER IX.

SEVEN GENERATIONS OF THE SMITH FAMILY--FOUR GENERATIONS OF THE MACK
FAMILY.

Here, I would like to give the early history of my husband, for many
facts might be mentioned, that doubtless would be highly interesting;
but as I am not able to give them in order, I shall decline making the
attempt, and in the place thereof shall insert a transcript from the
record of his family, beginning with Samuel Smith, who was the son of
Robert and Mary Smith, who came from England.

The above Samuel Smith was born January 26, 1666, in Toppsfield, Essex
county, Massachusetts; and was married to Rebecca Curtis, daughter of
John Chrtis, January 25, 1707.

_Children of Samuel and Rebecca Smith._

Phebe, born Jan. 8, 1708; married to Stephen Averel.

First Mary, born Aug. 14, 1711; married to Amos Towne.

Second Samuel, born Jan. 26, 1714; married to Priscilla Gould; died
Nov. 14, 1785.

Rebecca, born Oct. 1, 1715; married to John Balch.

Elizabeth, born July 8, 1718; married to Eliezer Gould; died March 15,
1753.

Hephzibah, born May 12, 1722; married to Wm. Gallop; died Nov. 15, 1774.

Robert, born April 25, 1724.

Susanna, born May 2, 1726; died May 5, 1741.

Hannah, born April 5, 1729; married to John Peabody; died Aug. 17, 1764.

First Samuel Smith died July 12, 1748.

His wife Rebecca Smith, March 2, 1753.

_Children of second Samuel, and first Priscilla Smith, which Samuel
was the son of first Samuel and Rebecca Smith._

Priscilla, born Sept. 26, 1735; married to Jacob Kimball, Sept. 15,
1755.

Third Samuel, born Oct. 28, 1737; married to Rebecca Towne, Jan. 2,
1760.

Vashti, born Oct. 5, 1739; married to Solomon Curtis, Sept. 15, 1763;
married second time to Jacob Hobbs, 1767.

Susanna, born Jan. 24, 1742; married to Isaac Hobbs, 1767.

First Asael, born March 8, 1744; married to Mary Duty, Feb. 12, 1767.

_Children of first Asael (died Oct. 31, 1830) and Mary Smith (died
May 27, 1836); which Asael was the son of second Samuel and Priscilla
Smith._

First Jesse, born April 20, 1768; married to Hannah Peabody, Jan. 20,
1792.

Priscilla, born Oct. 21, 1769; married to John C. Waller, Aug. 24, 1796.

First Joseph, born July 12, 1771; married to Lucy Mack, Jan. 24, 1796;
died Sept. 14, 1840.

Second Asael, born May 21, 1773; married to Betsy Schellenger March 21,
1802.

Mary, born June 4, 1775; married to Isaac Pierce, Dec. 22, 1796.

Fourth Samuel, born Sept. 15, 1777; married Frances Wilcox, Feb., 1816;
died April 1, 1830.

First Silas, born Oct. 1, 1779; married to Ruth Stevens, Jan 29, 1806;
second time to Mary Aikens, March 4, 1828.

First John, born June 16, 1781; married to Clarissa Lyman, Sept. 11,
1815.

Third Susannah, born May 18, 1783.

Stephen, born April 23, 1785; died July 25, 1802.

Sarah, born May 16, 1789; married to Joseph Sanford, Oct. 15, 1809;
died May 27, 1824.

_Children of fourth Samuel and Frances Wilcox._

  Charles, born Potsdam, St. Lawrence Co., N. Y.
  Laura,           "            "           "
  Horace Jay,      "            "           "
  Elizabeth,       "            "           "
  Sarah,           "            "           "

_Children of first Jesse and Hannah Smith, which Jesse was the son
of first Asael and Mary Smith._

  Benjamin G. was born May 2, 1793.

  Eliza,       "   "   Mar. 9, 1795,

  Ira,         "   "   Jan. 30, 1797.

  Harvey,      "   "   Apr. 1, 1799.

  Harriet,     "   "   Apr. 8, 1801.

  Stephen,     "   "   May 2, 1803.

  Mary,        "   "   May 4, 1805.

  Catherine,   "   "   July 13, 1807.

  Royal,       "   "   July 2, 1809.

  Sarah,       "   "   Dec. 16, 1810.

_Children of John C. and Priscilla Waller; which Priscilla was the
daughter of first Asael Smith._

  Calvin C. was born June 6, 1797.

  Polly      "   "   Oct. 16, 1799; died July 20, 1800.

  Marshall   "   "   March 18, 1801.

  Royal H.   "   "   Nov. 29, 1802; died Sept. 29, 1866.

  Dudley C.  "   "   Sept. 29, 1804.

  Bushrod W. "   "   Oct. 18, 1806.

  Silas B.   "   "   Jan. 1, 1809; died June 12, 1866.

  Sally P.   "   "   Oct. 31, 1810; died Aug. 15, 1874.

  John H.    "   "   Sept. 9, 1812; died Nov. 5, 1812.

_Children of first Joseph and Lucy Smith; which Joseph was the son of
the first Asael and Mary Smith._

Alvin, born Feb. 11, 1798; died Nov. 19, 1824.

Hyrum, born Feb. 9, 1800, Tunbridge, Vermont; married to Jerusha
Barden, Nov. 2, 1826, Manchester, N. Y.; to Mary Fielding, 1837;
murdered by a mob, June 27, 1844, in Carthage jail, Hancock county,
Illinois, while under the protection of Governor Thomas Ford.

Sophronia, born May 16, 1803, Tunbridge, Vermont; married to Calvin
Stoddard, Dec. 2, 1827, Palmyra, N. Y.

Second Joseph, Dec. 23, 1805, Sharon, Windsor county, Vermont; married
to Emma Hale, daughter of Isaac Hale, in South Bainbridge, Chenango
county, N. Y., Jan. 18, 1827; murdered by a mob, June 27, 1844, in
Carthage jail, Hancock county, Illinois, while under the protection of
Governor Thomas Ford.

Fifth Samuel Harrison, born March 13, 1808, Tunbridge, Vermont; married
to Mary Bailey, Aug. 13, 1834; later to Levira Clark; died July 30,
1844, of a fever, occasioned by overexertion in getting away from a
mob, when his brothers were killed.

Ephraim, born March 13, 1810; died March 24, 1810.

William, born March 13, 1811, Royalton, Vermont; married to Caroline
Grant, daughter of Joshua Grant, Feb. 14, 1833.

Catherine, born July 28, 1812, Lebanon, New Hampshire; married to
Wilkins J. Salisbury, Jan. 8, 1831; died Feb. 1, 1900.

Don Carlos, born March 25, 1816; married to Agnes Coolbrith, July 30,
1835, Kirtland, Ohio; died Aug. 7, 1841.

Lucy, born July 18, 1821; married to Arthur Miliken, June 4, 1840,
Nauvoo.

_Children of second Asael (died July 21, 1844) and Betsy Smith; which
Asael was the son of first Asael and Mary Smith._

  Elias      was born Sept. 6, 1804; died June 24, 1888.

  Emily       "   "   Sept. 1, 1806; died Aug. 11, 1893.

  Jesse J.    "   "   Oct. 6, 1808; died July 1, 1834.

  Esther      "   "   Sept. 20, 1810; died Oct. 31, 1856.

  Mary J.     "   "   April 29, 1813; died Mar. 1, 1878.

  Julia P.    "   "   March 6, 1815.

  Martha      "   "   June 9, 1817.

  Second Silas "  "   June 6, 1822; died June 6, 1892.

_Children of Isaac and Mary Pierce; which Mary was the daughter of
first Asael and Mary Smith._

  Eunice was born April 29, 1799.

  Miranda "   "   June 17, 1803.

  Horace  "   "   June 8, 1805.

  John S. "   "   March 6, 1807.

  Susan   "   "   June 20, 1809.

  Mary    "   "   April 25, 1811.

  Laura   "   "   Feb. 8, 1814.

  Eliza A. "  "   Sept. 2, 1817.

_Children of first Silas (died Sept. 13, 1839) and Ruth Smith (died
Mar. 14, 1826); which Silas was the son of first Asael and Mary Smith._

  Charles      was born Nov. 11, 1806; died May 7, 1809.

  Charity       "   "   April 1, 1808;  "   June 2, 1888.

  Curtis S.     "   "   Oct. 29, 1809;  "   Sept. 23, 1861.

  Sixth Samuel  "   "   Oct. 3, 1811;   "   March 7, 1826.

  Stephen       "   "   June 8, 1815;   "   Feb. 20, 1891.

  Susan         "   "   Oct. 19, 1817;  "   Nov., 1846.

  Third Asael   "   "   Oct. 12, 1819;  "   May 15, 1834.

_Children by his second wife Mary Aikens Smith (died Apr. 27, 1877)._

  Silas S.       was born Oct. 26, 1830.

  John A.         "   "   July 6, 1832; died Nov. 27, 1834.

  Jesse Nathaniel "   "   Dec. 2, 1834.

_Children of first John (died May 23, 1854) and Clarissa Smith (died
Feb. 14,1854); which John was the son of first Asael and Mary Smith._

  George A.      was born June 26, 1817; died Sept. 1, 1875.

  Caroline        "   "   June 6, 1820.

  Second John L.  "   "   Nov. 17, 1828.

_Children of Hyrum and Jerusha Smith; which Hyrum was the son of first
Joseph and Lucy Smith._

  Lovina       was born Sept. 16, 1827; died Oct. 8, 1876.

  Mary          "   "   June 27, 1829; died May 29, 1832.

  John          "   "   Sept, 22, 1832.

  Second Hyrum  "   "   April 27, 1834; died Sept. 21, 1841.

  Jerusha       "   "   Jan. 13, 1836.

  Sarah         "   "   Oct. 2, 1837; died Nov. 6, 1876.

_Children of Hyrum Smith and Mary, his second wife._

  Fourth Joseph F. was born Nov. 13, 1838.

  Martha Ann        "   "   May 14, 1841.

_Children of second Joseph, the Prophet, and Emma Smith; which Joseph
was the son of first Joseph and Lucy Smith._

  Julia Murdock Smith, adopted daughter, was born April 30,1831.

  Third Joseph   was born Nov. 6, 1832.

  Frederick G. W. "   "   June 20, 1836; died 1862.

  Alexander H.    "   "   June 2, 1838.

  Don Carlos      "   "   June 13, 1840; died Aug., 1841.

  David H.        "   "   Nov. 18, 1844.

_Children of fifth Samuel Smith and Mary, his first wife; which Samuel
was the son of first Joseph and Lucy Smith._

  Susanna B.  was born Oct. 27, 1835.

  Mary B.      "   "   March 27, 1837.

  Samuel H. B. "   "   Aug. 1, 1838.

  Lucy B.      "   "   Jan., 1841.

  Mary Smith died Jan. 25, 1841.

_Children of Samuel Smith and Levira, his second wife._

  Levira A. C. was born April 29, 1842.

  Lovisa C.     "   "   Aug. 28, 1843.

  Lucy J. C.    "   "   Aug. 20, 1844.

_Children of William and Caroline Smith; which William was the son of
first Joseph and Lucy Smith._

  Mary Jane  was born Jan., 1835.

  Caroline L. "   "   Aug., 1836.

_Children of Don Carlos and Agnes Smith; which Don Carlos was the son
of first Joseph and Lucy Smith._

  Agnes C.    was born Aug. 1, 1836.

  Sophronia C. "   "   1838.

  Josephine D. "   "   March 10, 1841.

_Children of Calvin and Sophronia Stoddard._

  Eunice was born March 22, 1830.

  Maria   "   "   April 12, 1832.

_Children of Wilkins J. and Catherine Salisbury; which Catharine was
the daughter of first Joseph Smith._

  Elizabeth was born April 12, 1832.

  Lucy       "   "   Oct. 3, 1834.

  Solomon J. "   "   Sept. 18, 1835.

  Alvin      "   "   June 7, 1838.

  Don C.     "   "   Oct. 25, 1841.

  Emma C.    "   "   March 25, 1844

  Arthur and Lucy Miliken have one son, named Don Carlos Miliken.

  George A. Smith, son of first John Smith, was married to Bathsheba W.
  Bigler, July 25, 1841.

_Children of George A. and Bathsheba W. Smith._

  George Albert, was born July 7, 1842; died Nov. 2, 1860.

  Bathsheba       "   "   Aug. 14, 1844.

Having now given all the names belonging to the family of Smith,
I shall take up another lineage, namely, that of the Mack family,
commencing with my grandfather Ebenezer Mack. Ebenezer Mack had three
sons, Elisha, Samuel and Solomon, and one daughter named Hypsebeth. His
son Solomon was born in the town of Lyme, state of Connecticut, Sept.
26, 1735; was married to a young woman by the name of Lydia Gates,
in the year 1759. This Lydia Gates was born in East Haddam, state of
Connecticut, Sept. 3, 1735.

_The following are the names of the children of first Solomon and Lydia
Mack; which Solomon was the son of Ebenezer and Hannah Mack._

Jason, Stephen, Daniel, second Solomon, Lovisa, Lovina, Lydia, Lucy.

_Children of second Solomon Mack; which Solomon was the son of first
Solomon Mack._

  Calvin       was born Nov. 28, 1797.

  Orlando       "   "   Sept. 23, 1799.

  Chilon        "   "   July, 26, 1802.

  Third Solomon "   "   May 23, 1805.

  Amos          "   "   May 1, 1807.

  Dennis        "   "   Oct. 18, 1809.

  Merrill       "   "   Sept. 14, 1812.

  Esther        "   "   April 2, 1815.

  Rizpah        "   "   June 5, 1818.



CHAPTER X.

A PRESENT OF ONE THOUSAND DOLLARS, FROM JOHN MUDGET AND STEPHEN MACK,
TO THE AUTHOR.

Soon after I was married, I went with my husband to see my parents, and
as we were about setting out on this visit, my brother Stephen, and his
partner in business, John Mudget, were making some remarks in regard to
my leaving them, and the conversation presently turned upon the subject
of giving me a marriage present. "Well," said Mr. Mudget, "Lucy ought
to have something worth naming, and I will give her just as much as you
will."

"Done," said my brother, "I will give her five hundred dollars in cash."

"Good," said the other, "and I will give her five hundred dollars more."

So they wrote a check on their bankers for one thousand dollars, and
presented me with the same. This check I laid aside, as I had other
means by me sufficient to purchase my housekeeping furniture.

Having visited my father and mother, we returned again to Tunbridge,
where my companion owned a handsome farm, upon which we settled
ourselves, and began to cultivate the soil. We lived on this place
about six years, tilling the earth for a livelihood.

In 1802, we rented our farm in Tunbridge, and moved to the town of
Randolph, where we opened a mercantile establishment. When we came to
this place we had two children, Alvin and Hyrum.



CHAPTER XI.

SICKNESS IN RANDOLPH.

We had lived in Randolph but six months when I took a heavy cold, which
caused a severe cough. To relieve this, every possible exertion was
made, but it was all in vain. A hectic fever set in, which threatened
to prove fatal, and the physician pronounced my case to be confirmed
consumption. During this sickness, my mother watched over me with much
anxiety, sparing herself no pains in administering to my comfort, yet I
continued to grow weaker and weaker, until I could scarcely endure even
a foot-fall upon the floor, except in stocking-foot, and no one was
allowed to speak in the room above a whisper.

While I was in this situation, a Methodist exhorter came to see me. On
coming to the door, he knocked in his usual manner, and his knocking so
agitated me that it was a considerable length of time before my nerves
became altogether quieted again. My mother motioned him to a chair, and
in a whisper informed him of my situation, which prevented his asking
me any questions. He tarried some time, and while he sat he seemed
deeply to meditate upon the uncertainty of my recovering; in the mean
time, he showed a great desire to have conversation with me respecting
my dying.

As he thus sat pondering, I fancied to myself that he was going to ask
me if I was prepared to die, and I dreaded to have him speak to me, for
then I did not consider myself ready for such an awful event, inasmuch
as I knew not the ways of Christ; besides, there appeared to be a dark
and lonesome chasm, between myself and the Savior, which I dared not
attempt to pass.

I thought I strained my eyes, and by doing so I could discern a faint
glimmer of the light that was beyond the gloom which lay immediately
before me.

When I was meditating upon death, in this manner, my visitor left; soon
after which my husband came to my bed, and took me by the hand, and
said, "Oh, Lucy! my wife! my wife! you must die! The doctors have given
you up; and all say you cannot live."

I then looked to the Lord, and begged and pleaded with him to spare my
life, in order that I might bring up my children, and be a comfort to
my husband. My mind was much agitated during the whole night. Sometimes
I contemplated heaven and heavenly things; then my thoughts would turn
upon those of earth--my babes and my companion.

During this night I made a solemn covenant with God, that, if he would
let me live, I would endeavor to serve him according to the best of my
abilities. Shortly after this, I heard a voice say to me, "Seek, and ye
shall find; knock, and it shall be opened unto you. Let your heart be
comforted; ye believe in God, believe also in me."

In a few moments my mother came in, and, looking upon me she said,
"Lucy, you are better."

I replied, as my speech returned just at that instant, "Yes, mother,
the Lord will let me live, if I am faithful to the promise which I made
to him, to be a comfort to my mother, my husband, and my children."
I continued to gain strength, until I became quite well as to my
bodily health; but my mind was considerably disquieted. It was wholly
occupied upon the subject of religion. As soon as I was able, I made
all diligence in endeavoring to find some one who was capable of
instructing me more perfectly in the way of life and salvation.

As soon as I had strength sufficient, I visited one Deacon Davies, a
man whom I regarded as exceedingly pious; and, as he was apprised of
my sudden and miraculous recovery, I expected to hear about the same
which I had heard from my mother--"The Lord has done a marvelous work;
let his name have the praise thereof." But, no: from the time I arrived
at his house until I left, I heard nothing, except, "Oh, Mrs. Smith
has come--help her in--run, build a fire, make the room warm--fill
the tea-kettle--get the great arm-chair," etc., etc. Their excessive
anxiety concerning my physical convenience and comfort, without being
seasoned with one word in relation to Christ or godliness, sickened and
disgusted me, and I returned home very sorrowful and much disappointed.

From my anxiety of mind to abide the covenant which I had made with
the Lord, I went from place to place, for the purpose of getting
information, and finding, if it were possible, some congenial spirit
who could enter into my feelings, and thus be able to strengthen and
assist me in carrying out my resolutions.

I heard that a very devout man was to preach the next Sabbath in
the Presbyterian church; I therefore went to meeting, in the full
expectation of hearing that which my soul desired--the Word of Life.

When the minister commenced speaking, I fixed my mind with deep
attention upon the spirit and matter of his discourse; but after
hearing him through, I returned home, convinced that he neither
understood nor appreciated the subject upon which he spoke, and I said
in my heart that there was not then upon earth the religion which I
sought. I therefore determined to examine my Bible, and, taking Jesus
and his disciples for my guide, to endeavor to obtain from God that
which man could neither give nor take away. Notwithstanding this,
I would hear all that could be said, as well as read much that was
written, on the subject of religion; but the Bible I intended should be
my guide to life and salvation. This course I pursued a number of years.

At length, I considered it my duty to be baptized, and, finding a
minister who was willing to baptize me, and leave me free in regard
to joining any religious denomination, I stepped forward and yielded
obedience to this ordinance; after which I continued to read the Bible
as formerly, until my eldest son had attained his twenty-second year.



CHAPTER XII.

JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, LOSES HIS PROPERTY AND BECOMES POOR--RECEIVES A
VISIT PROM JASON MACK--THE HISTORY OP THE LATTER CONCLUDED.

My husband, as before stated, followed merchandising for a short period
in the town of Randolph. Soon after he commenced business in this
place, he ascertained that crystalized ginseng root sold very high in
China, being used as a remedy for the plague, which was then raging
there.

He therefore concluded to embark in a traffic of this article, and
consequently made an investment of all the means which he commanded, in
that way and manner which was necessary to carry on a business of this
kind, viz., crystalizing and exporting the root. When he had obtained a
quantity of the same, a merchant by the name of Stevens, of Royalton,
offered him three thousand dollars for what he had; but my husband
refused his offer, as it was only about two-thirds of its real value,
and told the gentleman that he would rather venture shipping it himself.

My husband, in a short time, went to the city of New York, with the
view of shipping his ginseng, and finding a vessel in port which
was soon to set sail, he made arrangements with the captain to this
effect--that he was to sell the ginseng in China, and return the avails
thereof to my husband; and this the captain bound himself to do, in a
written obligation.

Mr. Stevens, hearing that Mr. Smith was making arrangements to ship his
ginseng, repaired immediately to New York, and by taking some pains,
he ascertained the vessel on board of which Mr. Smith had shipped his
ginseng; and having some of the same article on hand himself, he made
arrangements with the captain to take his also, and he was to send his
son on board the vessel to take charge of it.

It appears, from circumstances that afterwards transpired, that the
ginseng was taken to China, and sold there to good advantage, or at a
high price, but not to much advantage to us, for we never received any
thing, except a small chest of tea, of the avails arising from this
adventure.

When the vessel returned, Stevens, the younger, also returned with it,
and when my husband became apprized of his arrival, he went immediately
to him and made inquiry respecting the success of the captain in
selling his ginseng. Mr. Stevens told him quite a plausible tale, the
particulars of which I have forgotten; but the amount of it was, that
the sale had been a perfect failure, and the only thing which had been
brought for Mr. Smith from China was a small chest of tea, which chest
had been delivered into his care, for my husband.

In a short time after this, young Stevens hired a house of Major
Mack, and employed eight or ten hands and commenced the business of
crystalizing ginseng. Soon after engaging in this business, when he
had got fairly at work, my brother, Major Mack, went to see him, and,
as it happened, he found him considerably intoxicated. When my brother
came into his presence, he spoke to him thus, "Well, Mr. Stevens, you
are doing a fine business; you will soon be ready for another trip to
China." Then observed again, in a quite indifferent manner, "Oh, Mr.
Stevens, how much did Brother Smith's adventure bring?" Being under the
influence of liquor, he was not on his guard, and took my brother by
the hand and led him to a trunk; then opening it, he observed, "There,
sir, are the proceeds of Mr. Smith's ginseng!" exhibiting a large
amount of silver and gold.

My brother was much astounded at this; however, he disguised his
feelings, and conversed with him a short time upon different subjects,
then returned home, and about ten o'clock the same night he started for
Randolph, to see my husband.

When Mr. Stevens had overcome his intoxication, he began to reflect
upon what he had done, and making some inquiry concerning my brother,
he ascertained that he had gone to Randolph. Mr. Stevens, conjecturing
his business--that he had gone to see my husband respecting the ginseng
adventure, went immediately to his establishment, dismissed his hands,
called his carriage, and fled with his cash for Canada, and I have
never heard anything concerning him since.

My husband pursued him a while, but finding pursuit vain, returned home
much dispirited at the state of his affairs. He then went to work to
overhaul his accounts, in order to see how he stood with the world;
upon which he discovered that, in addition to the loss sustained by the
China adventure, he had lost about two thousand dollars in bad debts.
At the time he sent his venture to China he was owing eighteen hundred
dollars in the city of Boston, for store goods, and he expected to
discharge the debt at the return of the China expedition; but, having
invested almost all his means in ginseng, the loss which he suffered in
this article rendered it impossible for him to pay his debt with the
property which remained in his hands. The principal dependence left
him, in the shape of property, was the farm at Tunbridge, upon which
we were then living, having moved back to this place immediately after
his venture was sent to China. This farm, which was worth about fifteen
hundred dollars, my husband sold for eight hundred dollars, in order to
make a speedy payment on the Boston debt; and, as I had not used the
check of one thousand dollars, which my brother and Mr. Mudget gave me,
I added it to the eight hundred dollars obtained for the farm, and by
this means the whole debt was liquidated.

While we were living on the Tunbridge farm, my brother Jason made us a
visit. He brought with him a young man by the name of William Smith, a
friendless orphan, whom he had adopted as his own son, and, previous
to this time, had kept constantly with him; but he now thought best
to leave him with us, for the purpose of having him go to school. He
remained with us, however, only six months before my brother came again
and took him to New Brunswick, which they afterwards made their home,
and where my brother had gathered together some thirty families, on a
tract of land which he had purchased for the purpose of assisting poor
persons to the means of sustaining themselves. He planned their work
for them, and when they raised anything which they wished to sell, he
took it to market for them. Owning a schooner himself, he took their
produce to Liverpool, as it was then the best market.

When Jason set out on the above-mentioned visit to Tunbridge, he
purchased a quantity of goods, which he intended as presents for his
friends, especially his mother and sisters; but, on his way thither,
he found so many objects of charity, that he gave away not only the
goods, but most of his money. On one occasion, he saw a woman who had
just lost her husband, and who was very destitute; he gave her fifteen
dollars in money, and a full suit of clothes for herself and each of
her children, which were six in number.

This was the last interview I ever had with my brother Jason, but,
twenty years later, he wrote the following letter to my brother
Solomon, and that is about all the intelligence I have ever received
from him since I saw him:

    South Branch of Ormucto, Province of New Brunswick,

    June 30, 1835.

    My Dear Brother Solomon:

    You will, no doubt, be surprised to hear that I am still alive,
    although in an absence of twenty years I have never written to you
    before. But I trust you will forgive me when I tell you that, for
    most of the twenty years, I have been so situated that I have had
    little or no communication with the lines, and have been holding
    meetings, day and night, from place to place; besides, my mind
    has been so taken up with the deplorable situation of the earth,
    the darkness in which it lies, that, when my labors did call me
    near the lines, I did not realize the opportunity which presented
    itself of letting you know where I was. And, again, I have designed
    visiting you long since, and annually have promised myself that
    the succeeding year I would certainly seek out my relatives, and
    enjoy the privilege of one pleasing interview with them before
    I passed into the valley and shadow of death. But last, though
    not least, let me not startle you when I say, that, according to
    my early adopted principles of the power of faith, the Lord has,
    in his exceeding kindness, bestowed upon me the gift of healing
    by the prayer of faith, and the use of such simple means as seem
    congenial to the human system; but my chief reliance is upon him
    who organized us at the first, and can restore at pleasure that
    which is disorganized.

    The first of my peculiar successes in this way was twelve years
    since, and from nearly that date I have had little rest. In
    addition to the incessant calls which I, in a short time had, there
    was the most overwhelming torrent of opposition poured down upon
    me that I ever witnessed. But it pleased God to take the weak to
    confound the wisdom of the wise. I have in the last twelve years
    seen the greatest manifestations of the power of God in healing
    the sick, that, with all my sanguinity, I ever hoped or imagined.
    And when the learned infidel has declared with sober face, time
    and again, that disease had obtained such an ascendency that death
    could be resisted no longer, that the victim must wither beneath
    his potent arm, I have seen the almost lifeless clay slowly but
    surely resuscitated, and revive, till the pallid monster fled so
    far that the patient was left in the full bloom of vigorous health.
    But it is God that hath done it, and to him let all the praise be
    given.

    I am now compelled to close this epistle, for I must start
    immediately on a journey of more than one hundred miles, to attend
    a heavy case of sickness; so God be with you all. Farewell!

    Jason Mack.

The next intelligence we received concerning Jason, after his letter to
Brother Solomon, was, that he, his wife, and oldest son, were dead, and
this concludes my account of my brother Jason.



CHAPTER XIII.

THE AUTHOR'S DREAM.

While we were living in the town of Tunbridge, my mind became deeply
impressed with the subject of religion; which, probably, was occasioned
by my singular experience during my sickness at Randolph. I commenced
attending Methodist meetings, and in order to oblige me, my husband
accompanied me; but when this came to the ears of his oldest brother,
he was so displeased, and said so much in regard to the matter, that
my husband thought it best to desist. He said that he considered it
hardly worth our while to attend the meetings any longer, as it would
prove of but little advantage to us; besides this, it gave our friends
such disagreeable feelings. I was considerably hurt by this, yet I made
no reply. I retired to a grove not far distant, where I prayed to the
Lord in behalf of my husband--that the true gospel might be presented
to him, and that his heart might be softened so as to receive it, or,
that he might become more religiously inclined. After praying some time
in this manner, I returned to the house, much depressed in spirit,
which state of feeling continued until I retired to my bed. I soon fell
asleep, and had the following dream:--

    I thought that I stood in a large and beautiful meadow, which
    lay a short distance from the house in which we lived, and that
    everything around me wore an aspect of peculiar pleasantness. The
    first thing that attracted my special attention in this magnificent
    meadow, was a very pure and clear stream of water, which ran
    through the midst of it; and as I traced this stream, I discovered
    two trees standing upon its margin, both of which were on the same
    side of the stream. These trees were very beautiful, they were well
    proportioned, and towered with majestic beauty to a great height.
    Their branches, which added to their symmetry and glory, commenced
    near the top, and spread themselves in luxurious grandeur around.
    I gazed upon them with wonder and admiration; and after beholding
    them a short time, I saw one of them was surrounded with a bright
    belt, that shone like burnished gold, but far more brilliantly.
    Presently, a gentle breeze passed by, and the tree encircled with
    this golden zone, bent gracefully before the wind, and waved its
    beautiful branches in the light air. As the wind increased, this
    tree assumed the most lively and animated appearance, and seemed to
    express in its motions the utmost joy and happiness. If it had been
    an intelligent creature, it could not have conveyed, by the power
    of language, the idea of joy and gratitude so perfectly as it did;
    and even the stream that rolled beneath it, shared, apparently,
    every sensation felt by the tree, for, as the branches danced over
    the stream, it would swell gently, then recede again with a motion
    as soft as the breathing of an infant, but as lively as the dancing
    of a sunbeam. The belt also partook of the same influence, and, as
    it moved in unison with the motion of the stream and of the tree,
    it increased continually in refulgence and magnitude, until it
    became exceedingly glorious.

    I turned my eyes upon its fellow, which stood opposite; but it was
    not surrounded with the belt of light as the former, and it stood
    erect and fixed as a pillar of marble. No matter how strong the
    wind blew over it, not a leaf was stirred, not a bough was bent;
    but obstinately stiff it stood, scorning alike the zephyr's breath,
    or the power of the mighty storm.

    I wondered at what I saw, and said in my heart, What can be the
    meaning of all this? And the interpretation given me was, that
    these personated my husband and his oldest brother, Jesse Smith;
    that the stubborn and unyielding tree was like Jesse; that the
    other, more pliant and flexible, was like Joseph, my husband;
    that the breath of heaven? which passed over them, was the pure
    and undefiled gospel of the Son of God, which gospel Jesse would
    always resist, but which Joseph, when he was more advanced in life,
    would hear and receive with his whole heart, and rejoice therein;
    and unto him would be added intelligence, happiness, glory, and
    everlasting life.



CHAPTER XIV.

FIRST VISION OP JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR--THE BOX--SECOND VISION--THE TREE
AND THE SPACIOUS BUILDING.

After selling the farm at Tunbridge, we moved only a short distance, to
the town of Royalton. Here we resided a few months, then moved again to
Sharon, Windsor county, Vermont. In the latter place, my husband rented
a farm of my father, which he cultivated in the summer, teaching school
in the winter. In this way my husband continued laboring for a few
years, during which time our circumstances gradually improved, until we
found ourselves quite comfortable again.

In the meantime, we had a son whom we called Joseph, after the name of
his father; he was born December 23, 1805. I shall speak of him more
particularly by and by.

We moved thence to Tunbridge. Here we had another son, whom we named
Samuel Harrison, born March 13, 1808. We lived in this place a short
time, then moved to Royalton, where Ephraim was born, March 13, 1810.
We continued here until we had another son, born March 13, 1811, whom
we called William.

About this time my husband's mind became much excited upon the subject
of religion; yet he would not subscribe to any particular system of
faith, but contended for the ancient order, as established by our Lord
and Savior Jesus Christ, and his Apostles.

One night my husband retired to his bed, in a very thoughtful state of
mind, contemplating the situation of the Christian religion, or the
confusion and discord that were extant. He soon fell into a sleep, and
before waking had the following vision, which I shall relate in his own
words, just as he told it to me the next morning:--

    "I seemed to be traveling in an open, barren field, and as I was
    traveling, I turned my eyes towards the east, the west, the north
    and the south, but could see nothing save dead, fallen timber.
    Not a vestige of life, either animal or vegetable, could be seen;
    besides, to render the scene still more dreary, the most death-like
    silence prevailed, no sound of anything animate could be heard
    in all the field. I was alone in this gloomy desert, with the
    exception of an attendant spirit, who kept constantly by my side.
    Of him I inquired the meaning of what I saw, and why I was thus
    traveling in such a dismal place. He answered thus: 'This field
    is the world, which now lieth inanimate and dumb, in regard to
    the true religion, or plan of salvation; but travel on, and by
    the wayside you will find on a certain log a box, the contents of
    which, if you eat thereof, will make you wise, and give unto you
    wisdom and understanding.' I carefully observed what was told me
    by my guide, and proceeding a short distance, I came to the box. I
    immediately took it up, and placed it under my left arm; then with
    eagerness I raised the lid, and began to taste of its contents;
    upon which all manner of beasts, horned cattle, and roaring
    animals, rose up on every side in the most threatening manner
    possible, tearing the earth, tossing their horns, and bellowing
    most terrifically all around me, and they finally came so close
    upon me, that I was compelled to drop the box, and fly for my life.
    Yet, in the midst, of all this I was perfectly happy though I awoke
    trembling."

From this forward, my husband seemed more confirmed than ever, in the
opinion that there was no order or class of religionists that knew any
more concerning the Kingdom of God, than those of the world, or such as
made no profession of religion whatever.

In 1811, we moved from Royalton, Vermont, to the town of Lebanon, New
Hampshire. Soon after arriving here, my husband received another very
singular vision, which I will relate:--

    "I thought," said he, "I was traveling in an open, desolate field,
    which appeared to be very barren. As I was thus traveling, the
    thought suddenly came into my mind that I had better stop and
    reflect upon what I was doing, before I went any further. So I
    asked myself, 'What motive can I have in traveling here, and what
    place can this be?' My guide, who was by my side, as before, said,
    'This is the desolate world; but travel on.' The road was so broad
    and barren, that I wondered why I should travel in it; for, said
    I to myself, 'Broad is the road, and wide is the gate that leads
    to death, and many there be that walk therein; but narrow is the
    way, and strait is the gate that leads to everlasting life, and
    few there be that go in thereat.' Traveling a short distance
    further, I came to a narrow path. This path I entered, and, when
    I had traveled a little way in it, I beheld a beautiful stream
    of water, which ran from the east to the west. Of this stream, I
    could see neither the source nor yet the mouth; but as far as my
    eyes could extend I could see a rope, running along the bank of it,
    about as high as a man could reach, and beyond me, was a low, but
    very pleasant valley, in which stood a tree, such as I had never
    seen before. It was exceedingly handsome, insomuch that I looked
    upon it with wonder and admiration. Its beautiful branches spread
    themselves somewhat like an umbrella, and it bore a kind of fruit,
    in shape much like a chestnut bur, and as white as snow, or, if
    possible, whiter. I gazed upon the same with considerable interest,
    and as I was doing so, the burs or shells commenced opening and
    shedding their particles, or the fruit which they contained, which
    was of dazzling whiteness. I drew near, and began to eat of it, and
    I found it delicious beyond description. As I was eating, I said
    in my heart, 'I cannot eat this alone, I must bring my wife and
    children, that they may partake with me.' Accordingly, I went and
    brought my family, which consisted of a wife and seven children,
    and we all commenced eating, and praising God for this blessing.
    We were exceedingly happy, insomuch that our joy could not easily
    be expressed. While thus engaged, I beheld a spacious building
    standing opposite the valley which we were in, and it appeared to
    reach to the very heavens. It was full of doors and windows, and
    they were all filled with people, who were very finely dressed.
    When these people observed us in the low valley, under the tree,
    they pointed the finger of scorn at us, and treated us with all
    manner of disrespect and contempt. But their contumely we utterly
    disregarded. I presently turned to my guide, and inquired of him
    the meaning of the fruit that was so delicious. He told me it was
    the pure love of God, shed abroad in the hearts of all those who
    love him, and keep his commandments. He then commanded me to go
    and bring the rest of my children. I told him that we were all
    there. 'No,' he replied, 'look yonder, you have two more, and
    you must bring them also.' Upon raising my eyes, I saw two small
    children, standing some distance off. I immediately went to them,
    and brought them to the tree; upon which they commenced eating with
    the rest, and we all rejoiced together. The more we ate, the more
    we seemed to desire, until we even got down upon our knees, and
    scooped it up, eating it by double handfulls. After feasting in
    this manner a short time, I asked my guide what was the meaning of
    the spacious building which I saw. He replied, 'It is Babylon, it
    is Babylon, and it must fall. The people in the doors and windows
    are the inhabitants thereof, who scorn and despise the Saints of
    God, because of their humility.' I soon awoke, clapping my hands
    together for joy."



CHAPTER XV.

SICKNESS AT LEBANON--SOPHRONIA'S MIRACULOUS RECOVERY.

We moved, as before-mentioned, to the town of Lebanon, New Hampshire.
Here we settled ourselves down, and began to contemplate, with joy and
satisfaction, the prosperity which had attended our recent exertions;
and we doubled our diligence, in order to obtain more of this world's
goods, with the view of assisting our children, when they should need
it; and, as is quite natural, we looked forward to the decline of life,
and were providing for its wants, as well as striving to procure those
things which contribute much to the comfort of old age.

As our children had, in a great measure, been debarred from the
privilege of schools, we began to make every arrangement to attend to
this important duty. We established our second son Hyrum in an academy
at Hanover; and the rest, that were of sufficient age, we were sending
to a common school that was quite convenient. Meanwhile, myself and
companion were doing all that our abilities would admit of for the
future welfare and advantage of the family; and were greatly blessed in
our labors.

But this state of things did not long continue. The typhus fever came
into Lebanon, and raged tremendously. Among the number seized with this
complaint were, first, Sophronia; next Hyrum, who was taken while at
school, and came home sick; then Alvin; in short, one after another
was taken down, till all the family, with the exception of myself and
husband, were prostrated upon beds of sickness.

Sophronia had a heavy siege. The physician attended her eighty-nine
days, giving her medicine all the while; but on the ninetieth day, he
said she was so far gone, it was not for her to receive any benefit
from medicine, and for this cause he discontinued his attendance.
The ensuing night, she lay altogether motionless, with her eyes wide
open, and with that peculiar aspect which bespeaks the near approach
of death. As she thus lay, I gazed upon her as a mother looks upon the
last shade of life in a darling child. In this moment of distraction,
my husband and myself clasped our hands, fell upon our knees by the
bedside, and poured out our grief to God, in prayer and supplication,
beseeching him to spare our child yet a little longer.

Did the Lord hear our petition? Yes; he most assuredly did, and before
we rose to our feet, he gave us a testimony that she would recover.
When we first arose from prayer, our child had, to all appearance,
ceased breathing. I caught a blanket, threw it around her, then, taking
her in my arms, commenced pacing the floor. Those present remonstrated
against my doing as I did, saying, "Mrs. Smith, it is all of no use;
you are certainly crazy, your child is dead." Notwithstanding, I would
not, for a moment, relinquish the hope of again seeing her breathe and
live.

This recital, doubtless, will be uninteresting to some; but those who
have experienced in life something of this kind are susceptible of
feeling, and can sympathize with me. Are you a mother who has been
bereft of a child? Feel for your heart-strings, and then tell me how
I felt with my expiring child pressed to my bosom! Would you at this
trying moment feel to deny that God had "power to save to the uttermost
all who call on him!" I did not then, neither do I now.

At length she sobbed. I still pressed her to my breast, and continued
to walk the floor. She sobbed again, then looked up into my face,
and commenced breathing quite freely. My soul was satisfied, but my
strength was gone. I laid my daughter on the bed, and sunk by her side,
completely overpowered by the intensity of my feelings.

From this time forward Sophronia continued mending, until she entirely
recovered.



CHAPTER XVI.

THE SUFFERINGS OF JOSEPH SMITH, JUNIOR, WITH A FEVER SORE--EXTRACTION
OF LARGE FRAGMENTS OF BONE FROM ONE OF HIS LEGS.

Joseph, our third son, having recovered from the typhus fever, after
something like two weeks' sickness, one day screamed out while sitting
in a chair, with a pain in his shoulder, and, in a very short time,
he appeared to be in such agony, that we feared the consequence would
prove to be something very serious. We immediately sent for a doctor.
When he arrived, and had examined the patient, he said that it was
his opinion that this pain was occasioned by a sprain. But the child
declared this could not be the case, as he had received no injury in
any way whatever, but that a severe pain had seized him all at once, of
the cause of which he was entirely ignorant.

Notwithstanding the child's protestations, still the physician insisted
that it must be a sprain, and consequently, he anointed his shoulder
with some bone linament, but this was of no advantage to him, for the
pain continued the same after the anointing as before.

When two weeks of extreme suffering had elapsed, the attendant
physician concluded to make closer examination: whereupon he found that
a large fever sore had gathered between his breast and shoulder. He
immediately lanced it, upon which it discharged fully a quart of matter.

As soon as the sore had discharged itself, the pain left it, and shot
like lightening (using his own terms) down his side into the marrow of
the bone of his leg, and soon became very severe.

My poor boy, at this, was almost in despair, and he, cried out "Oh,
father! the pain is so severe, how can I bear it!"

His leg soon began to swell, and he continued to suffer the greatest
agony for the space of two weeks longer. During this period, I carried
him much of the time in my arms, in order to mitigate his suffering
as much as possible; in consequence of which I was taken very ill
myself. The anxiety of mind that I experienced, together with physical
over-exertion, was too much for my constitution, and my nature sank
under it.

Hyrum, who was rather remarkable for his tenderness and sympathy, now
desired that he might take my place. As he was a good, trusty boy,
we let him do so; and, in order to make the task as easy for him as
possible, we laid Joseph upon a low bed, and Hyrum sat beside him,
almost day and night, for some considerable length of time, holding the
affected part of his leg in his hands, and pressing it between them, so
that his afflicted brother might be enabled to endure the pain, which
was so excruciating that he was scarcely able to bear it.

At the end of three weeks, we thought it advisable to send again for
the surgeon. When he came, he made an incision of eight inches, on the
front side of the leg, between the knee and ankle. This relieved the
pain in a great measure, and the patient was quite comfortable until
the wound began to heal, when the pain became as violent as ever.

The surgeon was called again, and he this time enlarged the wound,
cutting the leg even to the bone. It commenced healing the second time,
and as soon as it began to heal, it also began to swell again, which
swelling continued to rise till we deemed it wisdom to call a council
of surgeons; and when they met in consultation, they decided that
amputation was the only remedy.

Soon after coming to this conclusion, they rode up to the door, and
were invited into a room, apart from the one in which Joseph lay. They
being seated, I addressed them thus: "Gentlemen, what can you do to
save my boy's leg?" They answered, "We can do nothing; we have cut it
open to the bone, and find it so affected that we consider his leg
incurable, and that amputation is absolutely necessary in order to save
his life."

This was like a thunderbolt to me. I appealed to the principal surgeon,
saying, "Dr. Stone, can you not make another trial? Can you not, by
cutting around the bone, take out the diseased part, and perhaps that
which is sound will heal over, and by this means you will save his leg?
You will not, you must not, take off his leg, until you try once more.
I will not consent to let you enter his room until you make me this
promise."

After consulting a short time with each other, they agreed to do as I
had requested, then went to see my suffering son. One of the doctors,
on approaching his bed, said, "My poor boy, we have come again." "Yes,"
said Joseph, "I see you have; but you have not come to take off my leg,
have you, sir?" "No," replied the surgeon, "it is your mother's request
that we make one more effort, and that is what we have now come for."

The principal surgeon, after a moment's conversation, ordered cords
to be brought to bind Joseph fast to a bedstead; but to this Joseph
objected. The doctor, however, insisted that he must be confined, upon
which Joseph said very decidedly, "No, doctor, I will not be bound, for
I can bear the operation much better if I have my liberty." "Then,"
said Dr. Stone, "will you drink some brandy?"

"No," said Joseph, "not one drop."

"Will you take some wine?" rejoined the doctor. "You must take
something, or you can never endure the severe operation to which you
must be subjected."

"No," exclaimed Joseph, "I will not touch one particle of liquor,
neither will I be tied down; but I will tell you what I will do--I
will have my father sit on the bed and hold me in his arms, and then
I will do whatever is necessary in order to have the bone taken out."
Looking at me, he said, "Mother, I want you to leave the room, for I
know you cannot bear to see me suffer so; father can stand it, but you
have carried me so much, and watched over me so long, you are almost
worn out." Then looking up into my face, his eyes swimming in tears, he
continued, "Now, mother, promise me that you will not stay, will you?
The Lord will help me, and I shall get through with it."

To this request I consented, and getting a number of folded sheets, and
laying them under his leg, I retired, going several hundred yards from
the house in order to be out of hearing.

The surgeons commenced operating by boring into the bone of his leg,
first on one side of the bone where it was affected, then on the other
side, after which they broke it off with a pair of forceps or pincers.
They thus took away large pieces of the bone. When they broke off the
first piece, Joseph screamed out so loudly, that I could not forbear
running to him. On my entering the room, he cried out, "Oh, mother, go
back, go back; I do not want you to come in--I will try to tough it
out, if you will go away."

When the third piece was taken away, I burst into the room again--and
oh, my God! what a spectacle for a mother's eye! The wound torn open,
the blood still gushing from it, and the bed literally covered with
blood. Joseph was pale as a corpse, and large drops of sweat were
rolling down his face, whilst upon every feature was depicted the
utmost agony!

I was immediately forced from the room, and detained until the
operation was completed; but when the act was accomplished, Joseph
put upon a clean bed, the room cleared of every appearance of blood,
and the instruments which were used in the operation removed, I was
permitted again to enter.

Joseph immediately commenced getting better, and from this onward,
continued to mend until he became strong and healthy. When he had so
far recovered as to be able to travel, he went with his uncle, Jesse
Smith, to Salem, for the benefit of his health, hoping the sea-breezes
would be of service to him, and in this he was not disappointed.

Having passed through about a year of sickness and distress, health
again returned to our family, and we most assuredly realized the
blessing; and indeed, we felt to acknowledge the hand of God, more in
preserving our lives through such a tremendous scene of affliction,
than if we had, during this time, seen nothing but health and
prosperity.



CHAPTER XVII.

JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, REMOVES TO NORWICH, THENCE TO PALMYRA--HIS DREAM
OF THE IMAGES--OF THE JUDGMENT.

When health returned to us, as one would naturally suppose, it found us
in quite low circumstances. We were compelled to strain every energy to
provide for our present necessities, instead of making arrangements for
the future, as we had previously contemplated.

Shortly after sickness left our family, we moved to Norwich, in the
state of Vermont. In this place we established ourselves on a farm
belonging to one Esquire Moredock. The first year our crops failed;
yet, by selling fruit which grew on the place, we succeeded in
obtaining bread for the family, and, by making considerable exertion,
we were enabled to sustain ourselves.

The crops the second year were as the year before--a perfect failure.
Mr. Smith now determined to plant once more, and if he should meet with
no better success than he had the two preceding years, he would then go
to the state of New York, where wheat was raised in abundance.

The next year an untimely frost destroyed the crops, and being the
third year in succession in which the crops had failed, it almost
caused a famine. This was enough; my husband was now altogether decided
upon going to New York. He came in, one day, in quite a thoughtful
mood, and sat down; after meditating some time, he observed that, could
he so arrange his affairs, he would be glad to start soon for New York
with a Mr. Howard, who was going to Palmyra. He further remarked, that
he could not leave consistently, as the situation of the family would
not admit of his absence; besides, he was owing some money that must
first be paid.

I told him it was my opinion he might get both his creditors and
debtors together, and arrange matters between them in such a way as to
give satisfaction to all parties concerned; and, in relation to the
family, I thought I could make every necessary preparation to follow as
soon as he would be ready for us. He accordingly called upon all with
whom he had any dealings, and settled up his accounts with them. There
were, however, some who, in the time of settlement, neglected to bring
forward their books, consequently they were not balanced, or there were
no entries made in them to show the settlement; but in cases of this
kind, he called witnesses, that there might be evidence of the fact.

Having thus arranged his business, Mr. Smith set out for Palmyra, in
company with Mr. Howard. After his departure, I and those of the family
who were of much size, toiled faithfully, until we considered ourselves
fully prepared to leave at a moment's warning. We shortly received a
communication from Mr. Smith, requesting us to make ourselves ready to
take up a journey for Palmyra. In a short time after this, a team came
for us. As we were about starting on this journey, several of those
gentlemen who had withheld their books, in the time of settlement, now
brought them forth, and claimed the accounts which had been settled,
and which they had, in the presence of witnesses, agreed to erase.
We were all ready for the journey, and the teams were waiting on
expense. Under these circumstances, I concluded it would be more to
our advantage to pay their unjust claims than to hazard a lawsuit.
Therefore, by making considerable exertion, I raised the required sum,
which was one hundred and fifty dollars, and liquidated the demand.

A gentleman by the name of Flagg, a wealthy settler, living in the
town of Hanover, also a Mr. Howard, who resided in Norwich, were both
acquainted with the circumstance mentioned above. They were very
indignant at it, and requested me to give them a sufficient time to get
the witnesses together, and they would endeavor to recover that which
had been taken from me by fraud. I told them I could not do so, for my
husband had sent teams for me, which were on expense; moreover, there
was an uncertainty in getting the money back again, and in case of
failure, I should not be able to raise the means necessary to take the
family where we contemplated moving.

They then proposed raising some money by subscription, saying, "We
know the people feel as we do concerning this matter, and if you
will receive it, we will make you a handsome present." This I utterly
refused. The idea of receiving assistance in such a way as this was
indeed very repulsive to my feelings, and I rejected their offer.

My aged mother, who had lived with us some time, assisted in preparing
for the journey. She came with us to Royalton, where she resided until
she died, which was two years afterwards, in consequence of an injury
which she received by getting upset in a wagon while traveling with us.

On arriving at Royalton, I had a scene to pass through, and it was
truly a severe one--one to which I shall ever look back with peculiar
feelings. Here I was to take leave of my affectionate mother. The
parting hour came; my mother wept over me, long and bitterly. She told
me that it was not probable she should ever behold my face again;
"But, my dear child," said she, "I have lived long--my days are nearly
numbered--I must soon exchange the things of this world for those
which pertain to another state of existence, where I hope to enjoy the
society of the blessed; and now as my last admonition, I beseech you to
continue faithful in the service of God to the end of your days, that
I may have the pleasure of embracing you in another and fairer world
above."

This parting scene was at one Willard Pierce's, a tavern keeper. From
his house my mother went to Daniel Mack's, with whom she afterwards
lived until her decease.

Having traveled a short distance, I discovered that Mr. Howard, our
teamster, was an unprincipled and unfeeling wretch, by the way in which
he handled both our goods and money, as well as by his treatment of my
children, especially Joseph. He would compel him to travel miles at
a time on foot, notwithstanding he was still lame. We bore patiently
with his abuse, until we got about twenty miles west of Utica, when one
morning, as we were getting ready to continue our journey, my oldest
son came to me and said, "Mother, Mr. Howard has thrown the goods out
of the wagon, and is about starting off with the team." Upon hearing
this, I told him to call the man in. I met him in the bar-room, in the
presence of a large company of travelers, both male and female, and
I demanded his reason for the course which he was taking. He told me
the money which I had given him was all expended, and he could go no
further.

I then turned to those present and said, "Gentlemen and ladies, please
give your attention for a moment. Now, as sure as there is a God in
heaven, that team, as well as the goods, belong to my husband, and this
man intends to take them from me, or at least the team, leaving me
with eight children, without the means of proceeding on my journey."
Then turning to Mr. Howard, I said, "Sir, I now forbid you touching
the team, or driving it one step further. You can go about your own
business; I have no use for you. I shall take charge of the team
myself, and hereafter attend to my own affairs." I accordingly did so,
and proceeding on our journey, we in a short time arrived at Palmyra,
with a small portion of our effects, and barely two cents in cash.

When I again met my husband at Palmyra, we were much reduced--not from
indolence, but on account of many reverses of fortune, with which
our lives had been rather singularly marked. Notwithstanding our
misfortunes, and the embarrassments with which we were surrounded, I
was quite happy in once more having the society of my husband, and in
throwing myself and children upon the care and affection of a tender
companion and father.

We all now sat down, and counselled together relative to the course
which was best for us to adopt in our destitute circumstances, and we
came to the conclusion to unite our energies in endeavoring to obtain a
piece of land. Having done considerable at painting oil-cloth coverings
for tables, stands, etc., I set up the business, and did extremely
well. I furnished all the provisions for the family, and, besides this,
began to replenish our household furniture, in a very short time, by my
own exertions.

My husband and his sons, Alvin and Hyrum, set themselves to work to pay
for one hundred acres of land for which Mr. Smith contracted with a
land agent. In a year, we made nearly all of the first payment, erected
a log house, and commenced clearing. I believe something like thirty
acres of land were made ready for cultivation the first year.

I shall now deviate a little from my subject, in order to relate
another very singular dream which my husband had about this time, which
is as follows:--

    "I dreamed," said he, "that I was traveling on foot, and I was very
    sick, and so lame I could hardly walk. My guide, as usual, attended
    me. Traveling some time together, I became so lame that I thought
    I could go no further. I informed my guide of this, and asked him
    what I should do. He told me to travel on till I came to a certain
    garden. So I arose and started for this garden. While on my way
    thither, I asked my guide how I should know the place. He said,
    'Proceed until you come to a very large gate; open this, and you
    will see a garden, blooming with the most beautiful flowers that
    your eyes ever beheld, and there you shall be healed.' By limping
    along with great difficulty, I finally reached the gate; and, on
    entering it, I saw the before-mentioned garden, which was beautiful
    beyond description, being filled with the most delicate flowers of
    every kind and color. In the garden were walks about three and a
    half feet wide, which were set on both sides with marble stones.
    One of the walks ran from the gate through the centre of the
    garden; and on each side of this was a very richly carved seat, and
    on each seat were placed six wooden images, each of which was the
    size of a very large man. When I came to the first image on the
    right side, it arose and bowed to me with much deference. I then
    turned to the one which sat opposite me, on the left side, and it
    arose and bowed to me in the same manner as the first. I continued
    turning, first to the right and then to the left, until the whole
    twelve had made their obeisance, after which I was entirely healed.
    I then asked my guide the meaning of all this, but I awoke before I
    received an answer."

I will now return to the subject of the farm. When the time for making
the second payment drew nigh, Alvin went from home to get work, in
order to raise the money, and after much hardship and fatigue, returned
with the required amount. This payment being made, we felt relieved, as
this was the only thing that troubled us; for we had a snug log-house,
neatly furnished, and the means of living comfortably. It was now
only two years since we entered Palmyra, almost destitute of money,
property, or acquaintance. The hand of friendship was extended on every
side, and we blessed God, with our whole heart, for his "mercy, which
endureth for ever." And not only temporal blessings were bestowed upon
us, but also spiritual were administered. The Scripture, which saith,
"Your old men shall dream dreams," was fulfilled in the case of my
husband, for, about this time, he had another vision, which I shall
here relate; this, with one more, is all of his that I shall obtrude
upon the attention of my readers. He received two more visions, which
would probably be somewhat interesting, but I cannot remember them
distinctly enough to rehearse them in full. The following, which was
the sixth, ran thus:--

    "I thought I was walking alone; I was much fatigued, nevertheless I
    continued traveling. It seemed to me that I was going to meeting,
    that it was the day of judgment, and that I was going to be judged.

    "When I came in sight of the meeting-house, I saw multitudes of
    people coming from every direction, and pressing with great anxiety
    towards the door of this great building; but I thought I should
    get there in time, hence there was no need of being in a hurry.
    But, on arriving at the door, I found it shut; I knocked for
    admission, and was informed by the porter that I had come too late.
    I felt exceedingly troubled, and prayed earnestly for admittance.
    Presently I found that my flesh was perishing. I continued to pray,
    still my flesh withered upon my bones. I was in a state of almost
    total despair, when the porter asked me if I had done all that was
    necessary in order to receive admission. I replied, that I had
    done all that was in my power to do. 'Then,' observed the porter,
    'justice must be satisfied; after this, mercy hath her claims.'

    "It then occurred to me to call upon God, in the name of his Son
    Jesus; and I cried out, in the agony of my soul, 'Oh, Lord God, I
    beseech thee, in the name of Jesus Christ, to forgive my sins.'
    After which I felt considerably strengthened, and I began to amend.
    The porter or angel then remarked, that it was necessary to plead
    the merits of Jesus, for he was the advocate with the Father, and a
    Mediator between God and man.

    "I was now made quite whole, and the door was opened, but, on
    entering, I awoke."

The following spring, we commenced making preparations for building
another house, one that would be more comfortable for persons in
advanced life.



CHAPTER XVIII.

HISTORY OF JOSEPH THE PROPHET COMMENCES--SEVENTH VISION OF JOSEPH
SMITH, SENIOR.

I now come to the history of Joseph. By reference to the table (chap.
ix), you will find the date and place of his birth; beside which,
except what has already been said, I shall say nothing respecting him
until he arrived at the age of fourteen. However, in this I am aware
that some of my readers will be disappointed, for I suppose, from
questions which are frequently asked me, that it is thought by some
that I shall be likely to tell many very remarkable incidents which
attended his childhood; but, as nothing occurred during his early life,
except those trivial circumstances which are common to that state of
human existence, I pass them in silence.

At the age of fourteen, an incident occurred which alarmed us much,
as we knew not the cause of it. Joseph being a remarkably quiet,
well-disposed child, we did not suspect that any one had aught against
him. He was out one evening on an errand, and, on returning home, as he
was passing through the door-yard, a gun was fired across his pathway,
with the evident intention of shooting him. He sprang to the door much
frightened. We immediately went in search of the assassin, but could
find no trace of him that evening. The next morning we found his tracks
under a wagon, where he lay when he fired; and the following day we
found the balls, which were discharged from the gun, lodged in the
head and neck of a cow that was standing opposite the wagon in a dark
corner. We have not as yet discovered the man who made this attempt at
murder, neither can we discover the cause thereof.

I shall here insert the seventh vision that my husband had, which
vision was received in the year 1819. It was as follows:

    "I dreamed," said he, "that a man with a pedler's budget on his
    back, came in, and thus addressed me: 'Sir, will you trade with me
    to-day? I have now called upon you seven times, I have traded with
    you each time, and have always found you strictly honest in all
    your dealings. Your measures are always heaped, and your weights
    overbalance; and I have now come to tell you that this is the last
    time I shall ever call on you, and that there is but one thing
    which you lack, in order to secure your salvation.' As I earnestly
    desired to know what it was that I still lacked, I requested him to
    write the same upon paper. He said he would do so. I then sprang to
    get some paper, but, in my excitement, I awoke."

Shortly after my husband received the foregoing vision, there was a
great revival in religion, which extended to all the denominations of
Christians in the surrounding country in which we resided. Many of the
world's people, becoming concerned about the salvation of their souls,
came forward and presented themselves as seekers after religion. Most
of them were desirous of uniting with some church, but were not decided
as to the particular faith which they would adopt. When the numerous
meetings were about breaking up, and the candidates and the various
leading church members began to consult upon the subject of adopting
the candidates into some church or churches, as the case might be, a
dispute arose, and there was a great contention among them.

While these things were going forward, Joseph's mind became
considerably troubled with regard to religion; and the following
extract from his history will show, more clearly than I can express,
the state of his feelings, and the result of his reflections on this
occasion:--

    I was at this time in my fifteenth year. My father's family was
    proselyted to the Presbyterian faith, and four of them joined
    that church, namely, my mother Lucy, my brothers Hyrum and Samuel
    Harrison, and my sister Sophronia.

    During this time of great excitement, my mind was called up to
    serious reflection and great uneasiness; but though my feelings
    were deep, and often poignant, still I kept myself aloof from all
    those parties, though I attended their several meetings as often as
    occasion would permit. In process of time, my mind became somewhat
    partial to the Methodist sect, and I felt some desire to be united
    with them, but so great were the confusion and strife among the
    different denominations, that it was impossible for a person, young
    as I was, and so unacquainted with men and things, to come to any
    certain conclusion who was right and who was wrong. My mind at
    different times was greatly excited, the cry and tumult were so
    great and incessant. The Presbyterians were most decided against
    the Baptists and Methodists, and used all the powers of either
    reason or sophistry to prove their errors, or at least to make the
    people think they were in error. On the other hand, the Baptists
    and Methodists, in their turn, were equally zealous in endeavoring
    to establish their own tenets and disprove all others.

    In the midst of this war of words, and tumult of opinion, I often
    said to myself, What is to be done? Who, of all these parties,
    are right? or, are they all wrong together? If any one of them be
    right, which is it? and how shall I know it?

    While I was laboring under the extreme difficulties caused by the
    contests of these parties of religionists, I was one day reading in
    the epistle of James, first chapter and fifth verse, which reads,
    "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of God, that giveth to all
    men liberally, and upbraideth not, and it shall be given him."
    Never did any passage of Scripture come with more power to the
    heart of man than this did at this time to mine. It seemed to enter
    with great force into every feeling of my heart. I reflected on
    it again and again, knowing that if any person needed wisdom from
    God, I did, for how to act I did not know, and, unless I could get
    more wisdom than I then had, I would never know; for the teachers
    of religion of the different sects understood the same passages so
    differently, as to destroy all confidence in settling the question
    by an appeal to the Bible. At length I came to the conclusion, that
    I must either remain in darkness and confusion, or else I must do
    as James directs, that is, ask of God. I at length came to the
    determination to ask of God, concluding that if he gave wisdom to
    them that lacked wisdom, and would give liberally, and not upbraid,
    I might venture. So, in accordance with this my determination to
    ask of God, I retired to the woods to make the attempt. It was on
    the morning of a beautiful, clear day, early in the spring of 1820.
    It was the first time in my life that I had made such an attempt;
    for amidst all my anxieties I had never as yet made the attempt
    to pray vocally. After I had retired into the place where I had
    previously designed to go, having looked around me, and finding
    myself alone, I kneeled down and began to offer up the desires of
    my heart to God. I had scarcely done so, when immediately I was
    seized upon by some power which entirely overcame me, and had such
    an astonishing influence over me as to bind my tongue, so that I
    could not speak. Thick darkness gathered around me, and it seemed
    to me for a time as if I were doomed to sudden destruction. But
    exerting all my powers to call upon God, to deliver me out of the
    power of this enemy which had seized upon me, and at the very
    moment when I was ready to sink into despair, and abandon myself
    to destruction--not to an imaginary ruin, but to the power of some
    actual being from the unseen world, who had such a marvelous power
    as I had never before felt in any being; just at this moment of
    great alarm, I saw a pillar of light exactly over my head, above
    the brightness of the sun, which descended gradually until it fell
    upon me. It no sooner appeared, than I found myself delivered from
    the enemy which held me bound. When the light rested upon me, I saw
    two personages, whose brightness and glory defy all description,
    standing above me in the air. One of them spake unto me, calling me
    by name, and said pointing to the other, "This is my beloved Son;
    hear him!"

    My object in going to enquire of the Lord, was to know which of
    all these sects was right, that I might know which to join. No
    sooner, therefore, did I get possession of myself, so as to be
    able to speak, than I asked the personages who stood above me in
    the light, which of all the sects was right--and which I should
    join. I was answered that I must join none of them, for they were
    all wrong; and the personage who addressed me said that all their
    creeds were an abomination in his sight; that those professors
    were all corrupt; that "they draw near to me with their lips,
    but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the
    commandments of men, having a form of godliness, but they deny
    the power thereof." He again forbade me to join with any of them;
    and many other things did he say unto me which I cannot write at
    this time. When I came to myself again, I found myself lying on my
    back, looking up into heaven. When the light had departed, I had no
    strength; but soon recovering in some degree, I went home. And as
    I leaned up to the fireplace, mother enquired what the matter was.
    I replied, "Never mind, all is well--I am well enough off." I then
    said to my mother, "I have learned for myself that Presbyterianism
    is not true." It seems as though the adversary was aware, at a very
    early period of my life, that I was destined to prove a disturber
    and an annoyer of his kingdom; else why should the powers of
    darkness combine against me? Why the opposition and persecution
    that arose against me, almost in my infancy?

    Some few days after I had this vision, I happened to be in company
    with one of the Methodist preachers who was very active in the
    before-mentioned religious excitement, and conversing with him upon
    the subject of religion, I took occasion to give him an account
    of the vision which I had had. I was greatly surprised at his
    behavior: he treated my communication not only lightly, but with
    great contempt, saying it was all of the devil; that there was
    no such thing as visions or revelations in these days; that all
    such things had ceased with the apostles, and that there would
    never be any more of them. I soon found, however, that my telling
    the story had excited a great deal of prejudice against me among
    professors of religion, and was the cause of great persecution,
    which continued to increase; and though I was an obscure boy, only
    between fourteen and fifteen years of age, and my circumstances
    in life such as to make a boy of no consequence in the world, yet
    men of high standing would take notice sufficient to excite the
    public mind against me and create a bitter persecution; and this
    was common among all the sects--all united to persecute me. It
    caused me serious reflection, then, and often has since, how very
    strange it was that an obscure boy, of a little over fourteen years
    of age--and one, too, who was doomed to the necessity of obtaining
    a scanty maintenance by his daily labors, should be thought a
    character of sufficient importance to attract the attention of
    the great ones of the most popular sects of the day, in a manner
    to create in them a spirit of the most bitter persecution and
    reviling. But strange or not, so it was, and it was often the cause
    of great sorrow to myself. However, it was, nevertheless, a fact
    that I had beheld a vision. I have thought since, that I felt much
    like Paul when he made his defense before King Agrippa, and related
    the account of the vision he had when he "saw a light and heard a
    voice;" but still there were but few who believed him. Some said
    he was dishonest, others said he was mad, and he was ridiculed and
    reviled; but all this did not destroy the reality of his vision.
    He had seen a vision--he knew he had--and all the persecution
    under heaven could not make it otherwise; and though they should
    persecute him unto death, yet he knew, and would know to his latest
    breath, that he had both seen a light and heard a voice speaking
    unto him, and all the world could not make him think or believe
    otherwise. So it was with me. I had actually seen a light, and in
    the midst of that light I saw two personages, and they did in
    reality speak to me; and though I was hated and persecuted for
    saying that I had seen a vision, yet it was true; and while they
    were persecuting me, reviling me, and speaking all manner of evil
    against me falsely, for so saying, I was led to say in my heart,
    Why persecute for telling the truth? I have actually seen a vision;
    and who am I that I can withstand God? or why does the world think
    to make me deny what I have actually seen? for I had seen a vision.
    I knew it, and I knew that God knew it; and I could not deny it,
    neither dared I do it--at least, I knew that by so doing I would
    offend God, and come under condemnation.--_Times and Seasons_, vol.
    iii, p. 727; _Supp. to Mill. Star_, vol. xiv, p. 2; _History of the
    Church_, vol. i, pp. 3-8.

From this time until the twenty-first of September, 1823, Joseph
continued, as usual, to labor with his father, and nothing during
this interval occurred of very great importance--though he suffered
every kind of opposition and persecution from the different orders of
religionists.

On the evening of the twenty-first of September, he retired to his bed
in quite a serious and contemplative state of mind. He shortly betook
himself to prayer and supplication to Almighty God, for a manifestation
of his standing before him, and while thus engaged he received the
following vision:

    While I was thus in the act of calling upon God, I discovered a
    light appearing in my room, which continued to increase until the
    room was lighter than at noon-day, when immediately a personage
    appeared at my bed-side, standing in the air, for his feet did
    not touch the floor. He had on a loose robe of most exquisite
    whiteness. It was a whiteness beyond anything earthly I had ever
    seen, nor do I believe that any earthly thing could be made to
    appear so exceedingly white and brilliant. His hands were naked,
    and his arms also, a little above the wrist; so also were his
    feet naked, as were his legs a little above the ankles. His head
    and neck were also bare. I could discover that he had no other
    clothing on but this robe, as it was open, so that I could see
    into his bosom. Not only was his robe exceedingly white, but his
    whole person was glorious beyond description, and his countenance
    truly like lightning. The room was exceedingly light, but not so
    very bright as immediately around his person. When I first looked
    upon him I was afraid, but the fear soon left me. He called me
    by name, and said unto me that he was a messenger sent from the
    presence of God to me, and that his name was Moroni; that God had
    a work for me to do, and that my name should be had for good and
    evil among all nations, kindreds, and tongues; or that it should be
    both good and evil spoken of among all people. He said there was a
    book deposited, written upon gold plates, giving an account of the
    former inhabitants of this continent, and the source from whence
    they sprang. He also said that the fullness of the everlasting
    gospel was contained in it, as delivered by the Savior to the
    ancient inhabitants. Also, that there were two stones in silver
    bows, and these stones fastened to a breastplate, constituted what
    is called the Urim and Thummim, deposited with the plates; and the
    possession and use of these stones were what constituted seers in
    ancient or former times; and that God had prepared them for the
    purpose of translating the book. After telling me these things, he
    commenced quoting the prophecies of the Old Testament. He first
    quoted part of the third chapter of Malachi; and he quoted also the
    fourth or last chapter of the same prophecy, though with a little
    variation from the way it reads in our Bibles. Instead of quoting
    the first verse as it reads in our books, he quoted it thus: "For
    behold the day cometh that shall burn as an oven; and all the
    proud, yea, and all who do wickedly, shall burn as stubble, for
    they that come shall burn them, saith the Lord of Hosts, that it
    shall leave them neither root nor branch." And again he quoted the
    fifth verse thus: "Behold, I will reveal unto you the priesthood
    by the hand of Elijah the prophet, before the coming of the great
    and dreadful day of the Lord." He also quoted the next verse
    differently: "And he shall plant in the hearts of the children the
    promises made to the fathers, and the hearts of the children shall
    turn to their fathers; if it were not so, the whole earth would
    be utterly wasted at his coming." In addition to these, he quoted
    the eleventh chapter of Isaiah, saying that it was about to be
    fulfilled. He quoted also the third chapter of Acts, twenty-second
    and twenty-third verses, precisely as they stand in our New
    Testament. He said that that Prophet was Christ, but the day had
    not yet come "when they who would not hear his voice should be cut
    off from among the people," but soon would come. He also quoted the
    second chapter of Joel, from the twenty-eighth verse to the last.
    He also said that this was not yet fulfilled, but was soon to be.
    And he further stated the fullness of the Gentiles was soon to come
    in. He quoted many other passages of Scripture, and offered many
    explanations which cannot be mentioned here. Again, he told me that
    when I got those plates of which he had spoken, (for the time that
    they should be obtained was not then fulfilled,) I should not show
    them to any person, neither the breastplate, with the Urim and
    Thummim, only to those to whom I should be commanded to show them:
    if I did I should be destroyed. While he was conversing with me
    about the plates, the vision was opened to my mind that I could see
    the place where the plates were deposited, and that so clearly and
    distinctly, that I knew the place again when I visited it.

    After this communication, I saw the light in the room begin to
    gather immediately around the person of him who had been speaking
    to me, and it continued to do so until the room was again left
    dark, except just around him; when instantly I saw, as it were, a
    conduit open right up into heaven, and he ascended till he entirely
    disappeared, and the room was left as it had been before this
    heavenly light made its appearance.

    I lay musing on the singularity of the scene, and marveling
    greatly at what had been told to me by this extraordinary
    messenger, when, in the midst of my meditation, I suddenly
    discovered that my room was again beginning to get lighted, and, in
    an instant, as it were, the same heavenly messenger was again by
    my bed-side. He commenced, and again related the very same things
    which he had done at his first visit, without the least variation,
    which having done, he informed me of great judgments which were
    coming upon the earth, with great desolations by famine, sword, and
    pestilence: and that these grievous judgments would come on the
    earth in this generation. Having related these things, he again
    ascended as he had done before.--_Times and Seasons_, vol. iii, p.
    729; Supplement to _Millennial Star_, vol. xiv, p. 4; _History of
    the Church_, vol. i, pp. 11-14.

When the angel ascended the second time, he left Joseph overwhelmed
with astonishment, yet gave him but a short time to contemplate the
things which he had told him before he made his reappearance, and
rehearsed the same things over, adding a few words of caution and
instruction, thus: that he must beware of covetousness, and he must not
suppose the record was to be brought forth with the view of getting
gain, for this was not the case, but that it was to bring forth light
and intelligence, which had for a long time been lost to the world; and
that when he went to get the plates, he must be on his guard, or his
mind would be filled with darkness. The angel then told him to tell his
father all which he had both seen and heard.



CHAPTER XIX.

THE ANGEL VISITS JOSEPH AGAIN--JOSEPH TELLS HIS FATHER WHAT HE HAS
SEEN AND HEARD--HE IS PERMITTED TO BEHOLD THE PLATES--RECEIVES FURTHER
INSTRUCTIONS--COMMUNICATES THE SAME TO THE FAMILY--TAKES THE PLATES
INTO HIS HANDS--THEY ARE TAKEN FROM HIM, AND HE IS REPROVED--HIS
DISAPPOINTMENT.

The next day, my husband, Alvin, and Joseph, were reaping together in
the field, and as they were reaping, Joseph stopped quite suddenly,
and seemed to be in a very deep study. Alvin, observing it, hurried
him, saying, "We must not slacken our hands or we will not be able to
complete our task." Upon this Joseph went to work again, and after
laboring a short time, he stopped just as he had done before. This
being quite unusual and strange, it attracted the attention of his
father, upon which he discovered that Joseph was very pale. My husband,
supposing that he was sick, told him to go to the house, and have his
mother doctor him. He accordingly ceased his work, and started, but on
coming to a beautiful green, under an apple tree, he stopped and lay
down, for he was so weak he could proceed no further. He was here but a
short time, when the messenger whom he saw the previous night, visited
him again, and the first thing he said was, "Why did you not tell your
father that which I commanded you to tell him?" Joseph replied, "I was
afraid my father would not believe me." The angel rejoined, "He will
believe every word you say to him."

Joseph then promised the angel that he would do as he had been
commanded. Upon this, the messenger departed, and Joseph returned
to the field, where he had left my husband and Alvin; but when he
got there, his father had just gone to the house, as he was somewhat
unwell. Joseph then desired Alvin to go straightway and see his father,
and inform him that he had something of great importance to communicate
to him, and that he wanted him to come out into the field where they
were at work. Alvin did as he was requested, and when my husband got
there, Joseph related to him all that had passed between him and the
angel the previous night and that morning. Having heard this account,
his father charged him not to fail in attending strictly to the
instruction which he had received from this heavenly messenger.

Soon after Joseph had this conversation with his father, he repaired to
the place where the plates were deposited, which place he describes as
follows:--

    "Convenient to the village of Manchester, Ontario Co., New York,
    stands a hill of considerable size, and the most elevated of any in
    the neighborhood. On the west side of this hill, not far from the
    top, under a stone of considerable size, lay the plates, deposited
    in a stone box. This stone was thick and rounding in the middle, on
    the upper side, and thinner towards the edges, so that the middle
    part of it was visible above the ground; but the edge all round was
    covered with earth.

    "Having removed the earth, I obtained a lever, which I got fixed
    under the edge of the stone, and with a little exertion raised
    it up. I looked in, and there, indeed, did I behold the plates!
    the Urim and Thummim, and the breast-plate, as stated by the
    messenger."--_Times and Seasons_ vol. iii, p. 729; _Supp. to
    Millennial Star_, vol. xiv, p. 5; _History of the Church_, pp. 15,
    16.

While Joseph remained here, the angel showed him, by contrast, the
difference between good and evil, and likewise the consequences of
both obedience and disobedience to the commandments of God, in such a
striking manner, that the impression was always vivid in his memory
until the very end of his days; and in giving a relation of this
circumstance, not long prior to his death, he remarked, that "ever
afterwards he was willing to keep the commandments of God."

Furthermore, the angel told him, at the interview mentioned last, that
the time had not yet come for the plates to be brought forth to the
world; that he could not take them from the place wherein they were
deposited until he had learned to keep the commandments of God--not
only till he was willing but able to do it. The angel bade Joseph come
to this place every year, at the same time of the year, and he would
meet him there and give him further instructions.

The ensuing evening, when the family were altogether, Joseph made known
to them all that he had communicated to his father in the field, and
also of his finding the record, as well as what passed between him and
the angel while he was at the place where the plates were deposited.

Sitting up late that evening, in order to converse upon these things,
together with over-exertion of mind, had much fatigued Joseph; and when
Alvin observed it, he said, "Now, brother, let us go to bed, and rise
early in the morning, in order to finish our day's work at an hour
before sunset, then, if mother will get our suppers early, we will
have a fine long evening, and we will all sit down for the purpose
of listening to you while you tell us the great things which God has
revealed to you."

Accordingly, by sunset the next day, we were all seated, and Joseph
commenced telling us the great and glorious things which God had
manifested to him; but, before proceeding, he charged us not to mention
out of the family that which he was about to say to us, as the world
was so wicked that when they came to a knowledge of these things they
would try to take our lives; and that when we should obtain the plates,
our names would be cast out as evil by all people. Hence the necessity
of suppressing these things as much as possible, until the time should
come for them to go forth to the world.

After giving us this charge, he proceeded to relate further particulars
concerning the work which he was appointed to do, and we received them
joyfully, never mentioning them except among ourselves, agreeable to
the instructions which we had received from him.

From this time forth, Joseph continued to receive instructions from
the Lord, and we continued to get the children together every evening,
for the purpose of listening while he gave us a relation of the same.
I presume our family presented an aspect as singular as any that ever
lived upon the face of the earth--all seated in a circle, father,
mother, sons and daughters, and giving the most profound attention to
a boy, eighteen years of age, who had never read the Bible through in
his life: he seemed much less inclined to the perusal of books than any
of the rest of our children, but far more given to meditation and deep
study.

We were now confirmed in the opinion that God was about to bring to
light something upon which we could stay our minds, or that would give
us a more perfect knowledge of the plan of salvation and the redemption
of the human family. This caused us greatly to rejoice, the sweetest
union and happiness pervaded our house, and tranquility reigned in our
midst.

During our evening conversations, Joseph would occasionally give us
some of the most amusing recitals that could be imagined. He would
describe the ancient inhabitants of this continent, their dress, mode
of traveling, and the animals upon which they rode; their cities, their
buildings, with every particular; their mode of warfare; and also their
religious worship. This he would do with as much ease, seemingly, as if
he had spent his whole life among them.

On the twenty-second of September, 1824, Joseph again visited the place
where he found the plates the year previous; and supposing at this
time that the only thing required, in order to possess them until the
time for their translation, was to be able to keep the commandments
of God--and he firmly believed he could keep every commandment which
had been given him--he fully expected to carry them home with him.
Therefore, having arrived at the place, and uncovering the plates, he
put forth his hand and took them up, but, as he was taking them hence,
the unhappy thought darted through his mind that probably there was
something else in the box besides the plates, which would be of some
pecuniary advantage to him. So, in the moment of excitement, he laid
them down very carefully, for the purpose of covering the box, lest
some one might happen to pass that way and get whatever there might be
remaining in it. After covering it, he turned round to take the Record
again, but behold it was gone, and where, he knew not, neither did he
know the means by which it had been taken from him.

At this, as a natural consequence, he was much alarmed. He kneeled down
and asked the Lord why the Record had been taken from him; upon which
the angel of the Lord appeared to him, and told him that he had not
done as he had been commanded, for in a former revelation he had been
commanded not to lay the plates down, or put them for a moment out of
his hands, until he got into the house and deposited them in a chest or
trunk, having a good lock and key, and, contrary to this, he had laid
them down with the view of securing some fancied or imaginary treasure
that remained.

In the moment of excitement, Joseph was overcome by the powers of
darkness, and forgot the injunction that was laid upon him.

Having some further conversation with the angel, on this occasion,
Joseph was permitted to raise the stone again, when he beheld the
plates as he had done before. He immediately reached forth his hand
to take them, but instead of getting them, as he anticipated, he was
hurled back upon the ground with great violence. When he recovered, the
angel was gone, and he arose and returned to the house, weeping for
grief and disappointment.

As he was aware that we would expect him to bring the plates home with
him, he was greatly troubled, fearing that we might doubt his having
seen them. As soon as he entered the house, my husband asked him if he
had obtained the plates. The answer was, "No, father, I could not get
them."

His father then said, "Did you see them?"

"Yes," replied Joseph, "I saw them, but could not take them."

"I would have taken them," rejoined his father, with much earnestness,
"if I had been in your place."

"Why," returned Joseph, in quite a subdued tone, "you do not know what
you say. I could not get them, for the angel of the Lord would not let
me."

Joseph then related the circumstance in full, which gave us much
uneasiness, as we were afraid that he might utterly fail of obtaining
the Record through some neglect on his part. We, therefore, doubled our
diligence in prayer and supplication to God, in order that he might be
more fully instructed in his duty, and be preserved from all the wiles
and machinations of him "who lieth in wait to deceive."

We were still making arrangements to build us a comfortable house, the
management and control of which devolved chiefly upon Alvin. And when
November, 1824, arrived, the frame was raised, and all the materials
necessary for its speedy completion were procured. This opened to
Alvin's mind the pleasing prospect of seeing his father and mother once
more comfortable and happy. He would say, "I am going to have a nice,
pleasant room for father and mother to sit in, and everything arranged
for their comfort, and they shall not work any more as they have done."



CHAPTER XX.

ALVIN'S SICKNESS AND DEATH.

On the 15th of November, 1824, about 10 o'clock in the morning,
Alvin was taken very sick with the bilious colic. He came to the
house in much distress, and requested his father to go immediately
for a physician. He accordingly went, obtaining one by the name of
Greenwood, who, on arriving, immediately administered to the patient
a heavy dose of calomel. I will here notice, that this Dr. Greenwood
was not the physician commonly employed by the family; he was brought
in consequence of the family physician's absence. And on this account,
as I suppose, Alvin at first refused to take the medicine, but by much
persuasion, he was prevailed on to do so.

This dose of calomel lodged in his stomach, and all the medicine
afterwards freely administered by four very skillful physicians could
not remove it.

On the third day of his sickness, Dr. M'Intyre, whose services were
usually employed by the family, as he was considered very skillful, was
brought, and with him four other eminent physicians. But it was all in
vain, their exertions proved unavailing, just as Alvin had said would
be the case--he told them the calomel was still lodged in the same
place, after some exertion had been made to carry it off, and that it
must take his life.

On coming to this conclusion, he called Hyrum to him, and said, "Hyrum,
I must die. Now I want to say a few things, which I wish to have you
remember. I have done all I could to make our dear parents comfortable.
I want you to go on and finish the house and take care of them in their
old age, and do not any more let them work hard, as they are now in old
age."

He then called Sophronia to him, and said to her, "Sophronia, you must
be a good girl, and do all you can for father and mother--never forsake
them; they have worked hard, and they are now getting old. Be kind to
them, and remember what they have done for us."

In the latter part of the fourth night he called for all the children,
and exhorted them separately in the same strain as above. But when he
came to Joseph, he said, "I am now going to die, the distress which I
suffer, and the feelings that I have, tell me my time is very short. I
want you to be a good boy, and do everything that lies in your power to
obtain the Record. Be faithful in receiving instruction, and in keeping
every commandment that is given you. Your brother Alvin must leave you;
but remember the example which he has set for you; and set the same
example for the children that are younger than yourself, and always be
kind to father and mother."

He then asked me to take my little daughter Lucy up, and bring her to
him, for he wished to see her. He was always very fond of her, and was
in the habit of taking her up and caressing her, which naturally formed
a very strong attachment on her part for him. I went to her, and said;
"Lucy, Alvin wants to see you." At this, she started from her sleep,
and screamed out, "Amby, Amby;" (she could not yet talk plain, being
very young). We took her to him, and when she got within reach of him,
she sprang from my arms and caught him around the neck, and cried out,
"Oh! Amby," and kissed him again and again.

"Lucy," said he, "you must be the best girl in the world, and take
care of mother; you can't have your Amby any more. Amby is going away;
he must leave little Lucy." He then kissed her, and said, "take her
away, I think my breath offends her." We took hold of her to take her
away; but she clinched him with such a strong grasp, that it was with
difficulty we succeeded in disengaging her hands.

As I turned with the child to leave him, he said, "Father, mother,
brothers, and sisters, farewell! I can now breathe out my life as
calmly as a clock." Saying this, he immediately closed his eyes in
death.

The child still cried to go back to Alvin. One present observed to
the child, "Alvin is gone; an angel has taken his spirit to heaven."
Hearing this, the child renewed her cries, and, as I bent over his
corpse with her in my arms, she again threw her arms around him, and
kissed him repeatedly. And until the body was taken from the house she
continued to cry, and to manifest such mingled feelings of both terror
and affection at the scene before her, as are seldom witnessed.

Alvin was a youth of singular goodness of disposition--kind and
amiable, so that lamentation and mourning filled the whole neighborhood
in which he resided.

By the request of the principal physician, Alvin was cut open, in order
to discover, if it were possible, the cause of his death. On doing
so, they found the calomel lodged in the upper bowels, untouched by
anything which he had taken to remove it, and as near as possible in
its natural state, surrounded as it was with gangrene.

A vast concourse of people attended his obsequies, who seemed very
anxious to show their sympathy for us in our bereavement.

Alvin manifested, if such could be the case, greater zeal and anxiety
in regard to the Record that had been shown to Joseph, than any of the
rest of the family; in consequence of which we could not bear to hear
anything said upon the subject. Whenever Joseph spoke of the Record,
it would immediately bring Alvin to our minds, with all his zeal, and
with all' his kindness; and, when we looked to his place, and realized
that he was gone from it, to return no more in this life, we all with
one accord wept over our irretrievable loss, and we could "not be
comforted, because he was not."



CHAPTER XXI.

RELIGIOUS EXCITEMENT--JOSEPH'S PROPHECY--HE WORKS FOR MR.
STOAL--BECOMES ACQUAINTED WITH EMMA HALE.

Shortly after the death of Alvin, a man commenced laboring in the
neighborhood, to effect a union of the different churches, in order
that all might be agreed, and thus worship God with one heart and with
one mind.

This seemed about right to me, and I felt much inclined to join in with
them; in fact, the most of the family appeared quite disposed to unite
with their numbers; but Joseph, from the first, utterly refused even to
attend their meetings, saying, "Mother, I do not wish to prevent your
going to meeting, or any of the rest of the family's; or your joining
any church you please; but, do not ask me to join them. I can take my
Bible, and go into the woods, and learn more in two hours, than you can
learn at meeting in two years, if you should go all the time."

To gratify me, my husband attended some two or three meetings, but
peremptorily refused going any more, either for my gratification, or
any other person's.

During this excitement, Joseph would say, it would do us no injury to
join them, that if we did, we should not continue with them long, for
we were mistaken in them, and did not know the wickedness of their
hearts. One day he said, that he would give us an example, and that we
might set it down as a prophecy; viz:--

    "You look at Deacon Jessup," said he, "and you hear him talk very
    piously. Well, you think he is a very good man. Now suppose that
    one of his poor neighbors should owe him the value of a cow, and
    that this poor man had eight little children; moreover, that he
    should be taken sick and die, leaving his wife with one cow,
    but destitute of every other means of supporting herself and
    family--now I tell you, that Deacon Jessup, religious as he is,
    would not scruple to take the last cow from the poor widow and
    orphans, in order to secure the debt, notwithstanding he himself
    has an abundance of everything."

At that time, this seemed impossible to us, yet one year had scarcely
expired when we saw Joseph's prophecy literally fulfilled.

The shock occasioned by Alvin's death, in a short time passed off, and
we resumed our usual avocations with considerable interest. The first
move towards business, was to complete the house before mentioned.
This we did as speedily as possible, and, when it was finished, Mr.
Stoddard, the principal workman, offered for it the sum of fifteen
hundred dollars; but my husband refused his offer as he was unwilling
to leave the scene of our labor where we had fondly anticipated
spending the remainder of our days.

A short time before the house was completed, a man, by the name of
Josiah Stoal, came from Chenango county, New York, with the view of
getting Joseph to assist him in digging for a silver mine.[A] He came
for Joseph on account of having heard that he possessed certain means,
by which he could discern things invisible to the natural eye.

[Footnote A: This project of Stoal's was undertaken from this
cause--an old document had fallen into his possession, in some way or
other, containing information of silver mines being somewhere in the
neighborhood in which he resided.]

Joseph endeavored to divert him from his vain pursuit, but he was
inflexible in his purpose, and offered high wages to those who would
dig for him, in search of said mine, and still insisted upon having
Joseph to work for him. Accordingly, Joseph and several others,
returned with him and commenced digging. After laboring for the old
gentleman about a month, without success, Joseph prevailed upon him
to cease his operations; and it was from this circumstance of having
worked by the month, at digging for a silver mine, that the very
prevalent story arose of Joseph's having been a money digger.

While Joseph was in the employ of Mr. Stoal, he boarded a short time
with one Isaac Hale, and it was during this interval, that Joseph
became acquainted with his daughter, Miss Emma Hale, to whom he
immediately commenced paying his addresses, and was subsequently
married.

When Mr. Stoal relinquished his project of digging for silver, Joseph
returned to his father's house.

Soon after his return, we received intelligence of the arrival of a
new agent for the Everson land, of which our farm was a portion. This
reminded us of the last payment, which was still due, and which must be
made before we could obtain a deed of the place.

Shortly after this, a couple of gentlemen, one of whom was the
before-named Stoal, the other a Mr. Knight, came into the neighborhood
for the purpose of procuring a quantity of either wheat or flour; and
we, having sown considerable wheat, made a contract with them, in which
we agreed to deliver a certain quantity of flour to them the ensuing
fall, for which we were to receive a sufficient amount of money to make
the final payment on our farm. This being done, my husband sent Hyrum
to Canandaigua to inform the new agent of the fact, namely, that the
money should be forthcoming as soon as the twenty-fifth of December,
1825. This, the agent said, would answer the purpose, and he agreed to
retain the land until that time. Having thus, as we supposed, made all
secure pertaining to the land, we gave ourselves no further uneasiness
in regard to the matter.

When the time had nearly arrived for the last payment to be made, and
when my husband was about starting for Mr. Stoal's and Mr. Knight's,
in order to get the money to make the same, Joseph called my husband
and myself aside, and said, "I have been very lonely ever since
Alvin died, and I have concluded to get married; and if you have no
objections to my uniting myself in marriage with Miss Emma Hale, she
would be my choice in preference to any other woman I have ever seen."
We were pleased with his choice, and not only consented to his marrying
her, but requested him to bring her home with him, and live with us.
Accordingly, he set out with his father for Pennsylvania.



CHAPTER XXII.

JOSEPH SMITH, SEN., LOSES HIS FARM--JOSEPH, JUN., IS MARRIED--HAS
ANOTHER INTERVIEW WITH THE ANGEL, BY WHOM HE IS CHASTISED--RECEIVES
FURTHER INSTRUCTIONS.

A few days subsequent to my husband's departure, I set myself to work
to put my house in order for the reception of my son's bride; and I
felt all that pride and ambition in doing so, that is common to mothers
upon such occasions.

My oldest son had, previous to this, formed a matrimonial relation
with one of the most excellent of women, with whom I had seen
much enjoyment, and I hoped for as much happiness with my second
daughter-in-law, as I had received from the society of the first, and
there was no reason why I should expect anything to the contrary.

One afternoon, after having completed my arrangements, I fell into a
very agreeable train of reflections. The day was exceedingly fine, and
of itself calculated to produce fine feelings; besides this, every
other circumstance seemed to be in unison, and to contribute to raise
in the heart those soothing and grateful emotions which we all have
seasons of enjoying when the mind is at rest. Thus, as I stood musing,
among other things, upon the prospect of a quiet and comfortable old
age, my attention was suddenly arrested by a trio of strangers who were
just entering. Upon their near approach I found one of these gentlemen
to be Mr. Stoddard, the principal carpenter in building the house in
which we then lived.

When they entered the house, I seated them, and commenced common-place
conversation. But shortly one of them began to ask questions which I
considered rather impertinent--questions concerning our making the
last payment on the place; and if we did not wish to sell the house;
furthermore, where Mr. Smith and my son had gone, etc., etc.

"Sell the house!" I replied, "No, sir, we have no occasion for that, we
have made every necessary arrangement to get the deed, and also have an
understanding with the agent. So you see we are quite secure, in regard
to this matter."

To this they made no answer, but went out to meet Hyrum, who was
approaching the house. They asked him the same questions, and he
answered them the same as I had done. When they had experimented in
this way, to their satisfaction, they proceeded to inform my son, that
he need put himself to no further trouble with regard to the farm;
"for," said they, "we have bought the place, and paid for it, and we
now forbid your touching anything on the farm; and we also warn you to
leave forthwith, and give possession to the lawful owners."

This conversation passed within my hearing. When they reentered the
house, I said, "Hyrum, is it a reality? or only a sham to startle
us?" But one collected look at the men convinced me of their fiendish
determination--I was overcome, and fell back into my chair almost
deprived of sensibility.

When I recovered, we (Hyrum and myself) talked to them some time,
endeavoring to persuade them to change their wicked course; but the
only answer we could get from them was, "Well, we've got the place, and
d--n you, help yourselves if you can."

Hyrum, in a short time, went to an old friend, Dr. Robinson, and
related to him the grievous story. Whereupon, the old gentleman sat
down, and wrote at some considerable length the character of the
family--our industry, and faithful exertions to secure a home, with
many commendations calculated to beget confidence in us with respect to
business transactions. And, keeping this writing in his own hands, he
went through the village, and in an hour procured sixty subscribers. He
then sent the same, by the hand of Hyrum, to the land agent, who lived
in Canandaigua.

On receiving this, the agent was highly enraged. He said the men had
told him that Mr. Smith and his son Joseph had run away, and that Hyrum
was cutting down the sugar orchard, hauling off the rails, burning
them, and doing all manner of mischief to the farm. That, believing
this statement, he was induced to sell the place, for which he had
given a deed, and received the money.

Hyrum told him the circumstances under which his father and brother had
left home; also the probability of their being detained on the road, to
attend to some business. Upon this, the agent directed him to address
a number of letters to my husband, and have them sent and deposited
in public-houses on the road which he traveled, that, perchance
some of them might meet his eye, and thus cause him to return more
speedily than he would otherwise. He then despatched a messenger to
those individuals to whom he had given a deed of the farm in question,
with the view of making a compromise with them; but they refused to
do anything respecting the matter. The agent sent a message to them,
stating that if they did not make their appearance forthwith, he would
fetch them with a warrant. To this they gave heed, and they came
without delay.

The agent strove to convince them of the disgraceful and impolitic
course which they were pursuing, and endeavored to persuade them to
retract, and let the land go back into Mr. Smith's hands again.

For some time they said but little, except in a sneering and taunting
way, about as follows:--"We've got the land, sir, and we've got the
deed, so just let Smith help himself. Oh, no matter about Smith, he
has gold plates, gold Bibles, he is rich--he don't want anything." But
finally, they agreed, if Hyrum could raise them one thousand dollars,
by Saturday at ten o'clock in the evening, they would give up the deed.

It was now Thursday about noon, and Hyrum was at Canandaigua, which
was nine miles distant from home, and hither he must ride before he
could make the first move towards raising the required amount. He
came home with a heavy heart. When he arrived, he found his father,
who had returned a short time before him. His father had fortunately
found, within fifty miles of home, one of those letters which Hyrum had
written.

The following day, by the request of my husband, I went to see an old
Quaker, a gentleman with whom we had been quite intimate since our
commencement on the farm, and who had always seemed to admire the
neat arrangement of the same. We hoped that he would be both able and
willing to purchase the place, that we might at least have the benefit
of the crops that were upon the ground, as he was a friend and would be
disposed to show us favor. But we were disappointed, not in his will or
disposition, but in his ability. He had just paid out to the land agent
all the money he could spare, to redeem a piece of land belonging to
a friend in his immediate neighborhood. If I had arrived at his house
thirty minutes sooner, I would have found him with fifteen hundred
dollars in his pocket.

When I rehearsed to him what had taken place, he was much distressed
for us, and very much regretted his inability to relieve our necessity.
He said, however, "If I have no money, I will try to do something for
you, and you may say to your husband, that I will see him as soon as I
can, and let him know what the prospect is."

It was nearly night--the country was new, and my road lay through a
dense forest. The distance that I had to travel was ten miles, and that
alone, yet I hastened to inform my husband of the disappointment that I
had met with.

The old gentleman, as soon as I left, started in search of some one
that could afford us assistance, and hearing of a Mr. Durfee, who lived
four miles distant, he came the same night, and directed us to go and
see what he could devise for our benefit.

Accordingly, my husband started without delay for Mr. Durfee's, and
arrived at his house before daylight in the morning. He sent my
husband three miles further, to one of his sons, who was high sheriff,
instructing him to say to the young man that his father wished to see
him as soon as possible. Mr. Durfee, the younger, was obedient to the
call. Immediately after he arrived at his father's, the three proceeded
together to see the farm, and arrived about ten o'clock a. m. They
tarried a short time, then rode on to see the agent and those villains
who held the deed of our place.

The anxiety of mind that I suffered that day can more easily be
imagined than described. I now looked upon the proceeds of our
industry, which smiled around us on every hand, with a kind of yearning
attachment that I never before had experienced; and our early losses I
did not feel so keenly, for I then realized that we were young, and by
making some exertions we might improve our circumstances; besides, I
had not felt the inconveniences of poverty as I had since.

My husband, and the Messrs. Durfee, arrived in Canandaigua at half
past nine o'clock in the evening. The agent sent immediately for Mr.
Stoddard and his friends, and they came without delay; but in order to
make difficulty, they contended that it was after ten o'clock; however,
not being able to sustain themselves upon this ground, they handed over
the deed to Mr. Durfee, the high sheriff, who now became the possessor
of the farm.

I stated before, that at the time Mr. Smith started to see Knight and
Stoal, Joseph accompanied him. When he returned, Joseph also returned
with him, and remained with us, until the difficulty about the farm
came to an issue; he then took leave for Pennsylvania, on the same
business as before mentioned, and the next January returned with his
wife, in good health and fine spirits.

Not long subsequent to his return, my husband had occasion to send him
to Manchester, on business. As he set off early in the day, we expected
him home at most by six o'clock in the evening, but when six o'clock
came, he did not arrive. We always had a peculiar anxiety about him
whenever he was absent, for it seemed as though something was always
taking place to jeopardize his life. But to return. He did not get
home till the night was far spent. On coming in, he threw himself
into a chair, apparently much exhausted. My husband did not observe
his appearance, and immediately exclaimed, "Joseph, why are you so
late? has anything happened to you? we have been much distressed about
you these three hours." As Joseph made no answer, he continued his
interrogations, until, finally, I said, "Now, father, let him rest a
moment--don't trouble him now--you see he is home safe, and he is very
tired, so pray wait a little."

The fact was, I had learned to be a little cautious about matters with
regard to Joseph, for I was accustomed to see him look as he did on
that occasion, and I could not easily mistake the cause thereof.

Presently he smiled, and said in a calm tone, "I have taken the
severest chastisement that I have ever had in my life."

My husband, supposing that it was from some of the neighbors, was quite
angry, and observed, "I would like to know what business anybody has to
find fault with you!"

"Stop, father, stop," said Joseph, "it was the angel of the Lord: as I
passed by the hill of Cumorah, where the plates are, the angel met me,
and said that I had not been engaged enough in the work of the Lord;
that the time had come for the record to be brought forth; and that I
must be up and doing, and set myself about the things which God had
commanded me to do. But, father, give yourself no uneasiness concerning
the reprimand which I have received, for I now know the course that I
am to pursue, so all will be well."

It was also made known to him, at this interview, that he should make
another effort to obtain the plates, on the twenty-second of the
following September, but this he did not mention to us at that time.



CHAPTER XXIII.

JOSEPH OBTAINS THE PLATES.

On the twentieth of September, Mr. Knight and his friend Stoal,
came to see how we were managing matters with Stoddard and Co.; and
they tarried with us until the twenty-second. On the night of the
twenty-first, I sat up very late, as my work rather pressed upon my
hands. I did not retire until after twelve o'clock at night. About
twelve o'clock, Joseph came to me, and asked me if I had a chest with
a lock and key. I knew in an instant what he wanted it for, and not
having one, I was greatly alarmed, as I thought it might be a matter of
considerable moment. But Joseph, discovering my anxiety, said, "Never
mind, I can do very well for the present without it--be calm--all is
right."

Shortly after this, Joseph's wife passed through the room with her
bonnet and riding dress; and in a few minutes they left together,
taking Mr. Knight's horse and wagon. I spent the night in prayer and
supplication to God, for the anxiety of my mind would not permit
me to sleep. At the usual hour, I commenced preparing breakfast.
My heart fluttered at every footstep, as I now expected Joseph and
Emma momentarily, and feared lest Joseph might meet with another
disappointment.

When the male portion of the family were seated at the breakfast table,
Mr. Smith inquired for Joseph, for he was not aware that he had left
home. I requested my husband not to call him, for I would like to have
him take breakfast with his wife that morning.

"No, no," said my husband; "I must have Joseph sit down here and eat
with me."

"Well, now, Mr. Smith," continued I, "do let him eat with his wife this
morning; he almost always takes breakfast with you."

His father finally consented, and ate without him, and no further
inquiries were made concerning his absence, but in a few minutes Mr.
Knight came in quite disturbed.

"Why, Mr. Smith," exclaimed he, "my horse is gone, and I can't find him
on the premises, and I wish to start for home in half an hour."

"Never mind the horse," said I. "Mr. Knight does not know all the nooks
and corners in the pastures; I will call William; he will bring the
horse immediately."

This satisfied him for the time being; but he soon made another
discovery. His wagon also was gone. He then concluded that a rogue had
stolen them both.

"Mr. Knight," said I, "do be quiet; I would be ashamed to have you go
about waiting upon yourself--just go out and talk with Mr. Smith until
William comes; and if you really must go home, your horse shall be
brought, and you shall be waited upon like a gentleman." He accordingly
went out, and while he was absent, Joseph returned.

I trembled so with fear, lest all might be lost in consequence of
some failure in keeping the commandments of God, that I was under the
necessity of leaving the room in order to conceal my feelings. Joseph
saw this, and said, "Do not be uneasy, mother, all is right--see here,
I have got a key."

I knew not what he meant, but took the article of which he spoke into
my hands, and examined it. He took it again and left me, but said
nothing respecting the Record.

In a short time he returned, and inquired of me in regard to getting a
chest made. I told him to go to a certain cabinet-maker, who had made
some furniture for my oldest daughter, and tell him that we would pay
him for making a chest, as we did for the other work which he had done
for us, namely, one half in cash and the other in produce.

Joseph remarked that he would do so, but that he did not know where the
money would come from, for there was not a shilling in the house.

The following day, one Mr. Warner came to him, and told him that a
widow by the name of Wells, who was living in Macedon, wanted some
labor done in a well, for which she would pay the money, and that
she was anxious to have him (Joseph) do this labor for her. As this
afforded us an opportunity to pay the cabinet maker for the chest,
Joseph went immediately to the house of Mrs. Wells, and commenced work.

The next day after he left home, one of the neighbors asked Mr. Smith
many questions concerning the plates. I will here observe, that no one
ever heard anything from us respecting them, except a confidential
friend, whom my husband had spoken to about them some two or three
years previous. It appeared that Satan had now stirred up the hearts of
those who had gotten a hint of the matter from our friend, to search
into it, and make every possible move towards thwarting the purposes of
the Almighty.

My husband soon learned that ten or twelve men were clubbed together,
with one Willard Chase, a Methodist class-leader, at their head; and
what was still more ridiculous, they had sent sixty or seventy miles
for a certain conjuror, to come and divine the place where the plates
were secreted.

We supposed that Joseph had taken the plates, and hid them somewhere,
and we were apprehensive that our enemies might discover their place of
deposit. Accordingly, the next morning, after hearing of their plans,
my husband concluded to go among the neighbors to see what he could
learn with regard to the plans of the adverse party. The first house he
came to he found the conjuror and Willard Chase, together with the rest
of the clan. Making an errand, he went in and sat down near the door,
leaving it a little ajar, in order to overhear their conversation. They
stood in the yard near the door, and were devising plans to find "Joe
Smith's gold Bible," as they expressed themselves. The conjuror seemed
much animated, although he had traveled sixty miles the day and night
previous.

Presently, the woman of the house, becoming uneasy at the exposures
they were making, stepped through a back door into the yard, and called
to her husband, in a suppressed tone, but loud enough to be heard
distinctly by Mr. Smith, "Sam, Sam, you are cutting your own throat."
At this the conjuror bawled out at the top of his voice, "I am not
afraid of anybody--we will have them plates in spite of Joe Smith or
all the devils in hell."

When the woman came in again, Mr. Smith laid aside the newspaper he
had been holding in his hand and remarked, "I believe I have not time
to finish reading the paper now." He then left the house, and returned
home.

Mr. Smith, on returning home, asked Emma if she knew whether Joseph
had taken the plates from their place of deposit, or if she was able
to tell where they were. She said she could not tell where they were,
or whether they were removed from their place. My husband then related
what he had both seen and heard.

Upon this, Emma said that she did not know what to do, but she supposed
if Joseph was to get the Record, he would get it, and that they would
not be able to prevent him.

"Yes," replied Mr. Smith, "he will, if he is watchful and obedient;
but remember, that for a small thing, Esau lost his birthright and his
blessing. It may be so with Joseph."

"Well," said Emma, "if I had a horse, I would go and see him."

Mr. Smith then said, "You shall have one in fifteen minutes, for
although my team is gone, there is a stray on the place, and I will
send William to bring him immediately."

In a few minutes William brought up the horse with a large hickory
withe around his neck (for it was according to law, to put a withe
around the neck of a stray before turning it into an enclosure), and
Emma was soon under way for Macedon.

Joseph kept the Urim and Thummim constantly about his person, by
the use of which he could in a moment tell whether the plates were
in any danger. Just before Emma rode up to Mrs. Wells, Joseph, from
an impression that he had had, came up out of the well in which he
was laboring, and met her not far from the house. Emma immediately
informed him of what had transpired, whereupon he looked in the Urim
and Thummim, and saw that the Record was as yet safe; nevertheless, he
concluded to return with his wife, as something might take place that
would render it necessary for him to be at home where he could take
care of it.

He then told Mrs. Wells that business at home rendered it necessary
for him to return. To this she did not agree at first, but finally
consented. She then sent a boy for a horse, which Joseph mounted in
his linen frock, and with his wife by his side on her horse decorated
as before with a hickory withe around his neck, he rode through the
village of Palmyra, which was on the way home.

On arriving at home, he found his father pacing the ground near his
door in great anxiety of mind. Joseph spoke to him, saying, "Father,
there is no danger--all is perfectly safe--there is no cause of alarm."

When he had taken a little refreshment, he sent Carlos, my youngest
son, to his brother Hyrum's, to have him come up immediately, as
he desired to see him. When he came, Joseph requested him to get a
chest, having a good lock and key, and to have it there by the time he
(Joseph) should return. And after giving these instructions, Joseph
started for the plates.

The plates were secreted about three miles from home, in the following
manner: Finding an old birch log much decayed, excepting the bark,
which was in a measure sound, he took his pocket knife and cut the bark
with some care, then turned it back, and made a hole of sufficient size
to receive the plates, and, laying them in the cavity thus formed,
he replaced the bark; after which he laid across the log, in several
places, some old stuff that happened to lay near, in order to conceal,
as much as possible, the place in which they were deposited.

Joseph, on coming to them, took them from their secret place, and,
wrapping them in his linen frock, placed them under his arm and started
for home.

After proceeding a short distance, he thought it would be more safe to
leave the road and go through the woods. Traveling some distance after
he left the road, he came to a large windfall, and as he was jumping
over a log, a man sprang up from behind it and gave him a heavy blow
with a gun. Joseph turned around and knocked him down, then ran at
the top of his speed. About half a mile further he was attacked again
in the same manner as before; he knocked this man down in like manner
as the former, and ran on again; and before he reached home he was
assaulted the third time. In striking the last one, he dislocated his
thumb, which, however, he did not notice until he came within sight of
the house, when he threw himself down in the corner of the fence in
order to recover his breath. As soon as he was able, he arose and came
to the house. He was still altogether speechless from fright and the
fatigue of running.

After resting a few moments, he desired me to send Carlos for my
husband, Mr. Knight, and his friend Stoal, and have them go immediately
and see if they could find the men who had been pursuing him. And after
Carlos had done this, he wished to have him sent to Hyrum's, to tell
him to bring the chest.

I did as I was requested, and when Carlos arrived at Hyrum's, he found
him at tea, with two of his wife's sisters. Just as Hyrum was raising a
cup to his mouth, Carlos touched his shoulder. Without waiting to hear
one word from the child, he dropped the cup, sprang from the table,
caught the chest, turned it upside down, and emptying its contents on
the floor, left the house instantly with the chest on his shoulder.

The young ladies were greatly astonished at his singular behavior, and
declared to his wife--who was then confined to her bed, her eldest
daughter, Lovina, being but four days old--that he was certainly crazy.

His wife laughed heartily, and replied, "Oh, not in the least: he has
just thought of something which he has neglected; and it is just like
him to fly off in a tangent when he thinks of anything in that way."

When the chest came, Joseph locked up the Record, then threw himself
upon the bed, and after resting a little, so that he could converse
freely, he arose and went into the kitchen, where he related his
recent adventure to his father, Mr. Knight, and Mr. Stoal, besides
many others, who had by this time collected, with the view of hearing
something in regard to the strange circumstance which had taken place.
He showed them his thumb, saying, "I must stop talking, father, and get
you to put my thumb in place, for it is very painful."

I will here mention that my husband, Mr. Knight, and Mr. Stoal went in
pursuit of those villains who had attempted Joseph's life, but were not
able to find them.

When Joseph first got the plates, the angel of the Lord stood by and
said--

    Now you have got the Record into your own hands, and you are but a
    man, therefore you will have to be watchful and faithful to your
    trust, or you will be overpowered by wicked men; for they will lay
    every plan and scheme that is possible to get it away from you, and
    if you do not take heed continually, they will succeed. While it
    was in my hands, I could keep it, and no man had power to take it
    away! but now I give it up to you. Beware, and look well to your
    ways, and you shall have power to retain it, until the time for it
    to be translated.

That of which I spoke, which Joseph termed a key, was, indeed, nothing
more nor less than the Urim and Thummim, and it was by this that the
angel showed him many things which he saw in vision; by which also he
could ascertain, at any time, the approach of danger, either to himself
or the Record, and on account of which he always kept the Urim and
Thummin about his person.



CHAPTER XXIV.

JOSEPH BRINGS HOME THE BREAST-PLATE--MARTIN HARRIS AND HIS WIFE
INTRODUCED--THE TRANSLATION COMMENCES--MRS. HARRIS BEGINS TO OPPOSE THE
WORK.

After bringing home the plates, Joseph commenced working with his
father and brothers on the farm, in order to be as near as possible to
the treasure which was confided to his care.

Soon after this, he came in from work, one afternoon, and after
remaining a short time, he put on his great coat, and left the house. I
was engaged at the time, in an upper room, in preparing some oil-cloths
for painting. When he returned, he requested me to come down stairs. I
told him that I could not leave my work just then, yet, upon his urgent
request, I finally concluded to go down and see what he wanted, upon
which he handed me the breast-plate spoken of in his history.

It was wrapped in a thin muslin handkerchief, so thin that I could feel
its proportions without any difficulty.

It was concave on one side, and convex on the other, and extended from
the neck downwards, as far as the center of the stomach of a man of
extraordinary size. It had four straps of the same material, for the
purpose of fastening it to the breast, two of which ran back to go over
the shoulders, and the other two were designed to fasten to the hips.
They were just the width of two of my fingers, (for I measured them,)
and they had holes in the end of them, to be convenient in fastening.
After I had examined it, Joseph placed it in the chest with the Urim
and Thummim.

Shortly after this circumstance, Joseph came to the house in great
haste, and inquired, if there had been a company of men about. I told
him, not a single individual had come to the house since he left. He
then said, that a mob would be there that night, if they did not come
before that time, to search for the Record, and that it must be removed
immediately.

Soon afterwards, a man by the name of Braman came in from the village
of Livonia, a man in whom we reposed much confidence, and who was well
worthy of the same. Joseph told him his apprehensions of a mob being
there that night, and that they must prepare themselves to drive them
away; but that the first thing to be attended to, was to secure the
Record and breast-plate.

In view of this, it was determined that a portion of the hearth should
be taken up, and that the Record and breast-plate should be buried
under the same, and then the hearth be relaid, to prevent suspicion.

This was done as speedily as possible, but the hearth was scarcely
relaid when a large company of men well-armed came rushing up to
the house. Joseph threw open the doors, and taking a hint from the
stratagem of his grandfather Mack, hallooed as if he had a legion at
hand, in the meanwhile, giving the word of command with great emphasis;
while all the male portion of the family, from the father down to
little Carlos, ran out of the house with such fury upon the mob, that
it struck them with terror and dismay, and they fled before the little
Spartan band into the woods, where they dispersed themselves to their
several homes.

In a short time Joseph received another intimation of the approach of
a mob, also of the necessity of removing the Record and breast-plate
from the place wherein they were secreted, consequently he took them
out of the box in which they were placed, and wrapping them in clothes,
carried them across the road to a cooper's shop, and laid them in a
quantity of flax which was stowed in the shop loft. After which he
nailed up the box again, then tore up the floor of the shop, and put it
under the same.

As soon as night came, the mob came also, and commenced ransacking the
place. They rummaged round the house, and all over the premises, but
did not come into the house. After making satisfactory search, they
went away.

The next morning we found the floor of the cooper's shop torn up, and
the box which was laid under it shivered in pieces.

In a few days afterwards, we learned the cause of this last move--why
their curiosity led them in the direction of the cooper's shop. A
young woman by the name of Chase, sister to Willard Chase, found a
green glass, through which she could see many very wonderful things,
and among her great discoveries she said that she saw the precise
place where "Joe Smith kept his gold Bible hid," and, obedient to
her directions, the mob gathered their forces and laid siege to the
cooper's shop.

Notwithstanding their disappointment in not finding the plates in the
shop, their confidence was not in the least shaken in Miss Chase, for
they still went from place to place by her direction, determined to get
if possible, the much desired object of their search.

Not long after the circumstance of the mob's going into the cooper's
shop, and splitting in pieces the box, Joseph began to make
arrangements to accomplish the translation of the Record. The first
step that he was instructed to take in regard to this work, was to make
a _facsimile_ of some of the characters, which were called reformed
Egyptian, and to send them to some of the most learned men of this
generation, and ask them for the translation thereof.

The reader will here observe, that on a preceding page of this volume,
I spoke of a confidential friend to whom my husband merely mentioned
the existence of the plates, some two or three years prior to their
coming forth. This was no other than Martin Harris, one of the
witnesses to the book subsequent to its being translated.

With the view of commencing the work of translation, and carrying it
forward as speedily as circumstances would permit, Joseph came to me
one afternoon and requested me to go to this Mr. Harris, and inform
him that he had got the plates, and that he desired to see Mr. Harris
concerning the matter. This, indeed, was an errand which I much
disliked, as Mr. Harris's wife was a very peculiar woman, one that was
naturally of a very jealous disposition; besides this, she was rather
dull of hearing, and when anything was said that she did not hear
distinctly, she suspected that it was some secret, which was designedly
kept from her. So I told Joseph that I would rather not go, unless I
could have the privilege of speaking to her first upon the subject. To
this he consented, and I went according to his request.

On arriving at Mr. Harris's, I cautiously detailed the particulars
with regard to Joseph's finding the plates, so far as wisdom dictated
and necessity demanded, in order to satisfy Mrs. Harris's curiosity.
However, she did not wait for me to get through with my story, before
she commenced urging upon me a considerable amount of money, that she
had at her command. Her husband always allowed her to keep a private
purse, in order to satisfy her singular disposition, and it was this
private money that she wished me to receive. She also had a sister
living with her who desired me to receive an amount of money, I think
some seventy-five dollars, to assist in getting the Record translated.

I told her that I came on no such business, that I did not want her
money, and that Joseph would attend to his own affairs; but, that I
would like to talk to Mr. Harris a moment, and then return home, as my
family would soon be expecting me. Yet, notwithstanding all this, she
was determined to assist in the business, for she said she knew that we
should want money, and she could spare two hundred dollars as well as
not.

After detaining me a few minutes, she went with me to her husband, and
I told him that I wished to speak to him. He replied, that he was not
going to stop his work, for he was just laying the last brick in his
hearth.

"You see," said he, "this is the last work I have to do on the house,
and it is the last work I shall do about the house, or on the farm,
in one year. And when this is done, I am going to hire a hand to work
a year for me, as I shall travel that length of time before I shall
settle myself at home again."

After completing the work in which he was engaged, he left the house,
but was absent only a short time. On returning, he came to me and said,
"Now I am a free man--my hands are altogether untied--I can come and go
and do as I please."

I related, in short, the errand on which I had come. He said, that
he would see Joseph in the course of a few days. At this his wife
exclaimed, "Yes, and I am coming to see him, too, and I will be there
on Tuesday afternoon, and will stop over night."

Accordingly, when Tuesday afternoon arrived, Mrs. Harris made her
appearance, and as soon as she was well seated, she began to importune
my son relative to the truth of what he had said concerning the Record,
declaring that if he really had any plates, she would see them, and
that she was determined to help him publish them.

He told her she was mistaken--that she could not see them, for he was
not permitted to exhibit them to any one, except those whom the Lord
should appoint to testify of them. "And, in relation to assistance," he
observed, "I always prefer dealing with men, rather than their wives."

This highly displeased Mrs. Harris, for she considered herself
altogether superior to her husband, and she continued her
importunities. She would say, "Now, Joseph, are you not telling me a
lie? Can you look full in my eye, and say before God, that you have in
reality found a Record, as you pretend?"

To this, Joseph replied, rather indifferently, "Why, yes, Mrs. Harris,
I would as soon look you in the face, and say so as not, if that will
be any gratification to you."

Then, said she, "Joseph, I will tell you what I will do, if I can get a
witness that you speak the truth, I will believe all you say about the
matter, and I shall want to do something about the translation--I mean
to help you any way."

This closed the evening's conversation. The next morning, soon after
she arose, she related a very remarkable dream which she said she
had had during the night. It ran about as follows: She said that a
personage appeared to her, who told her, that as she had disputed the
servant of the Lord, and said his word was not to be believed, and had
also asked him many improper questions, she had done that which was not
right in the sight of God. After which he said to her, "Behold, here
are the plates, look upon them, and believe."

After giving us an account of her dream, she described the Record very
minutely, then told us that she had made up her mind in relation to
the course which she intended to pursue; namely, that she had in her
possession twenty-eight dollars which she received from her mother
just before she died, while she was on her death bed, and that Joseph
should accept of it. If he would, he might give his note, but he should
certainly take it upon some terms.

The last proposal Joseph accepted, in order to get rid of further
importunity upon the subject.

Soon afterwards, Alva Hale, Joseph's brother-in-law, came to our
house, from Pennsylvania, for the purpose of moving Joseph to his
father-in-law's, as word had been sent to them, that Joseph desired
to move there as soon as he could settle up his business. During the
short interval of Alva's stay with us, he and Joseph were one day in
Palmyra, at a public-house, transacting some business. As they were
thus engaged, Mr. Harris came in: he stepped immediately up to my son,
and taking him by the hand, said, "How do you do, Mr. Smith." After
which, he took a bag of silver from his pocket, and said again, "Here,
Mr. Smith, is fifty dollars; I give this to you to do the Lord's work
with; no, I give it to the Lord for his own work."

"No," said Joseph, "We will give you a note, Mr. Hale, I presume, will
sign it with me."

"Yes," said Alva, "I will sign it."

Mr. Harris, however, insisted that he would give the money to the Lord,
and called those present to witness the fact that he gave it freely,
and did not demand any compensation, that it was for the purpose of
helping Mr. Smith to do the Lord's work. And as I have been informed,
many were present on that occasion, who witnessed the same circumstance.

Joseph, in a short time, arranged his affairs, and was ready for the
journey. The Record and breast-plate, for security, he nailed up in a
box and then put them into a strong cask; and after filling the cask
with beans, headed it up again.

When it became generally known that Joseph was about moving to
Pennsylvania, a mob of fifty men collected themselves together, and
they went to Dr. McIntyre, and requested him to take the command of the
company, stating, that they were resolved on following "Joe Smith," and
taking his "gold Bible" from him. The doctor's ideas and feelings did
not altogether harmonize with theirs, and he told them they were a pack
of devilish fools, and to go home and mind their own business; that, if
Joseph Smith had any business of that sort to attend to, he was capable
of doing it, and that it would be better for them to busy themselves
about that which more concerned them.

After this, a quarrel arose among them respecting who should be
captain, and it ran so high that it broke up the expedition.

* * * * * * * * *

When Joseph had had a sufficient time to accomplish the journey,
and transcribe some of the Egyptian characters, it was agreed that
Martin Harris should follow him--and that he (Martin) should take the
characters to the East, and, on his way, he was to call on all the
professed linguists, in order to give them an opportunity to display
their talents in giving a translation of the characters.

When Mrs. Harris heard of what her husband had in contemplation, she
resolved to accompany him; but he, concluding that it would be better
to go without her, left quite suddenly without her knowledge, in
company with my son Hyrum.

Mrs. Harris soon missed her husband, and came to me for that purpose
of ascertaining if I knew where he was. I told her what he had said
concerning his leaving, suppressing, however, his remarks pertaining to
herself.

On hearing this, she became highly exasperated, and charged me with
planning the whole affair. I protested against it, asserting that I had
nothing to do with the plan, nor the execution of it. Furthermore, that
the business of a house, which was the natural cares of a woman, was
all that I attempted to dictate, or interfere with, unless it was by my
husband's or son's request.

Mrs. Harris then observed that she had property, and knew how to take
care of it, which she would convince me of.

"Now, stop" said I, "do you not know that we have never asked you for
money or property? and that if we had been disposed to take advantage
of your liberality, could we not have obtained at least, two hundred
and seventy dollars of your cash?" She answered in the affirmative,
notwithstanding she went home in a great rage, determined to have
satisfaction for the treatment which she had received.

In a short time Mr. Harris returned, and his wife's anger kindled
afresh at his presence, insomuch that she prepared a separate bed and
room for him, which room she refused to enter.

A young man by the name of Dikes, had been paying some attention to
Miss Lucy, Martin Harris's oldest daughter. To this young man Mr.
Harris was quite attached, and his daughter Lucy was by no means
opposed to him; but Mrs. Harris, of course, was decidedly upon the
negative. However, just at this crisis, a scheme entered her brain
which materially changed her deportment to Mr. Dikes. She told
him, if he would manage to get the Egyptian characters from Mr.
Harris's possession, and procure a room in Palmyra for the purpose of
transcribing them, and then bring her the transcript, that she would
consent to his marriage with her daughter Lucy.

To this, Mr. Dikes cheerfully consented, and suffice it to say he
succeeded to her satisfaction, and thus received the promised reward.

When Mr. Harris began to make preparations to start for Pennsylvania
the second time, with the view of writing for Joseph, his wife told him
that she had fully decreed in her heart to accompany him. Mr. Harris,
having no particular objections, informed her that she might do so;
that she might go and stay one or two weeks, and then he would bring
her home again, after which he would return, and resume his writing for
Joseph. To this she cheerfully agreed. But Mr. Harris little suspected
what he had to encounter by this move. The first time he exhibited the
characters before named, she took out of her pocket an exact copy of
the same; and told those present, that "Joe Smith" was not the only
one who was in possession of this great curiosity, that she had the
same characters, and, they were quite as genuine as those shown by Mr.
Harris. This course she continued to pursue, until they arrived at
Joseph's.

As soon as she arrived there, she informed him that her object in
coming, was to see the plates, and that she would never leave until
she had accomplished it. Accordingly, without delay, she commenced
ransacking every nook and corner about the house--chests, trunks,
cupboards, etc.; consequently, Joseph was under the necessity of
removing both the breast-plate and the Record from the house, and
secreting them elsewhere. Not finding them in the house, she concluded
that Joseph had buried them, and the next day she commenced searching
out of doors, which she continued to do until about two o'clock p. m.
She then came in rather ill-natured; after warming herself a little,
she asked Joseph's wife if there were snakes in that country in the
winter. She replied in the negative. Mrs. Harris then said, "I have
been walking round in the woods to look at the situation of your place,
and as I turned round to come home, a tremendous black snake stuck up
his head before me, and commenced hissing at me."

The woman was so perplexed and disappointed in all her undertakings,
that she left the house and took lodgings during her stay in
Pennsylvania with a near neighbor, to whom she stated that the day
previous she had been hunting for the plates, and that, after a tedious
search, she at length came to a spot where she judged, from the
appearance of things, they must be buried; but upon stooping down to
scrape away the snow and leaves, in order to ascertain the fact, she
encountered a horrible black snake which gave her a terrible fright,
and she ran with all possible speed to the house.

While this woman remained in the neighborhood, she did all that lay in
her power to injure Joseph in the estimation of his neighbors--telling
them that he was a grand impostor, and, that by his specious
pretentions, he had seduced her husband into the belief that he (Joseph
Smith) was some great one, merely through a design upon her husband's
property.

When she returned home, being about two weeks after her arrival in
Harmony, the place where Joseph resided, she endeavored to dissuade
her husband from taking any further part in the publication of the
Record; however, Mr. Harris paid no attention to her, but returned and
continued writing.

Immediately after Martin Harris left home for Pennsylvania, his
wife went from place to place, and from house to house, telling
her grievances, and declaring that Joseph Smith was practicing a
deception upon the people, which was about to strip her of all that
she possessed, and that she was compelled to deposit a few things away
from home in order to secure them. So she carried away her furniture,
linen, and bedding; also other moveable articles, until she nearly
stripped the premises of everything that could conduce either to
comfort or convenience, depositing them with those of her friends and
acquaintances, in whom she reposed sufficient confidence to assure her
of their future safety.



CHAPTER XXV.

MARTIN HARRIS IS PERMITTED TO TAKE THE MANUSCRIPT HOME WITH HIM--HE
LOSES IT--THE SEASON OF MOURNING WHICH ENSUED.

Martin Harris, having written some one hundred and sixteen pages for
Joseph, asked permission of my son to carry the manuscript home with
him, in order to let his wife read it, as he hoped it might have a
salutary effect upon her feelings.

Joseph was willing to gratify his friend as far as he could
consistently, and he inquired of the Lord to know if he might do as
Martin Harris had requested, but was refused. With this, Mr. Harris was
not altogether satisfied, and, at his urgent request, Joseph inquired
again, but received a second refusal. Still, Martin Harris persisted
as before, and Joseph applied again, but the last answer was not like
the two former ones. In this, the Lord permitted Martin Harris to take
the manuscript home with him, on condition that he would exhibit it to
none, save five individuals whom he had mentioned, and who belonged to
his own family.

Mr. Harris was delighted with this, and bound himself in a written
covenant of the most solemn nature, that he would strictly comply with
the injunctions which he had received. Which being done, he took the
manuscript and went home.

Joseph did not suspect but that his friend would keep his faith,
consequently, he gave himself no uneasiness with regard to the matter.

Shortly after Mr. Harris left, Joseph's wife became the mother of a
son, which, however, remained with her but a short time before it was
snatched from her arms by the hand of death. And the mother seemed, for
some time, more like sinking with her infant into the mansion of the
dead, than remaining with her husband among the living. Her situation
was such for two weeks, that Joseph slept not an hour in undisturbed
quiet. At the expiration of this time she began to recover, but as
Joseph's anxiety about her began to subside, another cause of trouble
forced itself upon his mind. Mr. Harris had been absent nearly three
weeks, and Joseph had received no intelligence whatever from him, which
was altogether aside of the arrangement when they separated. But Joseph
kept his feelings from his wife, fearing that if she became acquainted
with them it might agitate her too much.

In a few days, however, she mentioned the subject herself, and desired
her husband to go and get her mother to stay with her, while he
should repair to Palmyra, for the purpose of learning the cause of
Mr. Harris's absence as well as silence. At first Joseph objected,
but seeing her so cheerful, and so willing to have him leave home, he
finally consented.

He set out in the first stage that passed for Palmyra, and, when he
was left to himself, he began to contemplate the course which Martin
had taken, and the risk which he (Joseph) had run in letting the
manuscript go out of his own hands--for it could not be obtained again,
in case Martin had lost it through transgression, except by the power
of God, which was something Joseph could hardly hope for--and that, by
persisting in his entreaties to the Lord, he had perhaps fallen into
transgression, and thereby lost the manuscript. When, I say, he began
to contemplate these things, they troubled his spirit, and his soul was
moved with fearful apprehensions. And, although he was now nearly worn
out, sleep fled from his eyes, neither had he any desire for food, for
he felt that he had done wrong, and how great his condemnation was he
did not know.

Only one passenger was in the stage besides himself: this man observing
Joseph's gloomy appearance, inquired the cause of his affliction, and
offered to assist him if his services would be acceptable. Joseph
thanked him for his kindness, and mentioned that he had been watching
some time with a sick wife and child, that the child had died, and that
his wife was still very low; but refrained from giving any further
explanation. Nothing more passed between them upon this subject, until
Joseph was about leaving the stage; at which time he remarked, that
he still had twenty miles further to travel on foot that night, it
being then about ten o'clock. To this the stranger objected, saying,
"I have watched you since you first entered the stage, and I know that
you have neither slept nor eaten since that time, and you shall not go
on foot twenty miles alone this night; for, if you must go, I will be
your company. Now tell me what can be the trouble that makes you thus
dispirited?"

Joseph replied, about as before--that he had left his wife in so low a
state of health, that he feared he should not find her alive when he
returned; besides, he had buried his first and only child but a few
days previous. This was true, though there was another trouble lying at
his heart, which he dared not to mention.

The stranger then observed, "I feel to sympathize with you, and I
fear that your constitution, which is evidently not strong, will be
inadequate to support you. You will be in danger of falling asleep in
the forest, and of meeting with some awful disaster."

Joseph again thanked the gentleman for his kindness, and, leaving
the stage, they proceeded together. When they reached our house it
was nearly daylight. The stranger said he was under the necessity of
leading Joseph the last four miles by the arm; for nature was too much
exhausted to support him any longer, and he would fall asleep as he was
walking along, every few minutes, towards the last of this distance.

On entering our house, the stranger remarked that he had brought our
son through the forest, because he had insisted on coming, that he
was sick, and needed rest, as well as refreshment, and that he ought
to have some pepper tea to warm his stomach. After thus directing us,
relative to our son, he said, that when we had attended to Joseph he
would thank us for a little breakfast for himself, as he was in haste
to be on his journey again.

When Joseph had taken a little nourishment, according to the directions
of the stranger, he requested us to send immediately for Mr. Harris.
This we did without delay. And when we had given the stranger his
breakfast, we commenced preparing breakfast for the family; and we
supposed that Mr. Harris would be there, as soon as it was ready, to
eat with us, for he generally came in such haste when he was sent for.
At eight o'clock we set the victuals on the table, as we were expecting
him every moment. We waited till nine, and he came not--till ten, and
he was not there--till eleven, still he did not make his appearance.
But at half past twelve we saw him walking with a slow and measured
tread towards the house, his eyes fixed thoughtfully upon the ground.
On coming to the gate, he stopped, instead of passing through, and got
upon the fence, and sat there some time with his hat drawn over his
eyes. At length he entered the house. Soon after which we sat down to
the table, Mr. Harris with the rest. He took up his knife and fork as
if he were going to use them, but immediately dropped them. Hyrum,
observing this, said "Martin, why do you not eat; are you sick?" Upon
which, Mr. Harris pressed his hands upon his temples, and cried out in
a tone of deep anguish, "Oh, I have lost my soul! I have lost my soul!"

Joseph who had not expressed his fears till now, sprang from the table,
exclaiming, "Martin, have you lost that manuscript? have you broken
your oath, and brought down condemnation upon my head as well as your
own?"

"Yes; it is gone," replied Martin, "and I know not where."

"Oh, my God!" said Joseph, clinching his hands. "All is lost! all is
lost! What shall I do? I have sinned--it is I who tempted the wrath
of God. I should have been satisfied with the first answer which I
received from the Lord; for he told me that it was not safe to let the
writing go out of my possession." He wept and groaned, and walked the
floor continually.

At length he told Martin to go back and search again.

"No;" said Martin, "it is all in vain; for I have ripped open beds and
pillows; and I know it is not there."

"Then must I," said Joseph, "return with such a tale as this? I dare
not do it. And how shall I appear before the Lord? Of what rebuke am I
not worthy from the angel of the Most High?"

I besought him not to mourn so, for perhaps the Lord would forgive him,
after a short season of humiliation and repentance. But what could I
do to comfort him, when he saw all the family in the same situation of
mind as himself; for sobs and groans, and the most bitter lamentations
filled the house. However, Joseph was more distressed than the rest, as
he better understood the consequences of disobedience. And he continued
pacing back and forth, meantime weeping and grieving, until about
sunset, when, by persuasion, he took a little nourishment.

The next morning, he set out for home. We parted with heavy hearts, for
it now appeared that all which we had so fondly anticipated, and which
had been the source of so much secret gratification, had in a moment
fled, and fled forever.



CHAPTER XXVI.

MARTIN HARRIS'S PERFIDY.

I will now give a sketch of the proceedings of Martin Harris during the
time he was absent from Joseph.

After leaving Joseph, he arrived at home with the manuscript in safety.
Soon after, he exhibited the manuscript to his wife and family. His
wife was so pleased with it, that she gave him the privilege of locking
it up in her own set of drawers, which was a special favor, for she had
never before this allowed him even the privilege of looking into them.
After he had shown the manuscript to those who had a right, according
to his oath, to see it, he went with his wife to visit one of her
relatives, who lived some ten or fifteen miles distant.

After remaining with them a short time, he returned home, but his
wife declined accompanying him back. Soon after his return, a very
particular friend of his made him a visit, to whom he related all
that he knew concerning the Record. The man's curiosity was much
excited, and, as might be expected, he earnestly desired to see the
manuscript. Martin was so anxious to gratify his friend, that, although
it was contrary to his obligation, he went to the drawer to get the
manuscript, but the key was gone. He sought for it some time, but could
not find it. Resolved, however, to carry his purpose into execution,
he picked the lock, and, in so doing, considerably injured his wife's
bureau. He then took out the manuscript, and, after showing it to this
friend, he removed it to his own set of drawers, where he could have it
at his command. Passing by his oath, he showed it to any good friend
that happened to call on him.

When Mrs. Harris returned, and discovered the marred state of her
bureau, her irascible temper was excited to the utmost pitch, and an
intolerable storm ensued, which descended with the greatest violence
upon the devoted head of her husband.

Having once made a sacrifice of his conscience, Mr. Harris no longer
regarded its scruples; so he continued to exhibit the writings, until
a short time before Joseph arrived, to any one whom he regarded as
prudent enough to keep the secret, except our family, but we were not
allowed to set our eyes upon them.

For a short time previous to Joseph's arrival, Mr. Harris had been
otherwise engaged, and thought but little about the manuscript. When
Joseph sent for him, he went immediately to the drawer where he had
left it, but, behold it was gone! He asked his wife where it was. She
solemnly averred that she did not know anything respecting it. He then
made a faithful search throughout the house, as before related.

The manuscript has never been found: and there is no doubt but Mrs.
Harris took it from the drawer, with the view of retaining it, until
another translation should be given, then, to alter the original
translation, for the purpose of showing a discrepancy between them, and
thus make the whole appear to be a deception.

It seemed as though Martin Harris, for his transgression, suffered
temporally as well as spiritually. The same day on which the foregoing
circumstance took place, a dense fog spread itself over his fields, and
blighted his wheat while in the blow, so that he lost about two-thirds
of his crop, whilst those fields which lay only on the opposite side of
the road, received no injury whatever.

I well remember that day of darkness, both within and without. To
us, at least, the heavens seemed clothed with blackness, and the
earth shrouded with gloom. I have often said within myself, that if a
continual punishment, as severe as that which we experienced on that
occasion, were to be inflicted upon the most wicked characters who ever
stood upon the footstool of the Almighty--if even their punishment were
no greater than that, I should feel to pity their condition.



CHAPTER XXVII.

THE URIM AND THUMMIM ARE TAKEN FROM JOSEPH--HE RECEIVES THEM AGAIN.

For nearly two months after Joseph returned to his family, in
Pennsylvania, we heard nothing from him, and becoming anxious about
him, Mr. Smith and myself set off to make him a visit. When we came
within three-quarters of a mile of the house, Joseph started to meet
us, telling his wife, as he left, that father and mother were coming.
When he met us, his countenance wore so pleasant an aspect, that I was
convinced he had something agreeable to communicate with regard to the
work in which he was engaged. When I entered, the first thing which
attracted my attention was a red morocco trunk, lying on Emma's bureau,
which Joseph shortly informed me contained the Urim and Thummim, and
the plates. And, in the evening, he gave us the following relation of
what had transpired since our separation:--

    "On leaving you," said Joseph, "I returned immediately home. Soon
    after my arrival, I commenced humbling myself in mighty prayer
    before the Lord, and, as I was pouring out my soul in supplication
    to God, that if possible, I might obtain mercy at his hands, and
    be forgiven of all that I had done contrary to his will, an angel
    stood before me, and answered me, saying, that I had sinned in
    delivering the manuscript into the hands of a wicked man, and, as
    I had ventured to become responsible for his faithfulness, I would
    of necessity have to suffer the consequences of his indiscretion,
    and I must now give up the Urim and Thummim into his (the angel's)
    hands.

    "This I did as I was directed, and as I handed them to him, he
    remarked, 'If you are very humble and penitent, it may be you will
    receive them again; if so, it will be on the twenty-second of next
    September.'"

Joseph then related a revelation which he received soon after the angel
visited him. A part of which is as follows:--

    "Behold, you have been entrusted with these things, but how strict
    were your commandments; and remember, also, the promises which
    were made to you, if you did not transgress them; and behold, how
    oft you have transgressed the commandments and the laws of God,
    and have gone on in the persuasions of men. For behold, you should
    not have feared man more than God, although men set at nought the
    counsels of God, and despise his words; yet you should have been
    faithful and he would have extended his arm and supported you
    against all the fiery darts of the adversary; and he would have
    been with you in every time of trouble. Behold, thou art Joseph,
    and thou wast chosen to do the work of the Lord, but because of
    transgression, if thou art not aware, thou wilt fall. But remember,
    God is merciful; therefore, repent of that which thou hast done
    which is contrary to the commandment which I gave you, and thou
    art still chosen, and art again called to the work. Except thou
    do this, thou shalt be delivered up and become as other men, and
    have no more gift. And when thou deliveredst up that which God had
    given thee sight and power to translate, thou deliveredst up that
    which was sacred into the hands of a wicked man, who has set at
    nought the counsels of God, and has broken the most sacred promises
    which were made before God, and has depended upon his own judgment,
    and boasted in his own wisdom, and this is the reason that thou
    hast lost thy privileges for a season, for thou hast suffered the
    counsel of thy director to be trampled upon from the beginning.
    Nevertheless my work shall go forth, for inasmuch as the knowledge
    of a Savior has come unto the world, through the testimony of the
    Jews, even so shall the knowledge of a Savior come unto my people."

For the sake of brevity, I have omitted part of this revelation, but
the reader will find it in the _Doctrine and Covenants_, section 3:
5-16.

I will now return to Joseph's recital.

    "After the angel left me," said he, "I continued my supplications
    to God, without cessation, and on the twenty-second of September,
    I had the joy and satisfaction of again receiving the Urim and
    Thummim, with which I have again commenced translating, and Emma
    writes for me, but the angel said that the Lord would send me a
    scribe, and I trust his promise will be verified. The angel seemed
    pleased with me when he gave me back the Urim and Thummim, and he
    told me that the Lord loved me, for my faithfulness and humility."

A few months after Joseph received them, he inquired of the Lord, and
obtained the following revelation:--

    "Now, behold, I say unto you, that because you delivered up those
    writings which you had power given unto you to translate, by the
    means of the Urim and Thummim, into the hands of a wicked man,
    you have lost them; and you also lost your gift at the same time,
    and your mind became darkened; nevertheless, it is now restored
    unto you again, therefore, see that you are faithful and continue
    on unto the finishing of the remainder of the work of translation
    as you have begun. Do not run faster, or labor more than you
    have strength and means provided to enable you to translate; but
    be diligent unto the end: pray always, that you may come off
    conqueror; yea, that you may conquer Satan, and that you may
    escape the hands of the servants of Satan that do uphold his work.
    Behold, they have sought to destroy you; yea, even the man in whom
    you have trusted, has sought to destroy you. And for this cause I
    said that he is a wicked man, for he has sought to take away the
    things wherewith you have been entrusted; and he has also sought
    to destroy your gift; and because you have delivered the writings
    into his hands, behold, wicked men have taken them from you.
    Therefore, you have delivered them up; yea, that which was sacred,
    unto wickedness. And, behold, Satan has put it into their hearts to
    alter the words which you have caused to be written, or which you
    have translated, which have gone out of your hands. And, behold, I
    say unto you, that because they have altered the words, they read
    contrary from that which you translated and caused to be written;
    and, on this wise, the devil has sought to lay a cunning plan, that
    he may destroy this work. For he has put it into their hearts to do
    this, that by lying they may say they have caught you in the words
    which you have pretended to translate."--_Doctrine and Covenants_,
    section x: 1-14.

While on this visit, we became acquainted with Emma's father, whose
name was Isaac Hale; also his family, which consisted of his wife,
Elizabeth; his sons, Jesse, David, Alva, Isaac Ward, and Reuben; and
his daughters, Phebe and Elizabeth.

They were an intelligent and highly respectable family. They were
pleasantly situated, and lived in good style, in the town of Harmony,
on the Susquehannah river, within a short distance of the place where
Joseph resided.

The time of our visit with them, we passed very agreeably, and returned
home relieved of a burden which was almost insupportable, and our
present joy far overbalanced all our former grief.



CHAPTER XXVIII.

OLIVER COWDERY COMMENCES WRITING FOR JOSEPH--THEY ATTEND TO THE
ORDINANCE OP BAPTISM.

When Mr. Smith, and myself arrived at home, we found Samuel and
Sophronia very sick, indeed, they were so low that Hyrum had left his
own house, and quitted business, in order to take care of them during
our absence. They continued sick a length of time--Samuel did not
altogether recover for a number of months.

Soon after we returned from Harmony, a man by the name of Lyman
Cowdery, came into the neighborhood, and applied to Hyrum, (as he
was one of the trustees,) for the district school. A meeting of the
trustees was called, and Mr. Cowdery was employed. But the following
day, this Mr. Cowdery brought his brother Oliver to the trustees, and
requested them to receive him instead of himself, as circumstances had
transpired which rendered it necessary for him to disappoint them,
or which would not allow of his attending to the school himself; and
he would warrant the good conduct of the school under his brother's
supervision. All parties being satisfied, Oliver, commenced his school,
boarding for the time being at our house. He had been in the school
but a short time, when he began to hear from all quarters concerning
the plates, and as soon began to importune Mr. Smith upon the subject,
but for a considerable length of time did not succeed in eliciting any
information. At last, however, he gained my husband's confidence, so
far as to obtain a sketch of the facts relative to the plates.

Shortly after receiving this information, he told Mr. Smith that he
was highly delighted with what he had heard, that he had been in a
deep study upon the subject all day, and that it was impressed upon
his mind, that he should yet have the privilege of writing for Joseph.
Furthermore, that he had determined to pay him a visit at the close of
the school, which he was then teaching.

On coming in on the following day, he said, "The subject upon which we
were yesterday conversing seems working in my very bones, and I cannot,
for a moment, get it out of my mind; finally, I have resolved on what I
will do. Samuel, I understand, is going down to Pennsylvania to spend
the spring with Joseph; I shall make my arrangements to be ready to
accompany him thither, by the time he recovers his health; for I have
made it a subject of prayer, and I firmly believe that it is the will
of the Lord that I should go. If there is a work for me to do in this
thing, I am determined to attend to it."

Mr. Smith told him, that he supposed it was his privilege to know
whether this was the case, and advised him to seek for a testimony for
himself, which he did, and received the witness spoken of in the Book
of _Doctrine and Covenants_, section viii.

From this time, Oliver was so completely absorbed in the subject of the
Record, that it seemed impossible for him to think or converse about
anything else.

As the time for which we had agreed for the place was now drawing to a
close, we began to make preparations to remove our family and effects
to the house in which Hyrum resided. We now felt more keenly than ever
the injustice of the measure which had placed a landlord over us on our
own premises, and who was about to eject us from them.

This I thought would be a good occasion for bringing to Oliver's mind,
the cause of all our present privations, as well as the misfortunes
which he himself was liable to if he should turn his back upon the
world, and set out in the service of God.

"Now, Oliver," said I, "see what a comfortable home we have had here,
what pains each child we have has taken to provide for us every thing
necessary to make old age comfortable, and long life desirable. Here,
especially, I look upon the handiwork of my beloved Alvin, who even
upon his death-bed, and in his last moments, charged his brothers to
finish his work of preparing a place of earthly rest for us; that if
it were possible, through the exertions of the children, our last days
might be our best days. Indeed, there is scarcely anything which I
here see, that has not passed through the hands of that faithful boy,
and afterwards, by his brothers, been arranged precisely according to
his plan, thus showing to me, their affectionate remembrance, both of
their parents, and of the brother whom they loved. All these tender
recollections render our present trial doubly severe, for these dear
relics must now pass into the hands of wicked men, who fear not God,
and regard not man. And upon what righteous principle has all this been
brought about? Have they ever lifted a finger to earn any part of that
which they now claim? I tell you they have not. Yet I now give up all
this for the sake of Christ and salvation, and I pray God to help me to
do so, without a murmur or a tear. In the strength of God, I say, that
from this time forth, I will not cast one longing look upon anything
which I now leave behind me. However, in consequence of these things,
Oliver, we cannot make you comfortable any longer, and you will be
under the necessity of taking boarding somewhere else."

"Mother," exclaimed the young man, "let me stay with you, for I can
live in any log hut where you and father live, but I cannot leave you,
so do not mention it."

In April, Samuel, and Mr. Cowdery set out for Pennsylvania.
The weather, for some time previous, had been very wet and
disagreeable--raining, freezing, and thawing alternately, which had
rendered the roads almost impassable, particularly in the middle of the
day. Notwithstanding, Mr. Cowdery was not to be detained, either by
wind or weather, and they persevered until they arrived at Joseph's.

Joseph had been so hurried with his secular affairs, that he could not
proceed with his spiritual concerns so fast as was necessary for the
speedy completion of the work; there was also another disadvantage
under which he labored, his wife had so much of her time taken up with
the care of her house, that she could write for him but a small portion
of the time. On account of these embarrassments, Joseph called upon the
Lord, three days prior to the arrival of Samuel and Oliver, to send him
a scribe, according to the promise of the angel; and he was informed
that the same should be forthcoming in a few days. Accordingly, when
Mr. Cowdery told him the business that he had come upon, Joseph was not
at all surprised.

They sat down and conversed together till late. During the evening,
Joseph told Oliver his history, as far as was necessary for his present
information, in the things which mostly concerned him. And the next
morning they commenced the work of translation, in which they were soon
deeply engaged.

One morning they sat down to their work, as usual, and the first thing
which presented itself through the Urim and Thummim, was a commandment
for Joseph and Oliver to repair to the water, and attend to the
ordinance of baptism. They did so, and as they were returning to the
house, they overheard Samuel engaged in secret prayer. Joseph said,
that he considered this as a sufficient testimony of his being a fit
subject for baptism; and as they had now received authority to baptize,
they spoke to Samuel upon the subject, and he went straightway to the
water with them, and was baptized. After which, Joseph and Oliver
proceeded with the work of translation as before.



CHAPTER XXIX.

MRS. HARRIS PROSECUTES JOSEPH--EX-PARTE EXAMINATION.

About the first of August, Samuel returned home, bringing us news of
Joseph's success. This intelligence produced in Martin Harris a great
desire to go down to Pennsylvania to see how they were prospering. This
being made known to his wife, she resolved to prevent him from going,
also to bring Joseph into difficulty, which would perhaps hinder him
from ever accomplishing the work in which he was engaged.

To this end, she undertook to prove, that Joseph never had the Record
which he professed to have, and that he pretended to have in his
possession certain gold plates, for the express purpose of obtaining
money. Accordingly, she mounted her horse, rode from house to house
through the neighborhood, like a dark spirit, making diligent inquiry
wherever she had the least hopes of gleaning anything, and stirring
up every malicious feeling which would tend to subserve her wicked
purpose. Having ascertained the number and strength of her adherents,
she entered a complaint against Joseph, before a certain magistrate
of Lyons. She then sent word to Lyman Cowdery, requesting him to come
thither, prepared to go post haste to Pennsylvania, (provided the
decision should be given against Joseph,) to assist the officers in
securing and confining him in prison. This call, Lyman Cowdery answered
immediately, and all things seemed going on prosperously with Mrs.
Harris. She made affidavit to many things herself, and directed the
officers whom to subpoena. Among the number was her husband, who was a
principal witness in the case.

When the day of trial came on, the neighbors came and informed us, that
the witnesses had gone to Lyons with the declared intention to obtain
a verdict against Joseph, if it could be done by swearing. Immediately
after our friends left, Hyrum came in, and I asked him what could be
done.

"Why, mother," said he, "we can do nothing, except to look to the Lord:
in him is all help and strength; he can deliver from every trouble."

I had never neglected this important duty, yet, seeing such confidence
in my son, strengthened me in this hour of trial. Not being accustomed
to lawsuits of this character, I trembled for the issue, for this
was the first time a suit had ever been preferred before a court
against any of my family. I retired to a secluded place, and poured
out my whole soul in entreaties to God, for the safety of my son, and
continued my supplication for some time; at length the spirit fell upon
me so powerfully, that every foreboding of ill was entirely removed
from my mind, and a voice spoke to me, saying, "not one hair of his
head shall be harmed." I was satisfied. I arose, and repaired to the
house. I had never before in my life experienced such happy moments. I
sat down and began to read, but my feelings were too intense to allow
me to do so. My daughter-in-law, Jerusha, came into the room soon after
this, and when she turned her eyes upon me, she stopped short, and
exclaimed, "Why! mother! what is the matter? I never saw you look so
strangely in my life."

I told her, that I had never felt so happy before in my life, that my
heart was so light, and my mind so completely at rest, that it did not
appear possible to me that I should ever have any more trouble while I
should exist. I then informed her in relation to the witness which I
had received from the Lord.

In the evening the proceedings of the court were rehearsed to us, which
were as follows:

The witnesses, being duly sworn, the first arose and testified, that
Joseph Smith told him that the box which he had, contained nothing but
sand; and he, Joseph Smith, said it was gold, to deceive the people.

Second witness swore, that Joseph Smith had told him that it was
nothing but a box of lead, and he was determined to use it as he saw
fit.

Third witness declared, that he once inquired of Joseph Smith what he
had in that box, and Joseph Smith told him that there was nothing at
all in the box, saying, that he had made fools of the whole of them,
and all he wanted was to get Martin Harris's money away from him, and
that he (witness) was knowing to the fact that Joseph Smith had, by his
persuasion, already got two or three hundred dollars.

Next came Mrs. Harris's affidavit, in which she stated, that she
believed the chief object which Joseph Smith had in view, was to
defraud her husband out of all his property, and that she did not
believe that Joseph Smith had ever been in possession of the gold
plates which he talked so much about.

The magistrate then forbade the introduction of any more witnesses,
until Martin Harris should be sworn. Martin being called upon,
testified with boldness, decision and energy, to a few simple facts.
When he arose he raised his hand to heaven, and said, "I can swear,
that Joseph Smith never has got one dollar from me by persuasion, since
God made me. I did once, of my own free will and accord, put fifty
dollars into his hands, in the presence of many witnesses, for the
purpose of doing the work of the Lord. This, I can pointedly prove; and
I can tell you, furthermore, that I have never seen in Joseph Smith,
disposition to take any man's money, without giving him a reasonable
compensation for the same in return. And as to the plates which he
professes to have, gentlemen, if you do not believe it, but continue to
resist the truth, it will one day be the means of damning your souls."

After hearing this testimony, the magistrate told them they need not
call any more witnesses, but ordered them to bring him what had been
written of the testimony already given. This he tore in pieces before
their eyes, and told them to go home about their business, and trouble
him no more with such ridiculous folly. And they did go home perfectly
discomfitted.



CHAPTER XXX.

JOSEPH AND OLIVER REMOVE TO WATERLOO--THEY FINISH THE TRANSLATION.

We will now return to Pennsylvania where we left Joseph and Oliver
busily engaged in translating the Record.

After Samuel left them, they still continued the work as before, until
about the time of the proceedings that took place in Lyons, New York.
Near this time, as Joseph was translating by means of the Urim and
Thummim, he received instead of the words of the Book, a commandment
to write a letter to a man by the name of David Whitmer, who lived in
Waterloo, requesting him to come immediately with his team, and convey
himself and Oliver to his own residence, as an evil-designing people
were seeking to take away his (Joseph's) life, in order to prevent
the work of God from going forth to the world. The letter was written
and delivered, and was shown by Mr. Whitmer to his father, mother,
brothers, and sisters, and their advice was asked in regard to the best
course for him to take in relation to the matter.

His father reminded him that he had as much wheat sown upon the ground
as he could harrow in two days, at least; besides this, he had a
quantity of plaster of paris to spread, which must be done immediately,
consequently he could not go, unless he could get a witness from God
that it was absolutely necessary.

This suggestion pleased David, and he asked the Lord for a testimony
concerning his going for Joseph, and was told by the voice of the
Spirit to go as soon as his wheat was harrowed in. The next morning,
David went to the field, and found that he had two heavy days' work
before him. He then said to himself that, if he should be enabled, by
any means, to do this work sooner than the same had ever been done
on the farm before, he would receive it as an evidence, that it was
the will of God, that he should do all in his power to assist Joseph
Smith in the work in which he was engaged. He then fastened his horses
to the harrow, and instead of dividing the field into what is, by
farmers, usually termed lands, drove around the whole of it, continuing
thus till noon, when, on stopping for dinner, he looked around, and
discovered to his surprise, that he had harrowed in full half the
wheat. After dinner he went on as before, and by evening he finished
the whole two days' work.

His father, on going into the field the same evening, saw what had been
done, and he exclaimed, "There must be an overruling hand in this,
and I think you would better go down to Pennsylvania as soon as your
plaster of paris is sown."

The next morning, David took a wooden measure under his arm and went
out to sow the plaster, which he had left, two days previous, in heaps
near his sister's house, but, on coming to the place, he discovered
that it was gone! He then ran to his sister, and inquired of her if she
knew what had become of it. Being surprised she said, "Why do you ask
me? was it not all sown yesterday?"

"Not to my knowledge," answered David.

"I am astonished at that," replied his sister, "for the children came
to me in the forenoon, and begged of me to go out and see the men sow
plaster in the field, saying, that they never saw anybody sow plaster
so fast in their lives. I accordingly went, and saw three men at work
in the field, as the children said, but, supposing that you had hired
some help, on account of your hurry, I went immediately into the house,
and gave the subject no further attention."

David made considerable inquiry in regard to the matter, both among
his relatives and neighbors, but was not able to learn who had done
it. However, the family were convinced that there was an exertion of
supernatural power connected with this strange occurrence.

David immediately set out for Pennsylvania, and arrived there in two
days, without injuring his horses in the least, though the distance was
one hundred and thirty-five miles. When he arrived, he was under the
necessity of introducing himself to Joseph, as this was the first time
that they had ever met.

I will observe, that the only acquaintance which existed between the
Smith and Whitmer families, was that formed by Mr. Smith and myself,
when on our way from Manchester to Pennsylvania to visit Joseph, at
which time we stopped with David over night and gave him a brief
history of the Record.

When Joseph commenced making preparations for the journey, he inquired
of the Lord to know in what manner he should carry the plates. The
answer was, that he should commit them into the hands of an angel, for
safety, and after arriving at Mr. Whitmer's the angel would meet him in
the garden and deliver them up again into his hands.

Joseph and Oliver set out without delay, leaving Emma to take charge of
affairs during her husband's absence. On arriving at Waterloo, Joseph
received the Record according to promise. The next day, he and Oliver
resumed the work of translation, which they continued without further
interruption until the whole work was accomplished.



CHAPTER XXXI.

THE PLATES ARE SHOWN TO TWELVE WITNESSES--JOSEPH MAKES ARRANGEMENTS FOR
PRINTING THE BOOK OF MORMON.

As soon as the Book of Mormon was translated, Joseph despatched a
messenger to Mr. Smith, bearing intelligence of the completion of the
work, and a request that Mr. Smith and myself should come immediately
to Waterloo.

The same evening, we conveyed this intelligence to Martin Harris, for
we loved the man, although his weakness had cost us much trouble.
Hearing this, he greatly rejoiced, and determined to go straightway
to Waterloo to congratulate Joseph upon his success. Accordingly, the
next morning, we all set off together, and before sunset met Joseph and
Oliver at Mr. Whitmer's.

The evening was spent in reading the manuscript, and it would be
superfluous for me to say, to one who has read the foregoing pages,
that we rejoiced exceedingly. It then appeared to those of us who did
not realize the magnitude of the work, as if the greatest difficulty
was then surmounted; but Joseph better understood the nature of the
dispensation of the Gospel which was committed unto him.

The next morning, after attending to the usual services, namely,
reading, singing and praying, Joseph arose from his knees, and
approaching Martin Harris with a solemnity that thrills through my
veins to this day, when it occurs to my recollection, said, "Martin
Harris, you have got to humble yourself before God this day, that you
may obtain a forgiveness of your sins. If you do, it is the will of God
that you should look upon the plates, in company with Oliver Cowdery
and David Whitmer."

In a few minutes after this, Joseph, Martin, Oliver and David, repaired
to a grove, a short distance from the house, where they commenced
calling upon the Lord, and continued in earnest supplication, until he
permitted an angel to come down from his presence, and declare to them,
that all which Joseph had testified of concerning the plates was true.

When they returned to the house it was between three and four o'clock
p.m. Mrs. Whitmer, Mr. Smith and myself, were sitting in a bedroom
at the time. On coming in, Joseph threw himself down beside me, and
exclaimed, "Father, mother, you do not know how happy I am: the Lord
has now caused the plates to be shown to three more besides myself.
They have seen an angel, who has testified to them, and they will have
to bear witness to the truth of what I have said, for now they know for
themselves, that I do not go about to deceive the people, and I feel
as if I was relieved of a burden which was almost too heavy for me to
bear, and it rejoices my soul, that I am not any longer to be entirely
alone in the world." Upon this, Martin Harris came in: he seemed almost
overcome with joy, and testified boldly to what he had both seen and
heard. And so did David and Oliver, adding, that no tongue could
express the joy of their hearts, and the greatness of the things which
they had both seen and heard.

Their written testimony, which is contained in the Book of Mormon, is
as follows:--

    THE TESTIMONY OF THREE WITNESSES.

    Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto
    whom this work shall come, that we, through the grace of God the
    Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, have seen the plates which
    contain this Record, which is a Record of the people of Nephi, and
    also of the Lamanites, their brethren, and also of the people of
    Jared, who came from the tower, of which hath been spoken; and we
    also know that they have been translated by the gift and power of
    God, for his voice hath declared it unto us; wherefore we know of a
    surety that the work is true. And we also testify that we have seen
    the engravings which are upon the plates; and they have been shown
    unto us by the power of God, and not of man. And we declare, with
    words of soberness, that an angel of God came down from heaven, and
    he brought and laid before our eyes, that we beheld and saw the
    plates, and the engravings thereon; and we know that it is by the
    grace of God the Father, and our Lord Jesus Christ, that we beheld
    and bear record that these things are true; and it is marvelous in
    our eyes, nevertheless, the voice of the Lord commanded us that
    we should bear record of it; wherefore, to be obedient unto the
    commandments of God, we bear testimony of these things. And we know
    that if we are faithful in Christ, we shall rid our garments of the
    blood of all men, and be found spotless before the judgment-seat
    of Christ, and shall dwell with him eternally in the heavens. And
    the honor be to the Father, and to the Son, and to the Holy Ghost,
    which is one God. Amen.

    Oliver Cowdery, David Whitmer, Martin Harris.

The following day, we returned, a cheerful, happy company. In a few
days, we were followed by Joseph, Oliver and the Whitmers, who came
to make us a visit, and make some arrangements about getting the book
printed. Soon after they came, all the male part of the company, with
my husband, Samuel and Hyrum, retired to a place where the family were
in the habit of offering up their secret devotions to God. They went
to this place, because it had been revealed to Joseph that the plates
would be carried thither by one of the ancient Nephites. Here it was,
that those eight witnesses, whose names are recorded in the Book of
Mormon, looked upon them and handled them. Of which they bear record in
the following words:--

    THE TESTIMONY OF EIGHT WITNESSES.

    Be it known unto all nations, kindreds, tongues, and people, unto
    whom this work shall come, that Joseph Smith, Jr., the translator
    of this work, has shown unto us the plates of which hath been
    spoken, which have the appearance of gold; and as many of the
    leaves as the said Smith has translated, we did handle with our
    hands; and we also saw the engravings thereon, all of which has the
    appearance of ancient work, and of curious workmanship. And this we
    bear record, with words of soberness, that the said Smith has shown
    unto us, for we have seen and hefted, and know of a surety, that
    the said Smith has got the plates of which we have spoken. And we
    give our names unto the world, to witness unto the world that which
    we have seen; and we lie not, God bearing witness of it.

    Christian Whitmer, Hiram Page,

    Jacob Whitmer, Joseph Smith, Sen.,

    Peter Whitmer, Jun., Hyrum Smith,

    John Whitmer, Samuel H. Smith.

After these witnesses returned to the house, the angel again made his
appearance to Joseph, at which time Joseph delivered up the plates
into the angel's hands. That evening, we held a meeting, in which all
the witnesses bore testimony to the facts, as stated above; and all
of our family, even to Don Carlos, who was but fourteen years of age,
testified of the truth of the Latter-day Dispensation--that it was
then ushered in. In a few days, the whole company from Waterloo, went
to Palmyra to make arrangements for getting the book printed; and they
succeeded in making a contract with one E. B. Grandin, but did not draw
the writings at that time. The next day, the company from Waterloo
returned home, excepting Joseph, and Peter Whitmer, Joseph remaining to
draw writings in regard to the printing of the manuscript, which was to
be done on the day following.

When Joseph was about starting for Palmyra, where the writings were to
be executed, Dr. M'Intyre came in and informed us, that forty men were
collected in the capacity of a mob, with the view of waylaying Joseph
on his way thither; that they requested him (Dr. M'Intyre) as they had
done once before, to take command of the company, and, that upon his
refusing to do so, one Mr. Huzzy, a hatter of Palmyra, proffered his
services, and was chosen as their leader.

On hearing this, I besought Joseph not to go; but he smiled at my
fears, saying, "Never mind, mother, just put your trust in God, and
nothing will hurt me today." In a short time he set out for Palmyra.
On his way thither, lay a heavy strip of timber, about half a mile
in width, and, beyond it, on the right side of the road, lay a field
belonging to David Jacaway. When he came to this field, he found the
mob seated on the string of fence running along the road. Coming to
Mr. Huzzy first, he took off his hat, and good-naturedly saying, "Good
morning, Mr. Huzzy," passed on to the next, whom he saluted in like
manner, and the next, and so on till he came to the last.

This struck them with confusion, and while they were pondering in
amazement, he passed on, leaving them perched upon the fence, like so
many roosting chickens, and arrived at Palmyra without being molested.
Here he met Mr. Grandin, and writings were drawn up between them to
this effect: That half of the price for printing was to be paid by
Martin Harris, and the residue by my two sons, Joseph and Hyrum. These
writings were afterwards signed by all the parties concerned.

When Joseph returned from Palmyra he said, "Well, mother, the Lord has
been on my side today, the devil has not overpowered me in any of my
proceedings. Did I not tell you that I should be delivered from the
hands of all my enemies! They thought they were going to perform great
feats; they have done wonders to prevent me from getting the book
printed; they mustered themselves together, and got upon the fence,
made me a low bow, and went home, and I'll warrant you they wish they
had stayed there in the first place. Mother, there is a God in heaven,
and I know it."

Soon after this, Joseph secured the copyright; and before he returned
to Pennsylvania, where he had left his wife, he received a commandment,
which was in substance as follows:--

First, that Oliver Cowdery should transcribe the whole manuscript.
Second, that he should take but one copy at a time to the office, so
that if one copy should get destroyed, there would still be a copy
remaining. Third, that in going to and from the office, he should
always have a guard to attend him, for the purpose of protecting the
manuscript. Fourth, that a guard should be kept constantly on the
watch, both night and day, about the house, to protect the manuscript
from malicious persons, who would infest the house for the purpose of
destroying the manuscript. All these things were strictly attended to,
as the Lord commanded Joseph. After giving these instructions, Joseph
returned to Pennsylvania.



CHAPTER XXXII.

THE PRINTING IS BEGUN--A MEETING OF THE CITIZENS HELD IN REFERENCE TO
THE BOOK.

Oliver Cowdery commenced the work immediately after Joseph left,
and the printing went on very well for a season, but the clouds of
persecution again began to gather. The rabble, and a party of restless
religionists, began to counsel together, as to the most efficient means
of putting a stop to our proceedings.

About the first council of this kind was held in a room adjoining that
in which Oliver and a young man by the name of Robinson were printing.
Mr. Robinson being curious to know what they were doing in the next
room, applied his ear to a hole in the partition wall, and by this
means overheard several persons expressing their fears in reference to
the Book of Mormon. One said, "it was destined to break down everything
before it, if not put a stop to," and, "that it was likely to injure
the prospects of their ministers," and then inquired, whether they
should endure it. "No, no," was the unanimous reply. It was then
asked "How shall we prevent the printing of this book?" Upon which it
was resolved by the meeting, that three of their company should be
appointed to go to the house of Mr. Smith, on the following Tuesday
or Wednesday, while the men were gone to their work, and request Mrs.
Smith to read the manuscript to them; that, after she had done reading
it, two of the company should endeavor to divert her attention from it
to some other object, while the third, seizing the opportunity, should
snatch it from the drawer, or where-ever it should be kept, and commit
it immediately to the flames.

"Again," said the speaker, "suppose we fail in this, and the book be
printed in defiance of all that we can do to the contrary, what means
shall we then adopt? Shall we buy their books and allow our families to
read them?" They all responded, "No." They then entered into a solemn
covenant, never to purchase even a single copy of the work, or permit
one member of their families to buy or read one, that they might thus
avert the awful calamity which threatened them.

Oliver Cowdery came home that evening, and, after relating the whole
affair with much solemnity, he said, "Mother, what shall I do with the
manuscript? where shall I put it to keep it away from them?"

"Oliver," said I, "I do not think the matter so serious after all, for
there is a watch kept constantly about the house, and I need not take
out the manuscript to read it to them unless I choose, and for its
present safety I can have it deposited in a chest, under the head of
my bed, in such a way that it never will be disturbed." I then placed
it in a chest, which was so high that when placed under the bed, the
whole weight of the bedstead rested upon the lid. Having made this
arrangement, we felt quite at rest, and that night, the family retired
to rest at the usual hour, all save Peter Whitmer, who spent the night
on guard. But as for myself, soon after I went to bed I fell into a
train of reflections which occupied my mind, and which caused sleep to
forsake my eyelids till the day dawned, for, when I meditated upon the
days of toil, and nights of anxiety, through which we had all passed
for years previous, in order to obtain the treasure that then lay
beneath my head; when I thought upon the hours of fearful apprehensions
which we had all suffered on the same account, and that the object was
at last accomplished, I could truly say that my soul did magnify the
Lord, and my spirit rejoiced in God my Savior. I felt that the heavens
were moved in our behalf, and that the angels who had power to put down
the mighty from their seats, and to exalt those who were of low degree,
were watching over us; that those would be filled who hungered and
thirsted after righteousness, when the rich would be sent empty away;
that God had helped his servant Israel in remembrance of his promised
mercy, and in bringing forth a Record, by which is made known the seed
of Abraham, our father. Therefore, we could safely put our trust in
him, as he was able to help in every time of need.

On the fourth day subsequent to the afore-mentioned council, soon after
my husband left the house to go to his work, those three delegates
appointed by the council, came to accomplish the work assigned to them.
Soon after they entered, one of them began thus:--

"Mrs. Smith, we hear that you have a gold bible; we have come to see if
you will be so kind as to show it to us?"

"No, gentlemen," said I, "we have no gold bible, but we have a
translation of some gold plates, which have been brought forth for
the purpose of making known to the world the plainness of the gospel,
and also to give a history of the people which formerly inhabited
this continent." I then proceeded to relate the substance of what
is contained in the Book of Mormon, dwelling particularly upon the
principles of religion therein contained. I endeavored to show them
the similarity between these principles, and the simplicity of the
gospel taught by Jesus Christ in the New Testament. "Notwithstanding
all this," said I, "the different denominations are very much opposed
to us. The Universalists are alarmed lest their religion should suffer
loss, the Presbyterians tremble for their salaries, the Methodists also
come, and they rage, for they worship a God without body or parts, and
they know that our faith comes in contact with this principle."

After hearing me through, the gentlemen said, "Can we see the
manuscript, then?"

"No, sir," replied I, "you cannot see it. I have told you what it
contains, and that must suffice."

He made no reply to this, but said, "Mrs. Smith, you and the most of
your children have belonged to our church for some length of time,
and we respect you very highly. You say a good deal about the Book of
Mormon, which your son has found, and you believe much of what he tells
you, yet we cannot bear the thoughts of losing you, and they do wish--I
wish, that if you do believe those things, you would not say anything
more upon the subject--I do wish you would not."

"Deacon Beckwith," said I, "if you should stick my flesh full of
faggots, and even burn me at the stake, I would declare, as long as God
should give me breath, that Joseph has got that Record, and that I know
it to be true."

At this, he observed to his companions, "You see it is of no use to say
anything more to her, for we cannot change her mind." Then, turning to
me, he said, "Mrs. Smith, I see that it is not possible to persuade you
out of your belief, therefore I deem it unnecessary to say anything
more upon the subject."

"No, sir," said I, "it is not worth your while."

He then bade me farewell, and went out to see Hyrum, when the following
conversation took place between them:

Deacon Beckwith: "Mr. Smith, do you not think that you may be deceived
about that Record, which your brother pretends to have found?"

Hyrum: "No, sir, I do not."

Deacon Beckwith: "Well, now, Mr. Smith, if you find that you are
deceived, and that he has not got the Record, will you confess the fact
to me?"

Hyrum: "Will you, Deacon Beckwith, take one of the books, when they are
printed, and read it, asking God to give you an evidence that you may
know whether it is true?"

Deacon Beckwith; "I think it beneath me to take so much trouble,
however, if you will promise that you will confess to me that Joseph
never had the plates, I will ask for a witness whether the book is
true."

Hyrum: "I will tell you what I will do, Mr. Beckwith, if you do get a
testimony from God, that the book is not true, I will confess to you
that it is not true."

Upon this they parted, and the Deacon next went to Samuel, who quoted
to him, Isaiah, lvi: 9-11:

    All ye beasts of the field, come to devour; yea, all ye beasts in
    the forest. His watchmen are blind: they are all ignorant, they are
    all dumb dogs, they cannot bark; sleeping, lying down, loving to
    slumber; yea, they are greedy dogs, which can never have enough,
    and they are shepherds that cannot understand: they all look to
    their own way, every one for his gain, from his quarter.

Here Samuel ended the quotation, and the three gentlemen left without
ceremony.



CHAPTER XXXIII.

ESQUIRE COLE'S DOGBERRY PAPER--SECOND MEETING OF THE CITIZENS.

The work of printing still continued with little or no interruption,
until one Sunday afternoon, when Hyrum became very uneasy as to the
security of the work left at the printing office, and requested Oliver
to accompany him thither, to see if all was right. Oliver hesitated
for a moment, as to the propriety of going on Sunday, but finally
consented, and they set off together.

On arriving at the printing establishment, they found it occupied by
an individual by the name of Cole, an ex-justice of the peace, who was
busily employed in printing a newspaper. Hyrum was much surprised at
finding him there, and remarked, "How is it, Mr. Cole, that you are so
hard at work on Sunday?"

Mr. Cole replied, that he could not have the press, in the day time
during the week, and was obliged to do his printing at night, and on
Sundays.

Upon reading the prospectus of his paper, they found that he had agreed
with his subscribers to publish one form of "Joe Smith's Gold Bible"
each week, and thereby furnish them with the principle portion of the
book in such a way that they would not be obliged to pay the Smiths
for it. His paper was entitled, _Dogberry Paper on Winter Hill_. In
this, he had thrown together a parcel of the most vulgar, disgusting
prose, and the meanest, and most low-lived doggerel, in juxtaposition
with a portion of the Book of Mormon, which he had pilfered. At this
perversion of common sense and moral feeling, Hyrum was shocked, as
well as indignant at the dishonest course which Mr. Cole had taken, in
order to possess himself of the work.

"Mr. Cole," said he, "what right have you to print the Book of Mormon
in this manner? Do you not know that we have secured the copyright?"

"It is none of your business," answered Cole, "I have hired the press,
and will print what I please, so help yourself."

"Mr. Cole," rejoined Hyrum, "that manuscript is sacred, and I forbid
your printing any more of it."

"Smith," exclaimed Cole, in a tone of anger, "I don't care a d--n for
you: that d--d gold bible is going into my paper, in spite of all you
can do."

Hyrum endeavored to dissuade him from his purpose, but finding him
inexorable, left him to issue his paper, as he had hitherto done;
for when they found him at work, he had already issued six or eight
numbers, and had managed to keep them out of our sight.

On returning from the office, they asked my husband what course was
best for them to pursue, relative to Mr. Cole. He told them that he
considered it a matter with which Joseph ought to be made acquainted.
Accordingly, he set out himself for Pennsylvania, and returned with
Joseph the ensuing Sunday. The weather was so extremely cold, that they
came near perishing before they arrived at home, nevertheless, as soon
as Joseph made himself partially comfortable, he went to the printing
office, where he found Cole employed, as on the Sunday previous. "How
do you do, Mr. Cole," said Joseph, "you seem hard at work." "How do you
do, Mr. Smith," answered Cole, dryly.

Joseph examined his _Dogberry Paper_, and then said firmly, "Mr. Cole,
that book, [the Book of Mormon] and the right of publishing it, belongs
to me, and I forbid you meddling with it any further."

At this Mr. Cole threw off his coat, rolled up his sleeves, and came
towards Joseph, smacking his fists together with vengeance, and roaring
out, "Do you want to fight, sir? do you want to fight? I will publish
just what I please. Now, if you want to fight, just come on."

Joseph could not help smiling at his grotesque appearance, for his
behavior was too ridiculous to excite indignation. "Now, Mr. Cole,"
said he, "you had better keep your coat on--it is cold, and I am not
going to fight you, nevertheless, I assure you, sir, that you have got
to stop printing my book, for I know my rights, and shall maintain
them."

"Sir," bawled out the wrathy gentleman, "if you think you are the best
man, just pull off your coat and try it."

"Mr. Cole," said Joseph, in a low, significant tone, "there is law, and
you will find that out, if you do not understand it, but I shall not
fight you, sir."

At this, the ex-justice began to cool off a little, and finally
concluded to submit to an arbitration, which decided that he should
stop his proceedings forthwith, so that he made us no further trouble.

Joseph, after disposing of this affair, returned to Pennsylvania, but
not long to remain there, for when the inhabitants of the surrounding
country perceived that the work still progressed, they became uneasy,
and again called a large meeting. At this time, they gathered their
forces together, far and near, and organizing themselves into a
committee of the whole, they resolved, as before, never to purchase
one of our books, when they should be printed. They then appointed a
committee to wait upon E. B. Grandin, and inform him of the resolutions
which they had passed, and also to explain to him the evil consequences
which would result to him therefrom. The men who were appointed to do
this errand, fulfilled their mission to the letter, and urged upon Mr.
Grandin the necessity of his putting a stop to the printing, as the
Smiths had lost all their property, and consequently would be unable to
pay him for his work, except by the sale of the books. And this they
would never be able to do, for the people would not purchase them. This
information caused Mr. Grandin to stop printing, and we were again
compelled to send for Joseph. These trips, back and forth, exhausted
nearly all our means, yet they seemed unavoidable.

When Joseph came, he went immediately with Martin Harris to Grandin,
and succeeded in removing his fears, so that he went on with the work,
until the books were printed, which was in the spring of eighteen
hundred and thirty.



CHAPTER XXXIV.

THE CHURCH ORGANIZED.

About the first of April of the same year in which the Book of Mormon
was published, Joseph came again from Pennsylvania, preached to us
several times. My husband and Martin Harris were baptized. When Mr.
Smith came out of the water, Joseph stood upon the shore, and taking
his father by the hand, he exclaimed, with tears of joy, "Praise to my
God! that I lived to see my own father baptized into the true Church of
Jesus Christ!" On April 6, 1830, the Church was organized.

Shortly after this, my sons were all ordained to the ministry, even
Don Carlos, who was but fourteen years of age. Samuel was directed to
take a number of the Books of Mormon, and go on a mission to Livonia,
to preach, and make sale of the books, if possible. Whilst he was
making preparations to go on this mission, Miss Almira Mack arrived in
Manchester from Pontiac. This young woman was a daughter of my brother,
Stephen Mack, whose history I have already given. She received the
Gospel as soon as she heard it, and was baptized immediately, and has
ever since remained a faithful member of the Church.

On the thirtieth of June, Samuel started on the mission to which he had
been set apart by Joseph, and in traveling twenty-five miles, which was
his first day's journey, he stopped at a number of places in order to
sell his books, but was turned out of doors as soon as he declared his
principles. When evening came on, he was faint and almost discouraged,
but coming to an inn, which was surrounded with every appearance of
plenty, he called to see if the landlord would buy one of his books.
On going in, Samuel enquired of him, if he did not wish to purchase a
history of the origin of the Indians.

"I do not know," replied the host; "how did you get hold of it?"

"It was translated," rejoined Samuel, "by my brother, from some gold
plates that he found buried in the earth."

"You d--d liar" cried the landlord, "get out of my house--you sha'nt
stay one minute with your books."

Samuel was sick at heart, for this was the fifth time he had been
turned out of doors that day. He left the house, and traveled a short
distance, and washed his feet in a small brook, as a testimony against
the man. He then proceeded five miles further on his journey, and
seeing an apple tree a short distance from the road, he concluded to
pass the night under it; and here he lay all night upon the cold,
damp ground. In the morning, he arose from his comfortless bed, and
observing a small cottage at no great distance, he drew near, hoping
to get a little refreshment. The only inmate was a widow, who seemed
very poor. He asked her for food, relating the story of his former
treatment. She prepared him some victuals, and, after eating, he
explained to her the history of the Book of Mormon. She listened
attentively, and believed all that he told her, but, in consequence of
her poverty, she was unable to purchase one of the books. He presented
her with one, and proceeded to Bloomington, which was eight miles
further. Here he stopped at the house of John P. Greene, who was a
Methodist preacher, and was at that time about starting on a preaching
mission. He, like the others, did not wish to make a purchase of what
he considered at that time to be a nonsensical fable, however, he said
that he would take a subscription paper, and, if he found anyone on
his route who was disposed to purchase, he would take his name, and in
two weeks, Samuel might call again, and he would let him know what the
prospect was of selling. After making this arrangement, Samuel left one
of his books with him, and returned home. At the time appointed, Samuel
started again for the Rev. John P. Greene's, in order to learn the
success which this gentleman had met with in finding sale for the Book
of Mormon. This time, Mr. Smith, and myself accompanied him, and it
was our intention to have passed near the tavern, where Samuel was so
abusively treated a fortnight previous, but just before we came to the
house, a sign of small-pox intercepted us. We turned aside, and meeting
a citizen of the place, we enquired of him, to what extent this disease
prevailed. He answered, that the tavern keeper and two of his family
had died with it not long since, but he did not know that any one else
had caught the disease, and that it was brought into the neighborhood
by a traveler, who stopped at the tavern over night.

This is a specimen of the peculiar disposition of some individuals,
who would sacrifice their soul's salvation rather than give a Saint of
God a meal of victuals. According to the word of God, it will be more
tolerable for Sodom and Gomorrah, in the day of judgment, than for such
persons.

We arrived at Esquire Beaman's, in Livonia, that night. The next
morning Samuel took the road to Mr. Greene's, and, finding that he had
made no sale of the books, we returned home the following day.



CHAPTER XXXV.

JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, AND DON CARLOS, VISIT STOCKHOLM.

In the summer after the Church was organized, my husband set out, with
Don Carlos, to visit his father, Asael Smith. After a tedious journey,
they arrived at the house of John Smith, my husband's brother. His wife
Clarissa had never before seen my husband, but as soon as he entered,
she exclaimed, "There, Mr. Smith, is your brother Joseph."

John, turning suddenly, cried out, "Joseph, is this you?"

"It is I," said Joseph; "is my father yet alive? I have come to see him
once more, before he dies."

For a particular account of this visit, I shall give my readers an
extract from brother John Smith's journal. He writes as follows:

    The next morning after brother Joseph arrived, we set out together
    for Stockholm to see our father, who was living at that place with
    our brother Silas. We arrived about dark at the house of my brother
    Jesse, who was absent with his wife. The children informed us, that
    their parents were with our father, who was supposed to be dying.
    We hastened without delay to the house of brother Silas, and upon
    arriving there, were told that father was just recovering from a
    severe fit, and, as it was not considered advisable to let him or
    mother know that Joseph was there, we went to spend the night with
    brother Jesse.

    As soon as we were settled, brothers Jesse and Joseph entered into
    conversation respecting their families. Joseph briefly related the
    history of his family, the death of Alvin, etc. He then began to
    speak of the discovery and translation of the Book of Mormon. At
    this Jesse grew very angry, and exclaimed, "If you say another word
    about that Book of Mormon, you shall not stay a minute longer in
    my house, and if I can't get you out any other way, I will hew you
    down with my broadaxe."

    We had always been accustomed to being treated with much harshness
    by our brother, but he had never carried it to so great an extent
    before. However, we spent the night with him, and the next morning
    visited our aged parents. They were overjoyed to see Joseph, for he
    had been absent from them so long, that they had been fearful of
    never beholding his face again in the flesh.

    After the usual salutations, enquiries, and explanations, the
    subject of the Book of Mormon was introduced. Father received with
    gladness, that which Joseph communicated; and remarked, that he had
    always expected that something would appear to make known the true
    Gospel.

    In a few moments brother Jesse came in, and on hearing that the
    subject of our conversation was the Book of Mormon, his wrath rose
    as high as it did the night before. "My father's mind," said Jesse,
    "is weak; and I will not have it corrupted with such blasphemous
    stuff, so just shut up your head."

    Brother Joseph reasoned mildly with him, but to no purpose. Brother
    Silas then said, "Jesse, our brother has come to make us a visit,
    and I am glad to see him, and am willing he should talk as he
    pleases in my house." Jesse replied in so insulting a manner, and
    continued to talk so abusively, that Silas was under the necessity
    of requesting him to leave the house.

    After this, brother Joseph proceeded in conversation, and father
    seemed to be pleased with every word which he said. But I must
    confess that I was too pious, at that time, to believe one word of
    it.

    I returned home next day, leaving Joseph with my father. Soon after
    which, Jesse came to my house and informed me, that all my brothers
    were coming to make me a visit, "and as true as you live," said he,
    "they all believe that cursed Mormon book, every word of it, and
    they are setting a trap for you, to make you believe it."

    I thanked him for taking so much trouble upon himself, to inform
    me that my brothers were coming to see me, but told him that
    I considered myself amply able to judge for myself in matters
    of religion. "I know," he replied, "that you are a pretty good
    judge of such things, but I tell you that they are as wary as the
    devil. And I want you to go with me and see our sister Susan and
    sister-in-law Fanny, and we will bar their minds against Joseph's
    influence."

    We accordingly visited them, and conversed upon the subject as we
    thought proper, and requested them to be at my house the next day.

    My brothers arrived according to previous arrangement, and Jesse,
    who came also, was very careful to hear every word which passed
    among us, and would not allow one word to be said about the Book of
    Mormon in his presence. They agreed that night to visit our sisters
    the following day, and as we were about leaving, brother Asael took
    me aside and said, "Now, John, I want you to have some conversation
    with Joseph, but if you do, you must cheat it out of Jesse. And if
    you wish, I can work the card for you."

    I told him that I would be glad to have a talk with Joseph alone,
    if I could get an opportunity.

    "Well," replied Asael, "I will take a certain number in my
    carriage, and Silas will take the rest, and you may bring out a
    horse for Joseph to ride, but when we are out of sight, take the
    horse back to the stable again, and keep Joseph over night."

    I did as Asael advised, and that evening Joseph explained to me the
    principles of "Mormonism," the truth of which I have never since
    denied.

    The next morning, we (Joseph and myself) went to our sisters, where
    we met our brothers. Jesse censured me very sharply for keeping
    Joseph over night.

    In the evening, when we were about to separate, I agreed to take
    Joseph in my wagon twenty miles on his journey the next day. Jesse
    rode home with me that evening, leaving Joseph with our sisters.
    As Joseph did not expect to see Jesse again, when we were about
    starting, Joseph gave Jesse his hand in a pleasant, affectionate
    manner, and said, "Farewell, brother Jesse." "Farewell, Jo, for
    ever," replied Jesse, in a surly tone.

    "I am afraid," returned Joseph, in a kind, but solemn manner, "it
    will be for ever, unless you repent."

    This was too much for even Jesse's obdurate heart. He melted
    into tears; however, he made no reply, nor ever mentioned the
    circumstance afterwards.

    I took my brother twenty miles on his journey the next day, as I
    had agreed. Before he left me, he requested me to promise him, that
    I would read a Book of Mormon, which he had given me, and even
    should I not believe it, that I would not condemn it; "for," said
    he, "if you do not condemn it, you shall have a testimony of its
    truth." I fulfilled my promise, and thus proved his testimony to be
    true.

Just before my husband's return, as Joseph was about commencing a
discourse one Sunday morning, Parley P. Pratt came in, very much
fatigued. He had heard of us at considerable distance, and had traveled
very fast, in order to get there by meeting time, as he wished to hear
what we had to say, that he might be prepared to show us our error. But
when Joseph had finished his discourse, Mr. Pratt arose, and expressed
his hearty concurrence in every sentiment advanced. The following day
he was baptized and ordained. In a few days he set off for Canaan, N.Y.,
where his brother Orson resided, whom he baptized on the nineteenth
of September, 1830.

About this time Joseph's trouble commenced at Colesville with the mob,
who served a writ upon him, and dragged him from the desk as he was
about taking his text to preach. But as a relation of this affair is
given in his history, (see _Times and Seasons_, vol. IV., pp. 40 and
61. _Supp. to Mill. Star_, vol. XIV., p. 31) I shall mention only one
circumstance pertaining to it, for which I am dependent upon Esquire
Reid, Joseph's counsel in the case, and I shall relate it as near in
his own words as my memory will admit:--

    I was so busy at that time, when Mr. Smith sent for me, that it
    was almost impossible for me to attend the case, and never having
    seen Mr. Smith, I determined to decline going. But soon after
    coming to this conclusion, I thought I heard some one say to me,
    "You _must_ go, and deliver the Lord's Anointed!" Supposing it
    was the man who came after me, I replied, "The Lord's Anointed?
    What do you mean by the Lord's Anointed?" He was surprised at
    being accosted in this manner, and replied, "What do you mean,
    sir? I said nothing about the Lord's Anointed." I was convinced
    that he told the truth, for these few words filled my mind with
    peculiar feelings, such as I had never before experienced; and I
    immediately hastened to the place of trial. Whilst I was engaged in
    the case, these emotions increased, and when I came to speak upon
    it, I was inspired with an eloquence which was altogether new to
    me, and which was overpowering and irresistible. I succeeded, as
    I expected, in obtaining the prisoner's discharge. This the more
    enraged the adverse party, and I soon discovered that Mr. Smith was
    liable to abuse from them, should he not make his escape. The most
    of them being fond of liquor, I invited them into another room to
    drink, and thus succeeded in attracting their attention, until Mr.
    Smith was beyond their reach. I knew not where he went, but I was
    satisfied that he was out of their hands.

Since this circumstance occurred, until this day, Mr. Reid has been a
faithful friend to Joseph, although he has never attached himself to
the Church.

After escaping the hands of the mob, Joseph traveled till daybreak
the next morning, before he ventured to ask for victuals, although he
had taken nothing, save a small crust of bread, for two days. About
day-break he arrived at the house of one of his wife's sisters, where
he found Emma, who had suffered great anxiety about him, since his
first arrest. They returned home together, and immediately afterwards
Joseph received a commandment by revelation, to move his family to
Waterloo.

Joseph had at this time just completed a house, which he had built on
a small farm, that he had purchased of his father-in-law; however, he
locked up his house with his furniture in it, and repaired with Emma,
immediately to Manchester. About the time of his arrival at our house,
Hyrum had settled up his business, for the purpose of being at liberty
to do whatever the Lord required of him: and he requested Joseph to ask
the Lord for a revelation concerning the matter. The answer given was,
that he should take a bed, his family, and what clothing he needed for
them, and go straightway to Colesville, for his enemies were combining
in secret chambers to take away his life. At the same time, Mr Smith
received a commandment to go forthwith to Waterloo, and prepare a place
for his family, as our enemies also sought his destruction in the
neighborhood in which we then resided, but in Waterloo he should find
favor in the eyes of the people. The next day, by ten o'clock, Hyrum
was on his journey. Joseph and Emma left for Macedon, and William went
away from home in another direction, on business. Samuel was absent on
a third mission to Livonia, for which he had set out on the first of
October, soon after the arrival of my husband and Don Carlos from their
visit to father Smith. Catherine and Don Carlos were also away from
home. Calvin Stodard and his wife, Sophronia, had moved several miles
distant, some time previous. This left no one but Mr. Smith, myself,
and our little girl, Lucy, at home.



CHAPTER XXXVI.

JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, IMPRISONED--AN ATTEMPT TO TAKE HYRUM.

On the same day that Hyrum left for Colesville, which was Wednesday,
the neighbors began to call, one after another, and inquire very
particularly for Hyrum.

This gave me great anxiety, for I knew that they had no business with
him. The same night, my husband was taken rather ill, and, continuing
unwell the next day, he was unable to take breakfast with me. About
ten o'clock I commenced preparing him some milk porridge, but, before
it was ready for him, a Quaker gentleman called to see him, and the
following is the substance of their conversation:

Quaker.--"Friend Smith, I have a note against thee for fourteen
dollars, which I have lately bought, and I have come to see if thou
hast the money for me."

Mr. Smith.--"Why, sir, did you purchase that note? You certainly was in
no want of the money?"

Quaker.--"That is business of my own; I want the money, and must have
it."

Mr. Smith.--"I can pay you six dollars now,--the rest you will have to
wait for, as I cannot get it for you."

Quaker.--"No, I will not wait one hour; and if thou dost not pay me
immediately, thou shalt go forthwith to the jail, unless (running to
the fire place, and making violent gestures with his hands towards the
fire) thou wilt burn up those Books of Mormon; but if thou wilt burn
them up, then I will forgive thee the whole debt."

Mr. Smith, (decidedly).--"That I shall not do."

Quaker.--"Then, thou shalt go to jail."

"Sir." I interrupted (taking my gold beads from my neck, and holding
them towards him), "these beads are the full value of the remainder of
the debt. I beseech you to take them, and give up the note."

Quaker.--"No, I will not. Thou must pay the money, or thy husband shall
go straightway to jail."

"Now, here, sir," I replied, "just look at yourself as you are. Because
God has raised up my son to bring forth a book, which was written for
the salvation of the souls of men, for the salvation of your soul as
well as mine, you have come here to distress me, by taking my husband
to jail; and you think, by this, that you will compel us to deny the
work of God, and destroy a book which was translated by the gift and
power of God. But, sir, we shall not burn the Book of Mormon, nor deny
the inspiration of the Almighty."

The Quaker then stepped to the door, and called a constable, who was
waiting there for the signal. The constable came forward, and, laying
his hand on Mr. Smith's shoulder, said, "You are my prisoner."

I entreated the officer to allow me time to get some one to become my
husband's security, but he refused. I then requested that he might be
permitted to eat the porridge which I had been preparing, as he had
taken no nourishment since the night before. This was also denied, and
the Quaker ordered my husband to get immediately into a wagon which
stood waiting to convey him to prison.

After they had taken him to the wagon, the Quaker stood over him as
guard, and the officer came back and ate up the food which I had
prepared for my husband, who sat in the burning sun, faint and sick.

I shall make no remarks in regard to my feelings on this occasion. Any
human heart can imagine how I felt. But verily, verily, those men will
have their reward.

They drove off with my husband, leaving me alone with my little girl.
The next morning, I went on foot several miles to see a friend by
the name of Abner Lackey, who, I hoped, would assist me. I was not
disappointed. He went without delay to the magistrate's office, and had
my papers prepared, so that I could get my husband out of the prison
cell, although he would still be confined in the jail yard.

Shortly after I returned home, a pert young gentleman came in, and
asked if Mr. Hyrum Smith was at home. I told him, as I had others,
that he was in Colesville. The young man said that Hyrum was owing
a small debt to Dr. McIntyre, and that he had come to collect it by
the doctor's orders, as he (McIntyre) was from home. I told the young
man that this debt was to be paid in corn and beans, which should
be sent to him the next day. I then hired a man to take the produce
the following day to the doctor's house, which was accordingly done,
and when the man returned, he informed me that the clerk agreed to
erase the account. It was now too late in the day to set out for
Canandaigua, where my husband was confined in prison, and I concluded
to defer going till the next morning, in hopes that some of my sons
would return during the interval. The night came on, but neither of
my sons made their appearance. When the night closed in, the darkness
was hideous, scarcely any object was discernible. I sat down and began
to contemplate the situation of myself and family. My husband, an
affectionate companion and tender father as ever blessed the confidence
of a family, was an imprisoned debtor, torn from his family and immured
in a dungeon, where he had already lain two dismal nights, and now
another must be added to the number, before I could reach him to render
him any assistance. And where were his children? Alvin was murdered by
a quack physician; but still he lay at peace. Hyrum was flying from
his home, and why I knew not; the secret combinations of his enemies
were not yet fully developed. Joseph had but recently escaped from
his persecutors, who sought to accomplish his destruction. Samuel was
gone, without purse or scrip, to preach the Gospel, for which he was
as much despised and hated as were the ancient disciples. William was
also gone, and, I had not, unlike Naomi, even my daughters-in-law, to
comfort my heart in this the hour of my affliction.

While I was thus meditating, a heavy rap at the door brought me
suddenly to my feet. I bade the stranger enter. He asked me, in a
hurried manner, where Hyrum was. I answered the question as usual. Just
then, a second person came in, and the first observed to a second,
"Mrs. Smith says her son is not at home." The person addressed looked
suspiciously around, and remarked, "He is at home, for your neighbors
have seen him here today." "Then, sir," I replied, "they have seen what
I have not." "We have a search warrant," rejoined he, "and if you do
not give him up, we shall be under the necessity of taking whatever
we find that belongs to him." Finding some corn stored in the chamber
above the room where Hyrum had lived, they declared their intention
of taking it, but I forbade their meddling with it. At this instant a
third stranger entered, and then a fourth. The last observed, "I do not
know, but you will think strange of so many of us coming in, but my
candle was out, and I came in to relight it by your fire." I told him I
did not know what to think. I had but little reason to consider myself
safe either day or night, and that I would like to know what their
business was, and for what cause they were seizing upon our property.
The foremost replied that it was wanted to settle a debt which Hyrum
was owing to Dr. M'Intyre. I told him that it was paid. He disputed
my word, and ordered his men to take the corn. As they were going up
stairs, I looked out of the window, and one glance almost turned my
head giddy. As far as I could see by the light of two candles and a
pair of carriage lamps, the heads of men appeared in every direction,
some on foot, some on horseback, and the rest in wagons. I saw that
there was no way but for me to sit quietly down, and see my house
pillaged by a banditti of blacklegs, religious bigots, and cut-throats,
who were united in one purpose, namely, that of destroying us from
the face of the earth. However, there was one resource, and to that I
applied. I went aside, and kneeled before the Lord, and begged that he
would not let my children fall into their hands, and that they might be
satisfied with plunder without taking life.

Just at this instant, William bounded into the house. "Mother," he
cried, "in the name of God, what is this host of men doing here? Are
they robbing or stealing? What are they about?"

I told him, in short, that they had taken his father to prison, and had
now come after Hyrum, but, not finding him, they were plundering the
house. Hereupon, William seized a large handspike, sprang up stairs,
and, in one instant, cleared the scoundrels out of the chamber. They
scampered down stairs; he flew after them, and, bounding into the very
midst of the crowd, he brandished his handspike in every direction,
exclaiming, "Away from here, you cut-throats, instantly, or I will be
the death of every one of you."

The lights were immediately extinguished, yet he continued to harangue
them boisterously, until he discovered that his audience had left him.
They seemed to believe what he said, and fled in every direction,
leaving us again to ourselves.

Between twelve and one o'clock, Calvin Stodard and his wife, Sophronia,
arrived at our house. Calvin said he had been troubled about us all
the afternoon, and, finally, about the setting of the sun, he told
Sophronia that he would even then start for her father's if she felt
inclined to go with him.

Within an hour after their arrival, Samuel came. He was much fatigued,
for he had traveled twenty one miles after sunset. I told him our
situation, and that I wished him to go early the next morning to
Canandaigua, and procure his fathers release from the dungeon. "Well,
mother," said he, "I am sick; fix me a bed, that I may lay down and
rest myself, or I shall not be able to go, for I have taken a heavy
cold, and my bones ache dreadfully."

However, by a little nursing and some rest, he was able to set off by
sunrise, and arrived at Canandaigua at ten o'clock. After informing
the jailor of his business, he requested that his father might be
immediately liberated from the cell. The jailor refused, because it was
Sunday, but permitted Samuel to go into the cell, where he found my
husband confined in the same dungeon with a man committed for murder.
Upon Samuel inquiring what his treatment had been, Mr. Smith replied as
follows:

    Immediately after I left your mother, the men by whom I was taken
    commenced using every possible argument to induce me to renounce
    the Book of Mormon, saying, "how much better it would be for you
    to deny that silly thing, than to be disgraced and imprisoned,
    when you might not only escape this, but also have the note back,
    as well as the money which you have paid on it." To this I made no
    reply. They still went on in the same manner till we arrived at the
    jail, when they hurried me into this dismal dungeon. I shuddered
    when I first heard these heavy doors creaking upon their hinges;
    but then I thought to myself, I was not the first man who had been
    imprisoned for the truth's sake; and when I should meet Paul in the
    Paradise of God, I could tell him that I, too, had been in bonds
    for the Gospel which he had preached. And this has been my only
    consolation.

    From the time I entered until now, and this is the fourth day, I
    have had nothing to eat, save a pint basin full of very weak broth;
    and there [pointing to the opposite side of the cell] lies the
    basin yet.

Samuel was very much wounded by this, and, having obtained permission
of the jailor, he immediately went out and brought his father some
comfortable food. After which he remained with him until the next
morning, when the business was attended to, and Mr. Smith went out
into the jail yard to a cooper's shop, where he obtained employment
at coopering, and followed the same until he was released, which was
thirty days. He preached during his confinement here every Sunday, and
when he was released he baptized two persons whom he had thus converted.



CHAPTER XXXVII.

THE FAMILY OF JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, REMOVE TO WATERLOO.

Samuel returned from Canandaigua the same day that my husband was
liberated from the cell. After relating to us the success he had met
with at Canandaigua, he gave us an account of his third mission to
Livonia:--

    When I arrived at Mr. Green's, said he, Mrs. Green informed me that
    her husband was absent from home, that there was no prospect of
    selling my books, and even the one which I had left with them, she
    expected I would have to take away, as Mr. Green had no disposition
    to purchase it, although she had read it herself, and was much
    pleased with it. I then talked with her a short time, and, binding
    my knapsack upon my shoulders, rose to depart; but, as I bade her
    farewell, it was impressed upon my mind to leave the book with her.
    I made her a present of it, and told her that the Spirit forbade me
    taking it away. She burst into tears, and requested me to pray with
    her. I did so, and afterwards explained to her the most profitable
    manner of reading the book which I had left with her; which was,
    to ask God, when she read it, for a testimony of the truth of what
    she had read, and she would receive the Spirit of God, which would
    enable her to discern the things of God. I then left her, and
    returned home.

I shall now turn aside from my narrative, and give a history of the
above book. When Mr. Green returned home, his wife requested him to
read it, informing him very particularly with regard to what Samuel
had said to her, relative to obtaining a testimony of the truth of
it. This, he, for a while, refused to do, but finally yielded to her
persuasions, and took the book, and commenced perusing the same,
calling upon God for the testimony of his Spirit. The result of which
was, that he and Mrs. Green were in a short time baptized. They gave
the book to Phineas Young, Mrs. Green's brother, who read it, and
commenced preaching it forthwith. It was next handed to Brigham Young,
and from him to Mrs. Murray, his sister, who is also the mother of
Heber C. Kimball's wife. They all received the work without hesitancy,
and rejoiced in the truth thereof. Joseph Young was at this time in
Canada, preaching the Methodist doctrine; but, as soon as Brigham
became convinced of the truth of the Gospel, as contained in the Book
of Mormon, he went straightway to his brother Joseph, and persuaded him
to cease preaching Methodism, and embrace the truth, as set forth in
the Book of Mormon, which he carried with him.

Thus was this book the means of convincing this whole family, and
bringing them into the Church, where they have continued faithful
members from the commencement of their career until now. And, through
their faithfulness and zeal, some of them have become as great and
honorable men as ever stood upon the earth.

I shall now resume my subject. The first business which Samuel set
himself about after he returned home, was preparing to move the family
to Waterloo, according to the revelation given to Joseph. And after
much fatigue and perplexities of various kinds, he succeeded in getting
us there. We moved into a house belonging to an individual by the
name of Kellog. Shortly after arriving there, we were made to realize
that the hearts of the people were in the hands of the Lord; for we
had scarcely unpacked our goods, when one of our new neighbors, a Mr.
Osgood, came in and invited us to drive' our stock and teams to his
barn-yard, and feed them from his barn, free of cost, until we could
make further arrangements. Many of our neighbors came in, and welcomed
us to Waterloo. Among whom was Mr. Hooper, a tavernkeeper, whose wife
came with him, and brought us a present of some delicate eatables. Such
manifestations of kindness as these were shown us from day to day,
during our continuance in the place. And they were duly appreciated,
for we had experienced the opposite so severely, that the least show of
good feeling gave rise to the liveliest sensations of gratitude.

Having settled ourselves in this place, we established the practice of
spending the evenings in singing and praying. The neighbors soon became
aware of this, and it caused our house to become a place of evening
resort, for some dozen or twenty persons. One evening, soon after we
commenced singing, a couple of little boys came in, and one of them,
stepping softly up to Samuel, whispered, "Mr. Smith, won't you pray
pretty soon? Our mother said, we must be home by eight o'clock, and we
would like to hear you pray before we go."

Samuel told them that prayer should be attended to immediately.
Accordingly, when we had finished the hymn, which we were then singing,
we closed the evening services with prayer, in order that the little
boys might be gratified. After this, they were never absent during our
evening devotions while we remained in the neighborhood.



CHAPTER XXXVIII.

THE FIRST WESTERN MISSION--JOSEPH SMITH, JUNIOR, MOVES TO KIRTLAND.

I mentioned, in a foregoing chapter, that when Joseph and Emma left
Manchester, they went to Macedon. Here, he commenced his ministerial
labors, and continued, for some time, to preach successively, in
this place, Colesville, Waterloo, Palmyra, and Manchester, till,
finally, he sent to Pennsylvania for his goods, and settled himself in
Waterloo. Soon after which, a revelation was given, commanding Parley
P. Pratt, Ziba Peterson, Peter Whitmer, and Oliver Cowdery, to take a
mission to Missouri, preaching by the way. As soon as this revelation
was received, Emma Smith, and several other sisters, began to make
arrangements to furnish those who were set apart for this mission, with
the necessary clothing, which was no easy task, as the most of it had
to be manufactured out of the raw material.

Emma's health at this time was quite delicate, yet she did not favor
herself on this account, but whatever her hands found to do, she did
with her might, until she went so far beyond her strength, that she
brought upon herself a heavy fit of sickness, which lasted four weeks.
And, although her strength was exhausted, still her spirits were the
same, which, in fact, was always the case with her, even under the
most trying circumstances. I have never seen a woman in my life, who
would endure every species of fatigue and hardship, from month to
month, and from year to year, with that unflinching courage, zeal, and
patience, which she has ever done; for I know that which she has had
to endure--she has been tossed upon the ocean of uncertainty--she has
breasted the storms of persecution, and buffeted the rage of men and
devils, which would have borne down almost any other woman. It may be,
that many may yet have to encounter the same--I pray God, that this
may not be the case; but, should it be, may they have grace given them
according to their day, even as has been the case with her.

As soon as those men designated in the revelation, were prepared to
leave home, they started on their mission, preaching and baptizing
on their way, wherever an opportunity afforded. On their route they
passed through Kirtland, where they preached a short time, and raised
up a branch of twenty or thirty members. Before leaving this place,
they addressed a letter to Joseph, desiring him to send an elder to
preside over the branch which they had raised up. Accordingly, Joseph
despatched John Whitmer to take the presidency of the church at
Kirtland; and when he arrived there, those appointed to go to Missouri,
proceeded on their mission, preaching and baptizing as before.

In December of the same year, Joseph appointed a meeting at our house.
While he was preaching, Sidney Rigdon and Edward Partridge came in
and seated themselves in the congregation. When Joseph had finished
his discourse, he gave all who had any remarks to make, the privilege
of speaking. Upon this, Mr. Partridge arose, and stated that he had
been to Manchester, with the view of obtaining further information
respecting the doctrine which we preached; but, not finding us, he had
made some inquiry of our neighbors concerning our characters, which
they stated had been unimpeachable, until Joseph deceived us relative
to the Book of Mormon. He also said that he had walked over our farm,
and observed the good order and industry which it exhibited; and,
having seen what we had sacrificed for the sake of our faith, and
having heard that our veracity was not questioned upon any other point
than that of our religion, he believed our testimony, and was ready to
be baptized, "if," said he, "Brother Joseph will baptize me."

"You are now," replied Joseph, "much fatigued, brother Partridge, and
you had better rest to-day, and be baptized tomorrow."

"Just as Brother Joseph thinks best," replied Mr. Partridge, "I am
ready at any time."

He was accordingly baptized the next day. Before he left, my husband
returned home from prison, bringing along with him considerable
clothing, which he had earned at coopering in the jail yard.

The latter part of the same month, Joseph received a letter from John
Whitmer, desiring his immediate assistance at Kirtland in regulating
the affairs of the church there. Joseph inquired of the Lord, and
received a commandment to go straightway to Kirtland with his family
and effects; also to send a message to Hyrum to have him take that
branch of the Church, over which he presided, and start immediately for
the same place. And my husband was commanded, in the same revelation,
to meet Hyrum at the most convenient point, and accompany him to
Kirtland. Samuel was sent on a mission, into the same region of
country, while I, and my two sons, William and Carlos, were to be left
till the ensuing spring, when we were to take the remainder of the
branch at Waterloo, and move also to Kirtland.

It was but a short time till Joseph and Emma were on their way,
accompanied by Sidney Rigdon, Edward Partridge, Ezra Thayre, and Newel
Knight. When they were about starting, they preached at our house on
Seneca River; and, on their way, they preached at the house of Calvin
Stodard, and likewise at the house of Preserved Harris. At each of
these places, they baptized several individuals into the Church.

On Joseph's arrival at Kirtland, he found a church consisting of nearly
one hundred members, who were, in general, good brethren, though a few
of them had imbibed some very erroneous ideas, being greatly deceived
by a singular power, which manifested itself among them in strange
contortions of the visage, and sudden, unnatural exertions of the body.
This they supposed to be a display of the power of God. Shortly after
Joseph arrived, he called the church together, in order to show them
the difference between the Spirit of God, and the spirit of the devil.
He said, if a man arose in meeting to speak, and was seized with a kind
of paroxysm that drew his face and limbs in a violent and unnatural
manner, which made him appear to be in pain; and if he gave utterance
to strange sounds, which were incomprehensible to his audience, they
might rely upon it, that he had the spirit of the devil. But, on the
contrary, when a man speaks by the Spirit of God, he speaks from the
abundance of his heart--his mind is filled with intelligence, and even
should he be excited, it does not cause him to do anything ridiculous
or unseemly. He then called upon one of the brethren to speak, who
arose and made the attempt, but was immediately seized with a kind of
spasm, which drew his face, arms, and fingers in a most astonishing
manner.

Hyrum, by Joseph's request, laid hands on the man, whereupon he sunk
back in a state of complete exhaustion. Joseph then called upon another
man to speak, who stood leaning in an open window. This man also
attempted to speak, but was thrown forward into the house, prostrate,
unable to utter a syllable. He was administered to, and the same
effects followed as in the first instance.

These, together with a few other examples of the same kind, convinced
the brethren of the mistake under which they had been laboring; and
they all rejoiced in the goodness of God, in once more condescending to
lead the children of men by revelation, and the gift of the Holy Ghost.



CHAPTER XXXIX.

THE DIFFERENT BRANCHES OF THE CHURCH REMOVE TO KIRTLAND--MIRACLE AT
BUFFALO.

Soon after my husband and Joseph left for Kirtland, William, being one
of the teachers, visited the church; and calling upon each family, he
remained with them until each individual belonging to the house had
prayed in his hearing.

When the brethren considered the spring sufficiently open for traveling
on the water, we all began to prepare for our removal to Kirtland. We
hired a boat of a certain Methodist preacher, and appointed a time to
meet at our house, for the purpose of setting off together; and when
we were thus collected, we numbered eighty souls. The people of the
surrounding country came and bade us farewell, invoking the blessing of
heaven upon our heads.

A few minutes before we started, an old brother by the name of Humphry,
arrived from Stockholm. This man was convinced by Don Carlos, at the
time that he visited his grandfather in company with my husband.

On account of Brother Humphry's age, I wished him to take charge of the
company, but he refused, saying that everything should be done, just as
mother Smith said; and to this the whole company responded, "yes." At
that instant, one Esquire Chamberlain came on board, and asked me, if I
had what money I wanted to make my family comfortable. I replied, that
I had an abundance for myself and children, but he might, perhaps, find
some on board, who stood in need of assistance. "Well," said he, "here
is a little money, and you can deal it out as you like," and, handing
me seventeen dollars, he left the boat. Soon after this, we were pushed
off and under fine headway.

I then called the brethren and sisters together, and reminded them
that we were traveling by the commandment of the Lord, as much as
Father Lehi was, when he left Jerusalem; and, if faithful, we had the
same reason to expect the blessings of God. I then desired them to be
solemn, and to lift their hearts to God continually in prayer, that
we might be prospered. We then seated ourselves and sang a hymn. The
captain was so delighted with the music, that he called to the mate,
saying, "Do, for God's sake come here, and steer the boat; for I must
hear that singing." He afterwards expressed his pleasure and surprise
at seeing such an appearance of devotion among us, stating that his
wife had refused to accompany him, on account of her prejudice against
us, which he very much regretted.

At the approach of sunset, we seated ourselves, and sang another hymn.
The music sounded beautifully upon the water, and had a salutary effect
upon every heart, filling our souls with love and gratitude to God, for
his manifold goodness towards us.

The services of the evening being ended, I inquired of the brethren
concerning the amount of provisions which they had on hand for the
journey; and, to my surprise, I ascertained that we had on board,
besides twenty grown persons, thirty children, who were almost
destitute of food. This was unaccountable to me at first, but I
afterwards learned that they had converted their substance into
clothing, expecting that those who were in better circumstances would
support them, as well as defray their traveling expenses; those,
however, from whom they expected the most assistance, disappointed
them, consequently, the burden was thrown entirely upon my shoulders.
From this time forward, I furnished the whole fifty persons with food
from day to day.

I soon discovered among the mothers, a kind of carelessness with
regard to their children, even when their lives were in danger. So
I called them together, and endeavored to impress upon their minds
the importance of doing their duty to their children; that in such a
place as this, especially, they ought to keep them constantly by their
side; that they should consider that children were given to them for a
blessing, and if they did not treat them as such, they would be taken
from them. Still they were negligent, and excused themselves by saying,
that their children were disobedient. I told the sisters that I could
manage their children, and if they were not better controlled by their
mothers, I should take the control of them.

I then called the children around me, and said to them, "Now, children,
mark what I say to you. When I come up stairs, and raise my hand, you
must, every one of you, run to me as fast as you can. Will you do as I
tell you?"

"Yes," they replied, with one unanimous voice. And they strictly kept
their faith to the end of the journey.

On getting about half way to Buffalo, the canal broke. This gave rise
to much murmuring and discontentment, which was expressed in terms like
the following:

"Well, the canal is broke now, and here we are, and here we are likely
to be, for we can go no further. We have left our homes, and here
we have no means of getting a living, consequently we shall have to
starve."

"No, no," said I, "you will not starve, brethren, nor anything of that
sort; only do be patient and stop your murmuring. I have no doubt but
the hand of the Lord is over us for good; perhaps it is best for us to
be here a short time. It is quite probable that the boats cannot leave
Buffalo harbor on account of the ice; if so, the town must inevitably
be crowded with families, in which case it would be next to impossible
for us to get into a comfortable house. Are we not in far better
circumstances in our present situation?"

"Well, well," returned the sisters, "I suppose you know best; but it
does seem as if it would have been better for us to have staid where we
were, for there we could sit in our rocking chairs, and take as much
comfort as we pleased, but here we are tired out, and have no place to
rest ourselves."

Whilst this was passing, a citizen of the place came on board, and
after inquiring what denomination we belonged to, he requested that,
if there were any preachers on board, a meeting would be appointed
in the neigborhood. I introduced him to Elders Humphry and Page, who
appointed a meeting for the next day, which was held on a beautiful
green, bordering on the canal, and of sufficient size to accommodate
a hundred persons. They listened with attention, and requested that
another meeting might be appointed for the succeeding day, but, as the
canal was repaired by eleven o'clock, we proceeded on our journey, and
arrived at Buffalo on the fifth day after leaving Waterloo.

Here we found the brethren from Colesville, who informed us that they
had been detained one week at this place, waiting for the navigation to
open. Also, that Mr. Smith and Hyrum had gone through to Kirtland by
land, in order to be there by the first of April.

I asked them if they had confessed to the people that they were
"Mormons." "No, indeed," they replied, "neither must you mention a word
about your religion, for if you do you will never be able to get a
house, or a boat either."

I told them I should tell the people precisely who I was; "and,"
continued I, "if you are ashamed of Christ, you must not expect to be
prospered; and I shall wonder if we do not get to Kirtland before you."

While we were talking with the Colesville brethren, another boat
landed, having on board about thirty brethren, among whom was Thomas B.
Marsh, who immediately joined us, and, like the Colesville brethren, he
was decidedly opposed to our attending to prayer, or making known that
we were professors of religion. He said that if our company persisted
in singing and praying, as we had hitherto done, we should be mobbed
before the next morning.

"Mob it is, then," said I, "we shall attend to prayer before sunset,
mob or no mob." Mr. Marsh, at this, left considerably irritated. I then
requested brothers Humphry and Page to go around among the boatmen,
and inquire for one Captain Blake, who was formerly captain of a boat
belonging to my brother, General Mack, and who, upon my brother's
decease, purchased the boat, and still commanded the same. They went
in search of the man, and soon found him, and learned from him that
his boat was already laden with the usual amount of passengers and
freight. He said, however, that he thought he could make room for us
if we would take a deck passage. As this was our only opportunity, we
moved our goods on board the next day, and by the time that we fairly
settled ourselves, it began to rain. This rendered our situation very
uncomfortable, and some of the sisters complained bitterly because we
had not hired a house till the boat was ready to start. In fact their
case was rather a trying one, for some of them had sick children; in
consequence of which, Brother Page went out for the purpose of getting
a room for the women and sick children, but returned unsuccessful.
At this the sisters renewed their complaints, and declared that they
would have a house, let the consequences be what they might. In order
to satisfy them, I set out myself, with my son William, although it
was still raining very fast, to see if it were possible to procure a
shelter for them and their children.

I stopped at the first tavern, and inquired of the landlord if he
could let me have a room for some women and children who were sick.
The landlord replied that he could easily make room for them. At this,
a woman who was present turned upon him very sharply, saying, "I have
put up here myself, and I am not a-going to have anybody's things in
my way. I'll warrant the children have got the whooping cough or
measles, or some other contagious disease, and, if they come, I will go
somewhere else."

"Why, madam," said the landlord, "that is not necessary, you can still
have one large room."

"I don't care," said she, "I want 'em both, and if I can't have 'em, I
won't stay--that's it."

"Never mind," said I, "it is no matter; I suppose I can get a room
somewhere else, just as well."

"No, you can't though," rejoined the lady, "for we hunted all over the
town, and we could not find one single one till we got here."

I left immediately, and went on my way. Presently I came to a long row
of rooms, one of which appeared to be almost vacant. I inquired if it
could be rented for a few days. The owner of the buildings, I found
to be a cheerful old lady, near seventy years of age. I mentioned the
circumstances to her, as I before had done to the landlord.

"Well, I don't know," said she; "where be you going?"

"To Kirtland," I replied.

"What be you?" said she. "Be you Baptists?"

I told her that we were "Mormons."

"Mormons!" ejaculated she, in a quick, good-natured tone. "What be
they? I never heard of them before."

"I told you that we were 'Mormons,'" I replied, "because that is what
the world call us, but the only name we acknowledge is Latter-day
Saints."

"Latter-day Saints!" rejoined she, "I never heard of them either."

I then informed her that this Church was brought forth through the
instrumentality of a prophet, and that I was the mother of this prophet.

"What!" said she, a "prophet in these days! I never heard of the like
in my life; and if you will come and sit with me, you shall have a room
for your sisters and their children, but you yourself must come and
stay with me, and tell me all about it."

This I promised to do, and then returned to the boat, and had the
sisters, and their sick children removed to the old lady's house; and
after making them comfortable, I went into her room. We soon fell into
conversation, in which I explained to her, as clearly as I could, the
principles of the gospel. On speaking of the laying on of hands for
the reception of the Holy Ghost, she was as much surprised as those
disciples were whom Paul found at Ephesus, and she asked me, "What do
you mean by the Holy Ghost?" I continued my explanations until after
two o'clock the next morning, when we removed to the boat again. On
arriving there, Captain Blake requested the passengers to remain on
board, as he wished, from that time, to be ready to start at a moment's
warning; at the same time he sent out a man to measure the depth of the
ice, who, when he returned, reported that it was piled up to the height
of twenty feet, and that it was his opinion that we would remain in the
harbor at least two weeks longer.

At this, Porter Rockwell started on shore to see his uncle. His mother
endeavored to prevent him, but he paid no attention to her, and she
then appealed to me, saying, "Mother Smith, do get Porter back, for he
won't mind anybody but you." I told him that, if he went, we should
leave him on shore, but he could do as he liked. He left the boat, and
several others were about following him; but when I spoke to them,
they replied, "we will do just as you say, Mother Smith," and returned
immediately.

Just then, William whispered in my ear, "Mother, do see the confusion
yonder; won't you go and put a stop to it!"

I went to that part of the boat where the principal portion of our
company were. There I found several of the brethren and sisters engaged
in a warm debate, others murmuring and grumbling, and a number of young
ladies were flirting, giggling, and laughing with gentlemen passengers,
who were entire strangers to them, whilst hundreds of people on shore
and on other boats were witnessing this scene of clamor and vanity
among our brethren with great interest. I stepped into their midst.
"Brethren and sisters," said I, "we call ourselves Saints, and profess
to have come out from the world for the purpose of serving God at
the expense of all earthly things; and will you, at the very onset,
subject the cause of Christ to ridicule by your own unwise and improper
conduct? You profess to put your trust in God, then how can you feel
to murmur and complain as you do! You are even more unreasonable than
the children of Israel were; for here are my sisters pining for their
rocking chairs, and brethren from whom I expected firmness and energy,
declare that they positively believe they shall starve to death before
they get to the end of their journey. And why is it so? Have any of you
lacked? Have not I set food before you every day, and made you, who
had not provided for yourselves, as welcome as my own children? Where
is your faith? Where is your confidence in God? Can you not realize
that all things were made by him, and that he rules over the works of
his own hands? And suppose that all the Saints here should lift their
hearts in prayer to God, that the way might be opened before us, how
easy it would be for him to cause the ice to break away, so that in a
moment we could be on our journey!"

Just then a man on shore cried, "Is the Book of Mormon true?"

"That book," replied I, "was brought forth by the power of God, and
translated by the gift of the Holy Ghost; and, if I could make my voice
sound as loud as the trumpet of Michael, the Archangel, I would declare
the truth from land to land, and from sea to sea, and the echo should
reach to every isle, until every member of the family of Adam should
be left without excuse. For I do testify that God has revealed himself
to man again in these last days, and set his hand to gather his people
upon a goodly land, and, if they obey his commandments, it shall be
unto them for an inheritance; whereas, if they rebel against his law,
his hand will be against them to scatter them abroad, and cut them off
from the face of the earth: and that he has commenced a work which will
prove a savor of life unto life, or of death unto death, to every one
that stands here this day--of life unto life, if you will receive it,
or of death unto death, if you reject the counsel of God, for every man
shall have the desires of his heart; if he desires the truth, he may
hear and live, but if he tramples upon the simplicity of the word of
God, he will shut the gate of heaven against himself." Then, turning to
our own company, I said, "Now, brethren and sisters, if you will all of
you raise your desires to heaven, that the ice may be broken up, and we
be set at liberty, as sure as the Lord lives, it will be done." At that
instant a noise was heard, like bursting thunder. The captain cried,
"Every man to his post." The ice parted, leaving barely a passage for
the boat, and so narrow, that as the boat passed through, the buckets
of the waterwheel were torn off with a crash, which, joined to the
word of command from the captain, the hoarse answering of the sailors,
the noise of the ice, and the cries and confusion of the spectators,
presented a scene truly terrible. We had barely passed through the
avenue, when the ice closed together again, and the Colesville brethren
were left in Buffalo, unable to follow us.

As we were leaving the harbor, one of the by-standers exclaimed, "There
goes the 'Mormon' company! That boat is sunk in the water nine inches
deeper than ever it was before, and, mark it, she will sink--there
is nothing surer." In fact, they were so sure of it, that they went
straight to the office and had it published that we were sunk, so that
when we arrived at Fairport, we read in the papers the news of our own
death.

After our miraculous escape from the wharf at Buffalo, we called our
company together, and had a prayer meeting, in which we offered up our
thanks to God for his mercy, which he had manifested towards us in
our deliverance; but before our meeting was broken up, the captain's
mate came to me and said, "Mrs. Smith, do, for God's sake, have your
children stop praying, or we shall all go to hell together; we cannot
keep one single man to his post, if we should go to the devil, for they
are so taken up with your praying." Therefore, our meeting was broken
up.

Soon after leaving Buffalo, some of our company began to feel the
effects of the motion of the boat, and were overcome with sea-sickness.
I went to the cook, and, handing him twenty-five cents, asked him if
he could let me have some hot water for the sick folks. He complied
with my request, and I was thus furnished with the means of making them
comfortable.

Upon further acquaintance with the captain, I made myself known to him
as the sister of General Mack. He seemed highly pleased to find in me a
relative of his old friend; and I was treated with great attention and
respect, both by himself and crew, while I remained on the boat.

A short time before I arrived at Fairport, Brother Humphry and myself
went on shore to do some trading for the company. While on shore, this
brother told me that I was making a slave of myself unnecessarily;
that those sisters whose families I had the care of could as well wait
upon their own husbands and children, as for me to do it; that, as for
himself, he was not going to stay on board much longer. I thanked him
for his kindness, but told him that I thought I could get along with
the work, without injuring myself. Nothing further passed between us
upon the subject. At the next landing, he left, and whither he went I
did not know.

On drawing near Fairport, where we were to land, the captain,
passengers, and crew, bade me farewell in tears. After landing, our
company were more disheartened than ever, and the brethren came around
me and requested that I should set their wives to sewing blankets
together, and making tents of them, that the men might camp by their
goods and watch them, for they had no hopes of getting any further.

I told them I should do nothing of the kind. As for the sisters, some
of them were crying, some pouting, and a few of them were attending to
the care of their families. As I passed among them, my attention was
attracted by a stranger, who sat a short distance from us on the shore
of the lake. I inquired of him the distance to Kirtland. He, starting
up, exclaimed, "Is it possible that this is Mother Smith? I have sat
here looking for you these three days."

Replying to his question in the affirmative, I asked him if it would be
possible to procure teams to take our goods to Kirtland. He told me to
give myself no uneasiness about the matter, that Joseph was expected
every hour, and in less than twenty-four hours there would be teams
sufficient to take all our company to houses that were waiting to
receive them. When he mentioned Joseph's name, I started, for I just
began to realize that I was so soon to see both my husband and my sons.
I turned from the stranger, and met Samuel, who was coming towards me,
closely followed by Joseph. I extended my right hand to Samuel and my
left to Joseph. They wept for joy upon seeing me--Samuel, because he
had been warned of God in a dream to meet the company from Waterloo,
and feared that some disaster had befallen me; and Joseph, because of
the information which he had received that he apprehended, from the
fatigue I was undergoing, my life was in danger.

After they informed me of these things, Joseph said he should take me
from the company. As the sisters begged to go with me, he took them as
far as Painsville, where we stopped at the house of Brother Partridge.
Here we found a fine supper prepared for the whole company.

Soon after partaking of this refreshment, I was taken to Brother
Kingsbury's, in his own carriage, where I was treated with great
kindness and respect. From this place I went with Joseph to Kirtland.
The first house that I entered was Brother Morley's. Here I met my
beloved husband, and great was our joy. Many of my readers may know
my present situation. These can imagine with what feelings I recite
such scenes as that which followed the reunion of our family; but let
it pass--imagination must supply the ellipsis. Were I to indulge my
feelings upon such occasions as this, my strength would not support me
to the end of my narrative.

Soon after arriving at Kirtland, a pair of twins were brought to Emma,
which were given to her to fill the place of a pair of her own that had
died.



CHAPTER XL.

SAMUEL SMITH'S FIRST MISSION TO MISSOURI.

We remained two weeks at Mr. Morley's, then removed our family to a
farm which had been purchased by Joseph for the Church. On this farm
my family were all established with this arrangement, that we were
to cultivate the farm, and, from the fruits of our labor, we were to
receive our support; but all over and above this was to be used for the
comfort of strangers or brethren, who were traveling through the place.

About this time Joseph was requested by Parley P. Pratt and his
company, who were then in Missouri, to send some Elders to assist
them. He inquired of the Lord, and received the revelation contained
in the _Times and Seasons_, vol. v., p. 416, in which Samuel H. Smith
and Reynolds Cahoon were appointed to go together to Missouri. They
departed immediately on their mission. Before they had proceeded far,
they called at a town, the name of which I do not remember, where they
found William E. McLellin, who was employed as a clerk in a store.
After making a little inquiry, they found that Mr. McLellin was anxious
to hear them preach, and that he was willing to make some exertion to
obtain a house and congregation for them, for the name of Latter-day
Saint was new to him, and he felt curious to hear what the principles
of our faith were. So, by his interposition, they soon had a large
congregation seated in a comfortable room. They preached that evening,
and the next morning they pursued their journey.

Shortly after they left, Mr. McLellin became very uneasy respecting his
new acquaintances; he felt that it was his duty to have gone with them
and assisted them on their journey. This feeling worked so strongly
in his breast, as to deprive him of rest all the ensuing night; and,
before morning, he concluded to set out for Missouri, at the hazard of
business, character, and everything else. Accordingly, after settling
with his employer, he started in pursuit of Samuel, and Brother Cahoon.
He passed them on their way, and got to Missouri, and was baptized
before they arrived there.

On their route, Samuel and Brother Cahoon suffered great privations,
such as want of rest and food. At the time that they started for
Missouri, near fifty others also set out for the same place, all taking
different routes. When they arrived, they dedicated the spot for the
Temple. About this time, or soon after, a number of revelations were
received which the reader will find by following the History of Joseph
in the _Times and Seasons_, vol. v., from p. 448 to 466. A clause
in one of these reads as follows: "Let my servant Reynolds Cahoon,
and my servant Samuel H. Smith, with whom I am well pleased, be not
separated until they return to their homes, and this for a wise purpose
in me." p. 465. And here, let me say, that Samuel was never censured
by revelation, to my knowledge, for he always performed his missions
faithfully, and his work was well approved.



CHAPTER XLI.

LUCY SMITH VISITS DETROIT.

As Hyrum, my eldest son, was directed to go to Missouri by the way
of Detroit, I thought it would be a good opportunity to visit the
family of my brother, General Mack. Accordingly, my niece, Almira
Mack, Hyrum,--brothers Murdock, Lyman Wight, and Corril and I, set out
together for Detroit. When we first went on board the vessel which
took us across the lake, we concluded to keep perfectly still upon the
subject of religion; but it was afterwards proposed by Hyrum, that
Mother Smith should say just what she pleased, and if she got into
difficulty, the Elders should help her out of it. Shortly after this, I
was sitting at the door of the cabin, reading the Book of Mormon, when
a lady came up and inquired of me what book I was reading. "The 'Book
of Mormon'," I replied. But the title of the book was no advantage
to her, for she had never before heard of there being such a work in
existence. By her request I gave her a brief history of the discovery
and translation of the book. This delighted her, and when I mentioned
that it was a record of the origin of the aborigines of America, she
said, "how I do wish I could get one of your books to carry to my
husband, for he is now a missionary among the Indians."

Just then, another lady, who was a doctor's wife, came near us, with
the appearance of wishing to hear our conversation. She was gorgeously
dressed, and carried herself very daintily, I assure you. She wore a
splendid satin scarf, which, as she walked to and fro before us, she
would occasionally let fall from the left shoulder, and expose a neck
and bosom decorated with very brilliant jewels. Presently she stopped
short, and said, "I do not want to hear any more of that stuff, or
anything more about Joe Smith either. They say that he is a 'Mormon'
prophet; but it is nothing but deception and lies. There was one Mr.
Murdock, who believed in Joe Smith's doctrines; and the 'Mormons' all
believe they can cure the sick and raise the dead; so when this Mr.
Murdock's wife was sick, he refused to send for a doctor, although the
poor woman wanted him to do so, and so by his neglect his wife died."

I told her I thought she must be a little mistaken, that I was
acquainted with the family, and knew something in regard to the matter.

"I know all about it," said the lady.

"Well now, perhaps not," said I, "just stop a moment and I will explain
it to you."

"No, I won't," returned the woman.

"Then," said I, "I will introduce you to Mr. Murdock, and let him tell
the story himself." I then turned to Mr. Murdock, who stood near, and
gave her an introduction to him. Before this, however, the chambermaid
went down stairs and complained to the doctor of his wife's unbecoming
behavior, and before she had heard a dozen words from our brother, her
husband came bustling up stairs. "Here," said he, to his wife, "they
tell me that you are abusing this old lady;" and taking her hand, he
drew it within his arm, and marched her off without further ceremony.

This circumstance introduced the subject of "Mormonism" among the
passengers, and it continued to be the topic of conversation until we
arrived at Detroit. On landing in Detroit, we repaired immediately to
a tavern, as my niece, Mrs. Cooper, was exceedingly nervous, and we
deemed it imprudent to disturb her that evening. The next morning,
Almira Mack and myself visited Mrs. Cooper, who was Almira's sister.
Almira went into her room, and found her lying on the bed. After the
usual salutations she informed Mrs. Cooper that Aunt Lucy was in the
parlor waiting to see her, and requested the privilege of inviting me
into her room; but it was some time before her nerves were sufficiently
settled to see me. However, before I was admitted into her presence,
she was further informed that her cousin Hyrum, as also several other
Elders, had come to Detroit in company with me, and that I would expect
them to be invited as well as myself. But this was refused, Mrs.
Cooper, declaring that she could not endure the presence of so many
visitors. She sent for me, but forbade her sisters inviting any one
else.

I went to her, and after the compliments were over, I said, "Lovisa, I
have with me four of my brethren, one of whom is your cousin Hyrum, if
I stay they must be invited also."

"Oh! no, no; I never can consent to it," exclaimed she,--"why, aunt, I
am so nervous I am scarcely ever able to see any company."

"Now, Lovisa," I replied, "do you know what ails you? lean tell you
exactly what it is: there is a good spirit and an evil one operating
upon you, and the bad spirit has almost got possession of you; and when
the good spirit is the least agitated, the evil one strives for the
entire mastery, and sets the good spirit to fluttering, just ready to
be gone, because it has so slight a foothold. But you have been so for
a long time, and you may yet live many years. These men who are with
me are clothed with the authority of the Priesthood, and through their
administration you might receive a blessing; and even should you not be
healed, do you not wish to know something about your Savior before you
meet him? Furthermore, if you refuse to receive my brethren into your
house, I shall leave it myself."

It was finally concluded that a sumptuous dinner should be prepared,
and that the brethren should all be invited. While they tarried with
her, they administered to her twice by the laying on of hands in the
name of the Lord. They stopped with her during the day, and in the
evening left for Pontiac. When she learned that they were not expected
back again, she seemed greatly distressed, because she had not urged
them to stay and preach.

The next morning, I and my niece set out for Pontiac, in the first
stage, to visit Sister Mack, my brother's widow, and her daughter, Mrs.
Whitermore. Here we were treated with great attention and respect by
Mr. Whitermore and his family. The subject of religion was introduced
immediately after our arrival, and continued the theme of conversation
until near tea-time, when Sister Mack arose, saying, "Sister Lucy, you
must excuse me, for I find my nerves are so agitated I cannot bear
conversation any longer; the subject is so entirely new, it confuses
my mind." I requested her to stop a moment. I then repeated to her the
same that I had done two days previous to Lovisa, adding, "Suppose a
company of fashionable people were to come in and begin to talk about
balls, parties, and the latest style of making dresses, do you think
that would agitate you so?" She smiled at this, and said, "I do not
know that it would, Sister Lucy; you know that those are more common
things."

I then told her that I would excuse her, and that she might go where
she pleased, concluding in my own mind never to mention the subject to
her again, unless it should be by her own request. That night we slept
in the same room. When I was about retiring to rest, she observed, "Do
not let my presence prevent you from attending to any duty which you
have practiced at home." And soon afterwards she again remarked, "The
house is now still, and I would be glad to hear you talk, if you are
not too much fatigued." I told her I would have no objections, provided
the subject of religion would not make her nervous; and, as she did not
think it would, we commenced conversation, the result of which was, she
was convinced of the truth of the gospel.

In a few days subsequent to this, we all set out to visit Mrs. Stanly,
who was also my brother's daughter. Here Mr. Whitermore gave me an
introduction to one Mr. Ruggles, the pastor of the Presbyterian church
to which this Mr. Whitermore belonged.

"And you," said Mr. Ruggles, upon shaking hands with me, "are the
mother of that poor, foolish, silly boy, Joe Smith, who pretended to
translate the Book of Mormon."

I looked him steadily in the face, and replied, "I am, sir, the mother
of Joseph Smith; but why do you apply to him such epithets as those?"

"Because," said his reverence, "that he should imagine he was going to
break down all other churches with that simple 'Mormon' book."

"Did you ever read that book?" I inquired.

"No," said he, "it is beneath my notice."

"But," rejoined I, "the Scriptures say, prove all things;' and, now
sir, let me tell you boldly, that that book contains the everlasting
gospel, and it was written for the salvation of your soul, by the gift
and power of the Holy Ghost."

"Pooh," said the minister, "nonsense--I am not afraid of any member
of my church being led astray by such stuff; they have too much
intelligence."

"Now, Mr. Ruggles," said I, and I spoke with emphasis, for the Spirit
of God was upon me, "mark my words--as true as God lives, before three
years we will have more than one-third of your church; and, sir,
whether you believe it or not, we will take the very deacon too."

This produced a hearty laugh at the expense of the minister.

Not to be tedious, I will say that I remained in this section of
country about four weeks, during which time I labored incessantly for
the truth's sake, and succeeded in gaining the hearts of many, among
whom were David Dort and his wife. Many desired me to use my influence
to have an elder sent into that region of country, which I agreed
to do. As I was about starting home, Mr. Cooper observed that our
ministers would have more influence if they dressed in broadcloth.

When I returned, I made known to Joseph the situation of things where
I had been, so he despatched Brother Jared Carter to that country. And
in order that he might not lack influence, he was dressed in a suit
of superfine broadcloth. He went immediately into the midst of Mr.
Ruggles' church, and, in a short time, brought away seventy of his best
members, among whom was the deacon, just as I told the minister. This
deacon was Brother Samuel Bent, who now presides over the High Council.

In less than a month after my arrival, Samuel returned home from
Missouri, and remained until the succeeding October, at which time a
revelation was given, commanding him and Wm. McLellin to go to the
town of Hiram, which was about thirty miles distant. Samuel commenced
making preparations, but before he was ready to start he heard a voice
in the night, which said, "Samuel, arise immediately, and go forth on
the mission which thou wast commanded to take to Hiram." He arose from
his bed and took what clothing he had in readiness, and set off without
further delay.

On arriving at the above-mentioned place, he found Wm. E. McLellin
there according to previous appointment. Here they commenced preaching
together, and after laboring a while in this town, they went from place
to place, bearing testimony of the truth in whatever city, town, or
village they entered, until the twenty-seventh of December, at which
time they arrived at Kirtland. Samuel was not long permitted to remain
at home in quiet; on the first of January he was sent, with Orson Hyde,
on a mission into the eastern country. They went and preached from city
to city, until they were called home to receive the ordinance of the
washing of feet.



CHAPTER XLII.

AN EXTRACT FROM THE HISTORY OF JOSEPH THE PROPHET--SIDNEY RIGDON'S
TRANSGRESSION--TROUBLE IN JACKSON COUNTY.

I shall now return to the month of September, 1831. Joseph, at this
time, was engaged in translating the Bible, and Sidney Rigdon was
writing for him. About the first of this month, Joseph came to the
conclusion to remove himself and clerk, as well as their families, to
the before-mentioned town of Hiram, in order to expedite the work. They
moved to the house of Father John Johnson, and lived with him in peace
until the following March, when a circumstance occurred, which I shall
relate in his own words:

    On the twenty-fifth of March, (1832,) the twins before mentioned,
    which had been sick of the measles for some time, caused us to be
    broke of our rest in taking care of them, especially my wife. In
    the evening, I told her she had better retire to rest with one of
    the children, and I would watch with the sickest child. In the
    night, she told me I had better lie down on the trundle bed, and
    I did so, and was soon after awakened by her screaming murder!
    When I found myself going out of the door in the hands of about
    a dozen men; some of whose hands were in my hair, and some hold
    of my shirt, drawers, and limbs. The foot of the trundle bed was
    towards the door, leaving only room enough for the door to swing.
    My wife heard a gentle tapping on the windows, which she then took
    no particular notice of (but which was unquestionably designed for
    ascertaining whether we were all asleep), and, soon after, the mob
    burst open the door and surrounded the bed in an instant, and, as I
    said, the first I knew, I was going out of the door, in the hands
    of an infuriated mob. I made a desperate struggle, as I was forced
    out, to extricate myself, but only cleared one leg, with which
    I made a pass at one man, and he fell on the door steps. I was
    immediately confined again, and they swore by God they would kill
    me if I did not be still, which quieted me. As they passed around
    the house with me, the fellow that I kicked, came to me and thrust
    his hand into my face all covered with blood, (for I hit him on the
    nose,) and with an exultant horse laugh, muttered "ge, gee, God
    d--mn ye, I'll fix ye."

    They then seized me by the throat, and held on till I lost my
    breath. After I came to, as they passed along with me, about thirty
    rods from the house, I saw Elder Rigdon stretched out on the
    ground, whither they had dragged him by the heels. I supposed he
    was dead.

    I began to plead with them, saying, you will have mercy and spare
    my life, I hope. To which they replied, "God d--mn ye, call on yer
    God for help, we'll show ye no mercy;" and the people began to show
    themselves in every direction; one coming from the orchard had a
    plank, and I expected they would kill me, and carry me off on a
    plank. They then turned to the right, and went on about thirty rods
    further--about sixty rods from the house, and about thirty from
    where I saw Elder Rigdon--into the meadow, where they stopped, and
    one said, "Simonds, Simonds," (meaning, I suppose, Simonds Rider,)
    "pull up his drawers, pull up his drawers, he will take cold."
    Another replied, "A'nt ye going to kill 'im? A'nt ye going to kill
    'im?" when a group of mobbers collected a little way off, and said,
    "Simonds, Simonds, come here;" and Simonds charged those who had
    hold of me to keep me from touching the ground (as they had done
    all the time), lest I should get a spring upon them. They went
    and held a council, and as I could occasionally overhear a word,
    I supposed it was to know whether it was best to kill me. They
    returned, after a while, when I learned that they had concluded not
    to kill me, but pound and scratch me well, tear off my shirt and
    drawers, and leave me naked: one cried, "Simonds, Simonds, where is
    the tar bucket?" "I don't know," answered one, "where 'tis, Eli's
    left it." They ran back and fetched the bucket of tar, when one
    exclaimed, "God d--mn it, let us tar up his mouth;" and they tried
    to force the tar paddle into my mouth; I twisted my head around,
    so that they could not; and they cried out, "God d--mn ye, hold up
    your head and let us give ye some tar." They then tried to force a
    vial into my mouth, and broke it in my teeth. All my clothes were
    torn off me, except my shirt collar; and one man fell on me and
    scratched my body with his nails like a mad cat, and then muttered
    out, "God d--mn ye, that's the way the Holy Ghost falls on folks."

    They then left me, and I attempted to rise, but fell again; I
    pulled the tar away from my lips, etc., so that I could breathe
    more freely, and after a while I began to recover, and raised
    myself up, when I saw two lights. I made my way towards one of
    them, and found it was Father Johnson's. When I had come to the
    door I was naked, and the tar made me look as though I was covered
    with blood; and when my wife saw me, she thought I was all mashed
    to pieces, and fainted. During the affray abroad, the sisters of
    the neighborhood had collected at my room. I called for a blanket,
    they threw me one and shut the door; I wrapped it around me, and
    went in. * * * *

    My friends spent the night in scraping and removing the tar, and
    washing and cleansing my body; so that by morning I was ready to be
    clothed again. This being Sabbath morning, the people assembled for
    meeting at the usual hour of worship, and among those came also the
    mobbers, viz., Simonds Rider, a Campbellite preacher, and leader of
    the mob; one M'Clentic, son of a Campbellite minister, and Pelatiah
    Allen, Esq., who gave the mob a barrel of whisky to raise their
    spirits; and many others. With my flesh all scarified and defaced,
    I preached to the congregation, as usual, and in the afternoon of
    the same day baptized three individuals.--_Times and Seasons_, vol.
    5, p. 611. _Millennial Star_, vol. 14, p. 148.

Sidney Rigdon went immediately to Kirtland, but Joseph remained at
Father Johnson's to finish his preparations for a journey, which he
contemplated making to Missouri. Immediately after Sidney's arrival
at Kirtland, we met for the purpose of holding a prayer meeting, and,
as Sidney had not been with us for some time, we hoped to hear from
him upon this occasion. We waited a long time before he made his
appearance; at last he came in, seemingly much agitated. He did not
go to the stand, but began to pace back and forth through the house.
My husband said, "Brother Sidney, we would like to hear a discourse
from you today," Brother Rigdon replied, in a tone of excitement, "The
keys of the kingdom are rent from the Church, and there shall not be
a prayer put up in this house this day." "Oh! no," said Mr. Smith, "I
hope not." "I tell you they are," rejoined Elder Rigdon, "and no man or
woman shall put up a prayer in this place today."

This greatly disturbed the minds of many sisters, and some brethren.
The brethren stared and turned pale, and the sisters cried. Sister
Howe, in particular, was very much terrified: "Oh dear me!" said she,
"what shall we do? what shall we do? The keys of the kingdom are taken
from us, and what shall we do?" "I tell you again," said Sidney, with
much feeling, "the keys of the kingdom are taken from you, and you
never will have them again until you build me a new house."

Hyrum was vexed at this frivolous nonsense, and, taking his hat, he
went out of the house, saying, "I'll put a stop to this fuss, pretty
quick; I'm going for Joseph."

"Oh don't," said Sister Howe, "for pity's sake, don't go for him.
Brother Sidney says the keys of the kingdom are taken from us, and
where is the use of bringing Joseph here?"

Hyrum took a horse, and went immediately to Father Johnson's, for
Joseph. He arrived there in the afterpart of the night. Joseph being
informed of the precise situation of affairs, he got a horse from
Father Johnsom, and started without delay, with Hyrum, for Kirtland.
On his arrival there, the brethren were collected for meeting. Joseph
went upon the stand, and informed the brethren that they were under a
great mistake, that the Church had not transgressed; "and, as for the
keys of the kingdom," said he, "I, myself, hold the keys of this Last
Dispensation, and will for ever hold them, both in time and eternity;
so set your hearts at rest upon that point, all is right."

He then went on and preached a comforting discourse, after which he
appointed a council to sit the next day, by which Sidney was tried, for
having lied in the name of the Lord. In this council Joseph told him,
he must suffer for what he had done, that he should be delivered over
to the buffetings of Satan, who would handle him as one man handleth
another, that the less Priesthood he had, the better it would be for
him, and that it would be well for him to give up his license.

This counsel Sidney complied with, yet he had to suffer for his folly,
for, according to his own account, he was dragged out of bed by the
devil, three times in one night, by his heels. Whether this be true or
not, one thing is certain, his contrition of soul was as great as a man
could well live through.

After he had sufficiently humbled himself, he received another license;
but the old one was retained, and is now in the hands of Bishop Whitney.

On the second of April, 1832, Joseph set off for Missouri, accompanied
by Newel K. Whitney, Peter Whitmer, and Jesse Gauze. They were taken by
Brother Pitkin to the town of Warren, where they were joined by Brother
Rigdon, and they all pursued their journey together.

During her husband's absence, Emma Smith lived with Reynolds Cahoon,
Father Smith, and Dr. F. G. Williams, occasionally spending a short
time with us.

On the twenty-fourth of April, Joseph arrived at Independence. He
made haste to attend to the business that lay before him, and on the
sixth of May following, he, with Brothers Whitney and Rigdon, left
Independence for Kirtland. When they arrived at New Albany, Brother
Whitney had the misfortune to get his leg broken. This detained Joseph,
who remained, in order to take care of him, four weeks at Mr. Porter's
public house in Greenville. While they were at this place, Joseph had
poison administered to him in his food, which operated very violently
upon his system, but he soon recovered, and the next morning they
pursued their journey again, and arrived in Kirtland some time in the
month of June. When Joseph got home, he immediately procured a house
for his wife; and, after making his family comfortable, he went on a
mission to the east, leaving his family in the care of Hyrum. Shortly
after he left, Joseph Smith the third was born.

After Joseph returned from his mission to the east, he established a
school for the elders, and called them all home from the different
parts of the country where they had been laboring. This was called the
School of the Prophets; and was kept in an upper room of the house in
which Joseph resided.

At this time my sons were all called home, and shortly after they
arrived, Joseph took all the male portion of our family into the
before-named school room, and administered to them the ordinance of
washing of feet; after which the Spirit fell upon them, and they
spake in tongues, and prophesied. The brethren gathered together to
witness the manifestations of the power of God. At that time I was on
the farm a short distance from the place where the meeting was held,
and my children being anxious that I should enjoy the meeting, sent a
messenger in great haste for me. I went without delay, and shared with
the rest, the most glorious outpouring of the Spirit of God, that had
ever before taken place in the Church. We felt that we had gained a
decided victory over the adversary, and,

    We could not believe,
    That we ever should grieve,
    Or ever should sorrow again.

But, alas! our joy was soon mingled with woe. It was but a few
months, before a messenger arrived from Missouri, with tidings of the
difficulty in Jackson county; that Brothers Partridge and Allen had
been tarred and feathered, and put into prison; that some had been
killed and others shot; and among the latter, was Brother Dibble, who
had been dangerously wounded.

Upon hearing this, Joseph was overwhelmed with grief. He burst into
tears and sobbed aloud, "Oh my brethren! my brethren;" he exclaimed,
"would that I had been with you, to have shared your fate. Oh my God,
what shall I do in such a trial as this!"

After his grief had a little subsided, he called a council, and it was
resolved, that the brethren from the surrounding country, as well as
those in Kirtland, should go immediately to Missouri, and take with
them money and clothing to relieve the brethren in their distress.[A]

[Footnote A: A revelation was received (see Doctrine and Covenants,
section 101), requiring the brethren from Kirtland and other places in
the state, to proceed to Missouri and relieve the persecuted Saints,
and importune the civil authorities in their behalf. (See also Doctrine
and Covenants, section 103).]



CHAPTER XLIII.

BUILDING OF A HOUSE--JOSEPH AND HYRUM RETURN FROM MISSOURI--THEY
REHEARSE THE HISTORY OF THEIR TROUBLE.

Previous to taking leave for Missouri, the brethren commenced building
a house, which was designed for both a meetinghouse and a school.
This was left in the hands of Brother Reynolds Cahoon for completion;
and was to be in readiness for use by the commencement of the ensuing
winter. It is true we held meetings in it during the summer, but then
it only served as a shelter from the sun. We were now unusually anxious
to meet together as often as possible, in order to unite our faith and
prayers in behalf of our brethren; but, for a length of time after they
left, almost every meeting was broken up by a storm. In consequence of
this, together with the near approach of winter, we began to urge upon
Brother Cahoon the necessity of hurrying the building, but he said that
he could do nothing about the matter, as he had neither time nor means.
This made me very sorrowful. I studied upon it a long time. Finally,
I told my husband, I believed that I could raise the means myself to
finish the building, and, if he would give his consent, I would try and
see what I could do. He said he would be glad if I could do anything
towards forwarding the work, and that I might take any course I saw
fit, in order to accomplish it. I then wrote a subscription paper, in
which I agreed to refund all the money that should be given, in case
it could not be appropriated to the purpose for which it should be
subscribed. This article I first took to each member of my family who
were at home, as also my boarders, then proceeded with it to Father
Bosley's. Here I received considerable assistance, and, as I was
leaving the house, I met Brother Cahoon, and informed him of what I was
doing. He seemed pleased, and told me to go on and prosper. And it was
even so, I did prosper; so that in two weeks I had everything in fine
order for commencing the work.

On the first of August, Joseph and Hyrum returned. They were overjoyed
to meet us again in health, more especially on account of the perils
which they had passed through during their absence. Joseph and Hyrum
sat down beside me, each holding one of my hands in his, while they
related the following story:

    When we started on our journey, we made arrangements to have
    every one made as comfortable as possible; but the sufferings
    which are incident to such an excursion made some of the brethren
    discontented, and they began to murmur against us, saying, "The
    Lord never required them to take such a tiresome journey," and that
    it was folly for them to suffer such fatigue and inconvenience
    just to gratify us. We warned them, in the name of the Lord, to
    stop their murmuring; for, if they did not, the displeasure of the
    Almighty would be manifested in judgments in their midst. But many
    of them paid no attention to what we said, until one morning when
    they went out to harness up their horses, and found them all so
    lame as to be unable to travel. We then told them that this was a
    curse which had come upon them because of transgression; but, if
    they would repent, it might be removed--if not, a greater curse
    would come upon them. They believed what we said, and repented
    of their folly. The consequence was, we were soon on our journey
    again. It was not long, however, till the spirit of dissension
    arose again, and was not quelled, so as to produce any degree of
    good feeling, until we arrived at Missouri.

    Soon after arriving at the point of destination, the cholera broke
    out in our midst; the brethren were so violently attacked that it
    seemed impossible to render them any assistance. They immediately
    sent for us to lay hands on them, but we soon discovered that
    this, also, was a judgment from the Almighty; for, when we
    laid our hands upon them, in the name of the Lord, the disease
    immediately fastened itself upon us, and in a few minutes we were
    in awful agony. We made signals to each other and left the house,
    in order to join in prayer to God that he would deliver us from
    this dreadful influence; but, before we could get to a sufficient
    distance from the house to be secure from interruption, we were
    hardly able to stand upon our feet, and we feared that we should
    die in that western wilderness without the privilege of blessing
    our children, or giving them one word of parting counsel. We
    succeeded in getting a few steps further, and then fell upon our
    knees and cried unto the Lord that he would deliver us from this
    awful calamity, but we arose worse than before. We kneeled down the
    second time, and when we commenced praying the cramp seized us,
    gathering the cords in our arms and legs in bunches, and operating
    equally severe throughout our system. We still besought the Lord,
    with all our strength, to have mercy upon us, but all in vain.
    It seemed as though the heavens were sealed against us, and that
    every power that could render us any assistance was shut within
    its gates. We then kneeled down the third time, concluding never
    to rise to our feet again, until one or the other should get a
    testimony that we should be healed; and that the one who should get
    the first intimation of the same from the Spirit, should make it
    known to the other.

They stated further, that after praying some time the cramp began to
release its hold; and, in a short time, Hyrum sprang to his feet and
exclaimed, "Joseph, we shall return to our families. I have had an open
vision, in which I saw mother kneeling under an apple tree; and she is
even now asking God, in tears, to spare our lives, that she may again
behold us in the flesh. The Spirit testifies, that her prayers, united
with ours, will be answered."

"Oh, my mother!" said Joseph, "how often have your prayers been the
means of assisting us when the shadows of death encompassed us."

William was also taken sick of the same disease; but one of the sisters
took him to her house, and nursed him so faithfully that he soon
recovered. Jesse Smith, my nephew, was seized so violently that nothing
could be done for him, and he died immediately. Brother Thayre was also
taken with the cholera; he went to the river and commenced dipping
himself, and finding that it helped him, he continued until he was
quite restored. His example was followed by several others, and with
the same effect.

After hearing this recital, I took Joseph and Hyrum with me, and showed
them the new meetinghouse, with which they were highly pleased, and
they approved of all that I had done relative to the matter.[A]

[Footnote A: The house referred to was not completed for some time
after Joseph's return. Most of the carpenter work was done by Brigham
Young.--_Note by Geo. A. Smith._]



CHAPTER XLIV.

THE LORD'S HOUSE AT KIRTLAND COMMENCED--A LETTER FROM THE PROPHET TO
HIS UNCLE SILAS.

Preceding Joseph's return from Missouri, the brethren called a council
with the view of investigating the subject of building a meetinghouse,
to accommodate the increased congregation.

In this council, Joseph requested that each of the brethren should give
his views with regard to the house; and when they had all got through,
he would then give his opinion concerning the matter. They all complied
with his request. Some were in favor of building a frame house, but
others were of a mind to put up a log house. Joseph reminded them that
they were not building a house for man, but for God; "and shall we,
brethren," said he, "build a house for our God, of logs? No, I have a
better plan than that. I have a plan of the house of the Lord, given
by himself; and you will soon see by this, the difference between our
calculations and his idea of things."

He then gave them a full pattern of the house of the Lord at Kirtland,
with which the brethren were highly delighted, particularly Hyrum, who
was much more animated than if it were designed for himself.

After the close of the meeting, Joseph took the brethren with him, for
the purpose of selecting a spot for the building to stand upon. The
place which they made choice of was situated in the north-west corner
of a field of wheat, which was sown by my sons the fall previous, on
the farm upon which we were then living. In a few minutes the fence
was removed, and the standing grain was levelled, in order to prepare
a place for the building and Hyrum commenced digging a trench for the
wall, he having declared that he would strike the first blow upon the
house.

On the following Monday, the brethren went to work at the house
with great ambition; and although not thirty families of Saints now
remained in Kirtland, they never suffered the work to stop until it
was accomplished. They had to endure great fatigue and privation, in
consequence of the opposition they met with from their enemies, and
which was so great, that they were compelled to keep a guard around the
walls much of the time until they were completed. They "gave no sleep
to their eyes, nor slumber to their eyelids, until they found a place
for the Lord, a habitation for the mighty God of Jacob."

Mary Bailey and Agnes Coolbrith were then boarding with me; they
devoted their time to making and mending clothes for the men who were
employed on the house. There was but one mainspring to all our thoughts
and actions, and that was, the building of the Lord's house.

I often wonder, when I hear brethren and sisters complain at the
trifling inconveniences which they have to suffer in these days, and I
think to myself that salvation is worth as much now as it was in the
commencement of the work. But "all like the purchase, few the price
would pay." How often I have parted every bed in the house for the
accommodation of the brethren, and then laid a single blanket on the
floor for my husband and myself, while Joseph and Emma slept upon the
same floor, with nothing but their cloaks for both bed and bedding.

In January, 1832, John Smith, my husband's brother, was lying very low
with the consumption, and, although he was hardly able to stand upon
his feet without assistance, he resolved upon being baptized, which
was accordingly done on the 10th, and he was immediately healed. In
May, 1833, he moved his family to Kirtland. Not long after Brother
John arrived, my oldest daughter, Sophronia Stoddard, was taken sick.
Her symptoms soon became so alarming, that her husband sent for a
physician, who, after attending upon her for some time, pronounced her
beyond the reach of medicine, and therefore discontinued his visits. As
she did not speak, nor turn herself in bed, many supposed that she was
dying. When she was in this situation, Jared Carter, together with my
husband and our sons, administered to her in the name of the Lord, and
in half an hour she spoke to me, saying, "Mother, I shall get well--not
suddenly, but the Lord will heal me gradually." The same day she sat up
half an hour, and in three days she walked across the street.

After Brother John moved to Kirtland, Joseph wrote a letter to his
uncle Silas, which I think would be interesting to my readers, and
shall therefore give it insertion in this place:--

    Kirtland Mills, Ohio, September 26, 1833.

    Respected Uncle Silas:--It is with feelings of deep interest for
    the welfare of mankind, which fill my mind on the reflection that
    all were formed by the hand of Him who will call the same to give
    an impartial account of all their works on that great day to which
    you and myself, in common with them, are bound, that I take up
    my pen and seat myself in an attitude to address a few, though
    imperfect, lines to you for your perusal.

    I have no doubt but that you will agree with me, that men will be
    held accountable for the things they have done, and not for the
    things they have not done. Or that all the light and intelligence
    communicated to them from their beneficent Creator, whether it is
    much or little, by the same they, in justice, will be judged. And
    that they are required to yield obedience, and improve upon that,
    and that only, which is given, for man is not to live by bread
    alone, but by every word that proceeds out of the mouth of the Lord.

    Seeing that the Lord has never given the world to understand, by
    anything heretofore revealed, that he had ceased for ever to speak
    to his creatures, when sought unto in a proper manner, why should
    it be thought a thing incredible, that he should be pleased to
    speak again in these last days for their salvation? Perhaps you may
    be surprised at this assertion, that I should say for the salvation
    of his creatures in these last days, since we have already in our
    possession a vast volume of his word, which he has previously
    given. But you will admit that the word spoken to Noah was not
    sufficient for Abraham, or it was not required of Abraham to leave
    the land of his nativity, and seek an inheritance in a strange
    country upon the word spoken to Noah, but, for himself he obtained
    promises at the hand of the Lord, and walked in that perfection,
    that he was called the friend of God. Isaac, the promised seed,
    was not required to rest his hope alone upon the promises made to
    his father Abraham, but was privileged with the assurance of his
    approbation, in the sight of Heaven, by the direct voice of the
    Lord to him. If one man can live upon the revelations given to
    another, might I not with propriety ask, why the necessity, then,
    of the Lord's speaking to Isaac as he did, as is recorded in the
    twenty-sixth chapter of Genesis? For the Lord there repeats, or
    rather, promises again to perform the oath which he had previously
    sworn to Abraham; and why this repetition to Isaac? Why was not
    the first promise as sure for Isaac as it was for Abraham? Was not
    Isaac Abraham's son? and could he not place implicit confidence
    in the veracity of his father as being a man of God? Perhaps you
    may say that he was a very peculiar man, and different from men in
    these last days, consequently, the Lord favored him with blessings,
    peculiar and different, as he was different from men in this age.
    I admit that he was a peculiar man, and was not only peculiarly
    blessed, but greatly blessed. But all the peculiarity that I can
    discover in the man, or all the difference between him and men in
    this age, is, that he was more holy and more perfect before God,
    and came to him with a purer heart, and more faith than men in this
    day.

    The same might be said on the subject of Jacob's history. Why was
    it that the Lord spake to him concerning the same promise, after he
    had made it once to Abraham, and renewed it to Isaac? Why could not
    Jacob rest contented upon the word spoken to his fathers? When the
    time of the promise drew nigh for the deliverance of the children
    of Israel from the land of Egypt, why was it necessary that the
    Lord should begin to speak to them? The promise or word to Abraham,
    was, that his seed should serve in bondage, and be afflicted, four
    hundred years, and after that they should come out with great
    substance. Why did they not rely upon this promise, and when they
    had remained in Egypt, in bondage, four hundred years, come out,
    without waiting for further revelations, but act entirely upon the
    promise given to Abraham, that they should come out?

    Paul said to his Hebrew brethren, that God being more abundantly
    willing to show unto the heirs of promise the immutability of his
    counsel, he confirmed it by an oath. He also exhorts them, who,
    through faith and patience inherit the promises.

    Notwithstanding, we (said Paul) have fled for refuge to lay hold
    upon the hope set before us, which hope we have as an anchor of the
    soul, both sure and steadfast and which entereth into that within
    the vail, yet he was careful to press upon them the necessity of
    continuing on until they, as well as those who then inherited the
    promises, might have the assurance of their salvation confirmed to
    them by an oath from the mouth of him who could not lie; for that
    seemed to be the example anciently, and Paul holds it out to his
    Hebrew brethren as an object attainable in his day. And why not?
    I admit, that by reading the Scriptures of truth, the saints, in
    the days of Paul, could learn, beyond the power of contradiction,
    that Abraham, Isaac, and Jacob, had the promise of eternal life
    confirmed to them by an oath of the Lord, but that promise or oath
    was no assurance to them of their salvation; but they could, by
    walking in the footsteps, continuing in the faith of their fathers,
    obtain, for themselves, an oath for confirmation that they were
    meet to be partakers of the inheritance with the saints in light.

    If the saints, in the days of the apostles, were privileged to take
    the saints for example, and lay hold of the same promises, and
    attain to the same exalted privileges of knowing that their names
    were written in the Lamb's Book of Life, and that they were sealed
    there as a perpetual memorial before the face of the Most High,
    will not the same faithfulness, the same purity of heart, and
    the same faith, bring the same assurance of eternal life, and that
    in the same manner to the children of men now, in this age of the
    world? I have no doubt, but that the holy prophets, and apostles,
    and saints in ancient days were saved in the kingdom of God;
    neither do I doubt but that they held converse and communion with
    him while they were in the flesh, as Paul said to his Corinthian
    brethren, that the Lord Jesus showed himself to above five hundred
    saints at one time after his resurrection. Job said that he knew
    that his Redeemer lived, and that he should see him in the flesh
    in the latter days. I may believe that Enoch walked with God, and
    by faith was translated. I may believe that Noah was a perfect man
    in his generation, and also walked with God. I may believe that
    Abraham communed with God, and conversed with angels. I may believe
    that Isaac obtained a renewal of the covenant made to Abraham by
    the direct voice of the Lord. I may believe that Jacob conversed
    with holy angels, and heard the word of his Maker, that he wrestled
    with the angel until he prevailed, and obtained a blessing. I
    may believe that Elijah was taken to heaven in a chariot of fire
    with fiery horses. I may believe that the saints saw the Lord,
    and conversed with him face to face after his resurrection. I
    may believe that the Hebrew church came to Mount Zion, and unto
    the city of the living God, the heavenly Jerusalem, and to an
    innumerable company of angels. I may believe that they looked into
    eternity, and saw the Judge of all, and Jesus the Mediator of the
    New Covenant. But will all this purchase an assurance for me, and
    waft me to the regions of eternal day, with my garments spotless,
    pure and white? Or, must I not rather obtain for myself, by my
    own faith and diligence in keeping the commandments of the Lord,
    an assurance of salvation for myself? And have I not an equal
    privilege with the ancient saints? And will not the Lord hear my
    prayers, and listen to my cries as soon as he ever did theirs, if
    I come to him in the manner they did? Or, is he a respecter of
    persons?

    I must now close this subject for the want of time; and, I may say,
    with propriety, at the beginning. We would be pleased to see you in
    Kirtland; and more pleased to have you embrace the New Covenant.

    I remain, yours affectionately,

    Joseph Smith, Jun.

In 1835, we were still living on the farm, and laboring with our might
to make the company which was constantly coming in, as comfortable as
possible. Joseph saw how we were situated, and that it would not answer
for us to keep a public house, at free cost, any longer; and, by his
request, we moved into an upper room of his own house, where we lived
very comfortably for a season.

Previous to the time of our going to live with Joseph, my attention
had been chiefly taken up with business; I now concluded to devote the
most of my time to the study of the Bible, Book of Mormon, and Doctrine
and Covenants, but a circumstance occurred which deprived me of the
privilege. One day upon going down stairs to dinner, I incautiously
set my foot upon a round stick, that lay near the top of the stairs.
This, rolling under my foot, pitched me forward down the steps; my head
was severely bruised in falling; however, I said but little about it,
thinking I should be better soon.

In the afternoon I went with my husband to a blessing meeting; I took
cold, and an inflammation settled in my eyes, which increased until I
became entirely blind. The distress which I suffered for a few days,
surpasses all description. Every effort was made by my friends to
relieve me, but all in vain. I called upon the elders, and requested
them to pray to the Lord, that I might be able to see, so as to be able
to read without even wearing spectacles. They did so, and when they
took their hands off my head, I read two lines in the Book of Mormon;
and although I am now seventy years old, I have never worn glasses
since.



CHAPTER XLV.

THE HOUSE OF THE LORD COMPLETED--A DIVISION IN THE CHURCH.

The house of the Lord went steadily forward, until it was completed,
notwithstanding the threats of the mob. When this work was
accomplished, there was much rejoicing in the Church, and great
blessings were poured out upon the elders; but as I was not present at
the endowment, I shall say but little about it.

Shortly after the completion of the house, Joseph and Martin Harris,
took a short tour through the eastern country. When they arrived at
Palmyra, on their return, Joseph had a vision, which lasted until he
besought the Lord to take it from him; for it manifested to him things
which were painful to contemplate. It was taken from before his eyes
for a short time, but soon returned again, and remained until the whole
scene was portrayed before him.

On his arrival at home, the brethren seemed greatly pleased to see him.
The next day he preached a sermon, and the following is a part of his
remarks:

    Brethren, I am rejoiced to see you, and I have no doubt, but that
    you are glad to see me. We are now nearly as happy as we can be
    on earth. We have accomplished more than we had any reason to
    expect when we began. Our beautiful house is finished, and the Lord
    has acknowledged it, by pouring out his Spirit upon us here, and
    revealing to us much of his will in regard to the work which he is
    about to perform. Furthermore, we have everything that is necessary
    to our comfort and convenience, and, judging from appearances, one
    would not suppose that anything could occur which would break up
    our friendship for each other, or disturb our tranquility. But,
    brethren, beware; for I tell you in the name of the Lord, that
    there is an evil in this very congregation, which, if not repented
    of will result in setting many of you, who are here this day, so
    much at enmity against me, that you will have a desire to take my
    life; and you even _would do it_, if God should permit the deed.
    But, brethren, I now call upon you to repent, and cease all your
    hardness of heart, and turn from those principles of death and
    dishonesty which you are harboring in your bosoms, before it is
    eternally too late, for there is yet room for repentance.

He continued to labor with them in this way, appealing to them in the
most solemn manner, until almost everyone in the house was in tears,
and he was exhausted with speaking.

The following week was spent in surmises and speculations, as to who
would be the traitors, and why they should be so, etc., etc.

In the fall of 1836, a bank was established in Kirtland. Soon after the
sermon, above mentioned, Joseph discovered that a large amount of money
had been taken away by fraud, from this bank. He immediately demanded
a search warrant of Esquire F. G. Williams, which was flatly refused.
"I insist upon a warrant," said Joseph, "for if you will give me one, I
can get the money, and if you do not, I will break you of your office."
"Well, break it is, then," said Williams, "and we will strike hands
upon it." "Very well," said Joseph, "from henceforth I drop you from my
quorum, in the name of the Lord."

Joseph then went to Cleveland, in order to transact some business
pertaining to the bank; and as he was absent the ensuing Sunday, my
husband preached to the people. In speaking of the bank affair, he
reflected somewhat sharply upon Warren Parrish. Although the reflection
was just, Parrish was highly incensed, and made an attempt to drag
him out of the stand. My husband appealed to Oliver Cowdery, who was
justice of the peace, to have him brought to order; but Oliver never
moved from his seat. William, seeing the abuse which his father was
receiving, sprang forward and caught Parrish, and carried him in his
arms nearly out of the house. At this John Boynton stepped forward,
and drawing a sword from his cane, presented it to William's breast,
and said, "if you advance one step further, I will run you through."
Before William had time to turn himself, several gathered around him,
threatening to handle him severely, if he should lay the weight of his
finger upon Parrish again. At this juncture of affairs, I left the
house, not only terrified at the scene, but likewise sick at heart, to
see that the apostasy of which Joseph had prophesied, was so near at
hand.

At this time a certain young woman, who was living at David Whitmer's,
uttered a prophecy, which she said was given her, by looking through a
black stone that she had found. This prophecy gave some altogether a
new idea of things. She said, the reason why one-third of the Church
would turn away from Joseph, was because that he was in transgression
himself; that he would fall from his office on account of the same;
that David Whitmer or Martin Harris would fill Joseph's place; and that
the one who did not succeed him, would be the counselor to the one that
did.

The girl soon became an object of great attention among those who were
disaffected. Dr. Williams became her scribe, and wrote her revelations
for her. Jared Carter, who lived in the same house with David Whitmer,
soon imbibed the same spirit, and I was informed that he said in one of
their meetings, that he had power to raise Joseph Smith to the highest
heavens, or sink him down to the lowest hell.

Shortly after this, Jared came to our house, and I questioned him
relative to what he had said concerning Joseph. Not having mentioned
the matter to my husband, he did not understand what I meant at first;
but after a little explanation, he warned Jared to repent of the
injudicious course that he was taking, and speedily confess his sins to
the Church, or the judgments of God would overtake him, Jared received
this admonition, and acknowledging his fault, agreed to confess to the
brethren the first opportunity. The next morning he was seized with
a violent pain in his eyes, and continued in great distress for two
days. On the evening of the second day, he arose from his bed, and,
kneeling down, besought the Lord to heal him, covenanting to make a
full confession to the Church at meeting the next Sunday.

Accordingly, the next Sabbath he arose and stated to the brethren,
that he had done wrong; and, asking their forgiveness, begged to be
received again into their confidence. He did not, however, state what
he had done that was wrong; nevertheless his confession was received,
and he was forgiven. But the rest of his party continued obstinate.
They still held their secret meetings at David Whitmer's, and when
the young woman, who was their instructress, was through giving what
revelations she intended for the evening, she would jump out of her
chair and dance over the floor, boasting of her power, until she was
perfectly exhausted. Her proselytes would also, in the most vehement
manner, proclaim their purity and holiness, and the mighty power which
they were going to have.

They made a standing appointment for meetings to be held every
Thursday, by the pure church in the house of the Lord. They also
circulated a paper in order to ascertain how many would follow them,
and it was found, that a large number of the Church were disaffected.
In this spirit some went to Missouri, and contaminated the minds of
many of the brethren against Joseph, in order to destroy his influence.
This made it more necessary than ever, to keep a strict guard at the
houses of those who were the chief objects of their vengeance.



CHAPTER XLVI.

JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, AND HIS BROTHER JOHN, GO ON A MISSION TO THE
EAST--THE DEATH OF JERUSHA SMITH.

In the year 1836, my husband and his brother John were sent on a short
mission to New Portage. While there, they administered patriarchal
blessings, and baptized sixteen persons.

Soon after they left for New Portage, their aged mother arrived in
Kirtland from New York, after traveling the distance of five hundred
miles. We sent immediately for my husband and his brother, who returned
as speedily as possible, and found the old lady in good health and
excellent spirits. She rejoiced to meet so many of her children,
grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, whom she expected never to see.

In two days after her sons John and Joseph arrived, she was taken sick,
and survived but one week; at the end of which she died, firm in the
faith of the gospel, although she had never yielded obedience to any of
its ordinances. Her age was ninety-three years.

In a short time after her death, my husband and his brother John took a
journey to visit branches of the Church in the East, and the following
is a sketch from the journal of John Smith, of this tour:

    We traveled through New Hampshire, and on our way we visited Daniel
    Mack, who was Joseph's brother-in-law. He treated us very kindly,
    but was unwilling to hear the gospel. We traveled thence up the
    Connecticut river to Grafton. Here we found our sister Mary, whom
    we had not seen for twenty years. The prejudice of her husband
    had become so strong against Mormonism, that she was unwilling to
    treat us even decently. From this place we went to Vermont, through
    Windsor and Orange counties, and found many of our relatives,
    who treated us kindly, but would not receive the gospel. We next
    crossed the Green Mountains to Middlebury. Here we found our oldest
    sister Precilla, who was very much pleased to see us, and received
    our testimony. We stayed with her over night, and the next day set
    out for St. Lawrence county, New York, where we had one brother
    and a sister. Having arrived at this brother's (who was Jesse
    Smith), we spent one day with him. He treated us very ill. Leaving
    him, we went to see our sister Susan. I had business about ten
    miles on one side, and during my absence, Jesse pursued Joseph to
    Potsdam, with a warrant, on a pretended debt of twelve dollars,
    and took him back to Stockholm. Not satisfied with this, he abused
    him most shamefully, in the presence of strangers; and he exacted
    fifty dollars of him, which Joseph borrowed of brother Silas, who
    happened to be there just at that time from Kirtland, and paid
    Jesse this sum, in order to save further trouble.

    The meekness manifested by brother Joseph upon this occasion,
    won upon the feelings of many, who said that Jesse had disgraced
    himself so much, that he would never be able to redeem his
    character.

    From Potsdam we went to Ogdensburg, when to our joy we found Heber
    C. Kimball, who had raised up a small branch in that place. These
    were the first Latter-day Saints we had seen in traveling three
    hundred miles. On the tenth of October, we returned home.

About one year after ray husband returned from this mission, a calamity
happened to our family that wrung our hearts with more than common
grief. Jemsha, Hyrum's wife, was taken sick, and, after an illness of,
perhaps, two weeks, died, while her husband was absent on a mission to
Missouri. She was a woman whom everybody loved that was acquainted with
her, for she was every way worthy. The family were so warmly attached
to her, that, had she been our own sister, they could not have been
more afflicted by her death.



CHAPTER XLVII.

THE PERSECUTION REVIVES--DON CARLOS AND HIS FATHER FLY FROM THEIR
ENEMIES--JOSEPH MOVES TO MISSOURI.

Soon after the apostasy that took place in Kirtland our enemies began
again to trouble us. Having seen our prosperity in everything to which
we had set our hands previous to this, they became discouraged, and
ceased their operations; but, suddenly discovering that there was a
division in our midst, their fruitful imaginations were aroused to the
utmost, to invent new schemes to accomplish our destruction.

Their first movement was to sue Joseph for debt, and, with this
pretense, seize upon every piece of property belonging to any of the
family. Joseph then had in his possession four Egyptian mummies, with
some ancient records that accompanied them. These the mob swore they
would take, and then burn every one of them. Accordingly, they obtained
an execution upon them for an unjust debt of fifty dollars; but, by
various stratagems, we succeeded in keeping them out of their hands.

The persecution finally became so violent, that Joseph regarded it as
unsafe to remain any longer in Kirtland, and began to make arrangements
to move to Missouri. One evening, before finishing his preparations
for the contemplated journey, he sat in council with the brethren at
our house. After giving them directions as to what he desired them to
do, while he was absent from them, and, as he was about leaving the
room, he said, "Well, brethren, I do not recollect anything more, but
one thing, brethren, is certain, I shall see you again, let what will
happen, for I have a promise of life for five years, and they cannot
kill me until that time is expired."

That night he was warned by the Spirit to make his escape, with his
family, as speedily as possible; he therefore arose from his bed, and
took his family, with barely beds and clothing sufficient for them,
and left Kirtland in the dead hour of the night. The day following,
the constable, Luke Johnson, an apostate, served a summons upon my
husband, telling him that no harm was intended, and desired him to go
immediately to the office.

I begged Johnson not to drag my husband away among our enemies, for
I knew, by sad experience, the direful consequences of these civil
suits. Johnson paid no attention to what I said, but hurried my
husband away to the office. He was taken for marrying a couple without
being licensed. Luke Johnson bustled about, pretending to be very
much engaged in drawing the bonds and in making arrangements, such
as were required of him by the party to which he belonged. The first
opportunity that offered itself, he went to Hyrum, and told him he
would take his father into a room, which he pointed out and, said
Johnson, "I will manage so that he can get out, which will set him at
liberty to go where he pleases." In this way he escaped, by the help of
Hyrum and John Boynton, from the window.

My husband, after traveling about two miles, stopped with Brother
Oliver Snow, who was father to Eliza Snow, the poetess. The old man
told Mr. Smith that he would secrete him, and, calling his family
together, he forbade them telling any one of his being there.

Johnson came to me and inquired if Mr. Smith had returned home. This
frightened me very much, and I exclaimed, "Luke, you have killed my
husband." He denied it, but gave no further explanation. In a short
time I found out where he was, and sent him both money and clothes
to travel with, so that in a few days he started with Don Carlos and
Brother Wilber. By this time hand-bills were stuck up on every public
as well as private road, offering a reward for him, and describing his
person, in order, if possible, to prevent his escape. Runners were
also sent throughout the country to watch for him, with authority
to bring him back, in case he should be found; but, in spite of all
their diligence, he succeeded in making his escape, and getting to
New Portage, where he stopped with Brother Taylor. Don Carlos, having
accompanied his father to the above-named place, returned home again
to his family: but, immediately discovering that the mob contemplated
taking him for the same offense, he moved with his family to New
Portage, and was there with his father, until the rest of the family
were ready to remove to Missouri. Hyrum had already moved there with
his family.

Shortly after they left, a man by the name of Edwin Woolley came to
Kirtland to see Mr. Smith; not finding him there, he went to New
Portage, and persuaded my husband to accompany him to Rochester,
Columbia Co.

After Mr. Smith had been at this gentleman's residence about two weeks,
we became very uneasy about him; and, as we did not know at that time
whither he had gone, William set out in pursuit of him, in order to
learn, if possible, whether he had met with friends, and was well
provided for, or had fallen into the hands of his enemies, and been
murdered, for we had as much reason to apprehend the latter calamity,
as to hope for the former good fortune.

It was some time after William arrived at New Portage, before he could
ascertain where my husband had gone. But as soon as he did receive the
desired information he proceeded to Mr. Woolley's, where he found his
father in good health, but extremely anxious about the family.

Immediately after this, William returned home, and his father went
again to New Portage. Here he remained with Don Carlos, until we were
ready to start to Missouri.



CHAPTER XLVIII.

JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, MOVES WITH HIS FAMILY TO MISSOURI--COMMENCEMENT
OF THE PERSECUTION IN CALDWELL.

When we were ready to start on our journey, I went to New Portage, and
brought my husband to his family, and we all proceeded together on our
journey, highly delighted to enjoy each other's society again, after so
long a separation.

As soon as we had got fairly started, our sons began to have calls
to preach, and they directly discovered that if they should yield to
every solicitation, our journey would be a preaching mission of no
inconsiderable length, which was quite inconsistent with the number
and situation of our family. They therefore stopped preaching while
on their journey, and we proceeded as fast as possible, under the
disadvantageous circumstances with which we were frequently surrounded.
Sometimes we lay in our tents, through driving storms; at other
times we were traveling on foot through marshes and quagmires. Once
in particular, we lay all night exposed to the rain, which fell in
torrents, so that when I arose in the morning, I found that my clothing
was perfectly saturated with the rain. However, I could not mend the
matter by a change of dress, for the rain was still falling rapidly,
and I wore my clothes in this situation, three days; in consequence of
which I took a severe cold, so that when we arrived at the Mississippi
river, I was unable to walk or sit up. After crossing this river, we
stopped at a negro hut, a most unlovely place, yet the best shelter we
could find. This hut was the birth-place of Catharine's son Alvin.

The next day my husband succeeded in getting a comfortable place, about
four miles distant, for Catharine and her infant, and they were carried
thither on a lumber wagon, the same day. We then agreed that Sophronia,
and her husband, McLerie, should stop and take care of Catharine, while
Mr. Smith and the remainder of the party, should take me, and make what
speed they could to Huntsville.

Our progress was but slow, for I was unable to travel far in a day, on
account of a violent cough with which I was afflicted; however, we at
length arrived there, and succeeded in getting a place where we could
stay for some considerable length of time, if we should think proper to
do so.

The next morning after our arrival, the family being absent, I seized
the opportunity to make an effort to get far enough from the house to
pray without interruption. Accordingly I took a staff in each hand,
and, by the assistance which they afforded me, I was enabled to reach a
dense thicket, which lay some distance from the house. As soon as I was
sufficiently rested to speak with ease, I commenced calling upon the
Lord, beseeching him to restore me to health, as well as my daughter
Catharine. I urged every claim which is afforded us by the Scriptures,
and continued praying faithfully for three hours, at the end of which
time I was relieved from every kind of pain; my cough left me, and I
was well.

At one o'clock, Wilkins J. Salisbury, Catharine's husband, came to
Huntsville, and informed us that Catharine was so much better, that, if
she had a carriage to ride in, she could proceed on her journey.

After getting a carriage, Salisbury returned to his wife, who was forty
miles from Huntsville, and the first day she traveled, she rode thirty
miles. The second day, it commenced raining quite early in the morning,
and continued to rain all day. However, this did not stop Catharine;
she started about eight o'clock, and arrived a little before noon. When
she got to Huntsville she was wet and cold. We put her immediately into
a dry bed, and soon after she had an ague fit. The Elders were called
to lay hands upon her, after which she seemed better, but continued
weak and inclined to chills and fever sometime.

The day following I washed a quantity of clothes, and then we proceeded
on our journey, and met with no further difficulty until we arrived at
Far West.

We moved into a small log house, having but one room, a very
inconvenient place for so large a family. Joseph saw how uncomfortably
we were situated, and proposed that we should take a tavern house,
which he had recently purchased. We took the tavern, and moved into
it. Samuel, previous to this, had moved to a place called Marrowbone,
Daviess county. William had moved thirty miles in another direction. We
were all now quite comfortable. But this state of affairs was of short
duration, for it was not long before our peace was again disturbed by
the mob. An election took place at Gallatin, the county seat of Daviess
county; the brethren went to the poll as usual, but, on attempting to
vote, they were forbidden by the mob. They, however, paid no attention
to this, but proceeded to vote; upon which one of the mob struck a
brother a heavy blow, which was returned by the latter, with a force
that brought his antagonist to the ground. Four others came to the
assistance of the fallen man, and shared the same fate. The mob saw the
discomfiture of their champions with shame and disappointment, and not
choosing to render them any present help, they waited till evening,
when, procuring the assistance of the judge of the election, they wrote
letters to all the adjoining counties, begging their assistance against
the "Mormons." They stated that Joseph Smith had, himself, killed seven
men, at the election the day previous, and that the inhabitants had
every reason to expect that he would collect his people together, as
soon as possible, and murder all that did not belong to his Church.

These letters were extensively circulated, and as widely believed.

A few days subsequent to this, Joseph was at our house writing a
letter. While he was thus engaged, I stepped to the door, and looking
towards the prairie, I beheld a large company of armed men advancing
towards the city, but, as I supposed it to be training day, said
nothing about it.

Presently the main body came to a halt. The officers dismounting,
eight of them came into the house. Thinking they had come for some
refreshment, I offered them chairs, but they refused to be seated, and,
placing themselves in a line across the floor, continued standing. I
again requested them to sit, but they replied, "We do not choose to sit
down; we have come here to kill Joe Smith and all the 'Mormons.'"

"Ah," said I, "what has Joseph Smith done, that you should want to kill
him?"

"He has killed seven men in Daviess county," replied the foremost, "and
we have come to kill him, and all his Church."

"He has not been in Daviess county," I answered, "consequently the
report must be false. Furthermore, if you should see him, you would not
want to kill him."

"There is no doubt but that the report is perfectly correct," rejoined
the officer; "it came straight to us, and I believe it; and we were
sent to kill the Prophet and all who believe in him, and I'll be d--d
if I don't execute my orders."

"I suppose," said I, "you intend to kill me, with the rest?"

"Yes, we do," returned the officer.

"Very well," I continued, "I want you to act the gentleman about it,
and do the job quick. Just shoot me down at once, then I shall be at
rest; but I should not like to be murdered by inches.

"There it is again," said he. "You tell a 'Mormon' that you will kill
him, and they will always tell you, 'that is nothing--if you kill us,
we shall be happy.'"

Joseph, just at this moment finished his letter, and, seeing that he
was at liberty, I said, "Gentlemen, suffer me to make you acquainted
with Joseph Smith, the Prophet." They stared at him as if he were a
spectre. He smiled, and stepping towards them, gave each of them his
hand, in a manner which convinced them that he was neither a guilty
criminal nor yet a hypocrite.

Joseph then sat down and explained to them the views, feelings, etc.,
of the Church, and what their course had been; besides the treatment
which they had received from their enemies since the first. He also
argued, that if any of the brethren had broken the law, they ought to
be tried by the law, before anyone else was molested. After talking
with them some time in this way, he said, "Mother, I believe I will go
home now--Emma will be expecting me." At this two of the men sprang
to their feet, and declared that he should not go alone, as it would
be unsafe--that they would go with him, in order to protect him.
Accordingly the three left together, and, during their absence, I
overheard the following conversation among the officers, who remained
at the door:

1st Officer. "Did you not feel strangely when Smith took you by the
hand? I never felt so in my life."

2nd Officer. "I could not move. I would not harm a hair of that man's
head for the whole world."

3rd Officer. "This is the last time you will catch me coming to kill
Joe Smith, or the 'Mormons' either."

1st Officer. "I guess this is about my last expedition against this
place. I never saw a more harmless, innocent appearing man than the
'Mormon' Prophet."

2nd Officer. "That story about his killing them men is all a d--d
lie--there is no doubt of it; and we have had all this trouble for
nothing; but they will never fool me in this way again, I'll warrant
them."

The men who went home with my son promised to disband the militia under
them and go home, which they accordingly did, and we supposed that
peace was again restored. After they were gone, Joseph and Hyrum went
to Daviess county, and, receiving the strongest assurances from the
civil officers of the county that equal rights should be administered
to all parties, they returned, hoping that all would be well.

About this time, we heard that William and his wife were very sick.
Samuel, who was then at Far West, set out with a carriage to bring them
to our house, and in a few days returned with them.

They were very low when they arrived; however, by great care and close
attention, they soon began to recover.

Soon after Samuel brought William and Caroline to our house, there
was born unto Samuel a son, whom he called by his own name. When the
child was three weeks old, his father was compelled to leave, and
on the next day his mother was informed that she must leave home
forthwith, and take a journey of thirty miles to Far West. One of the
neighbors offered to furnish her a team, and a small boy to drive it,
if she would start immediately. To this she agreed. A lumber wagon was
brought, and she, with her bed, her childten, and very little clothing,
either for them or herself, was put into it and sent to Far West, under
the care of a boy of eleven years of age.

The day following, Samuel started home from Far West, although the rain
was falling fast, and had been all the night previous. He had proceeded
but ten miles when he met his wife and children, exposed to the
inclemency of the weather, and dripping with wet. He returned with them
to Far West, where they arrived in about thirty-six hours after they
left Marrowbone, without having taken any nourishment from the time
they left home. She was entirely speechless and stiff with the cold. We
laid her on a bed, and my husband and sons administered to her by the
laying on of hands. We then changed her clothing and put her into warm
blankets, and, after pouring a little wine and water into her mouth,
she was administered to again. This time she opened her eyes and seemed
to revive a little. I continued to employ every means that lay in my
power for her recovery, and in this I was much assisted by Emma and my
daughters.

My children soon began to mend, and I felt to rejoice at the prospect
of returning health.



CHAPTER XLIX.

TESTIMONY OF HYRUM SMITH.

Here I shall introduce a brief history of our troubles in Missouri,
given by my son Hyrum, when Joseph was before the Municipal Court, at
Nauvoo, June 30, 1843, on a writ of _habeas corpus_:

    Hyrum Smith, sworn: Said that the defendant now in court is his
    brother, and that his name is not Joseph Smith, junior, but his
    name is Joseph Smith, senior, and has been for more than two years
    past. I have been acquainted with him ever since he was born, which
    was thirty seven years in December last, and I have not been absent
    from him at any one time, not even the space of six months, since
    his birth, to my recollection; and have been intimately acquainted
    with all his sayings, doings, business transactions, and movements,
    as much as any one man could be acquainted with any other man's
    business, up to the present time, and do know that he has not
    committed treason against any state in the Union, by any overt
    act, or by levying war, or by aiding and abetting, or assisting
    an enemy, in any state in the Union. And that the said Joseph
    Smith, senior, has not committed treason in the state of Missouri,
    nor violated any law or rule of said state, I being personally
    acquainted with the transactions and doings of said Smith, whilst
    he resided in said state, which was for about six months in the
    year 1838; I being also a resident in said state, during the same
    period of time. And I do know that said Joseph Smith, senior, never
    was subject to military duty in any state, neither was he in the
    state of Missouri, he being exempt by the amputation or extraction
    of a bone from his leg, and by his having a license to preach the
    gospel, or being in other words, a minister of the gospel. And I
    do know that said Smith never bore arms as a military man, in any
    capacity whatever, whilst in the state of Missouri, or previous
    to that time; neither has he given any orders, or assumed any
    command, in any capacity whatever. But I do know that whilst he
    was in the state of Missouri, that the people commonly called
    "Mormons," were threatened with violence and extermination, and
    on or about the first Monday in August, 1838, at the election at
    Gallatin, the county seat in Daviess county, the citizens who were
    commonly called "Mormons," were forbidden to exercise the rights
    of franchise, and from that unhallowed circumstance an affray
    commenced, and a fight ensued among the citizens of that place,
    and from that time a mob commenced gathering in that county,
    threatening the extermination of the "Mormons." The said Smith, and
    myself, upon hearing that mobs were collecting together, and that
    they had also murdered two of the citizens of the same place, and
    would not suffer them to be buried, the said Smith and myself went
    over to Daviess county to learn the particulars of the affray; but
    upon our arrival at Diahman, we learned that none were killed, but
    several were wounded. We tarried all night at Col. Lyman Wight's.
    The next morning, the weather being very warm, and having been very
    dry for some time previous, the springs and wells in that region
    were dried up. On mounting our horses to return, we rode up to Mr.
    Black's, who was then an acting justice of the peace, to obtain
    some water for ourselves and horses. Some few of the citizens
    accompanied us there, and after obtaining the refreshment of water,
    Mr. Black was asked, by said Joseph Smith, senior, if he would
    use his influence to see that the laws were faithfully executed,
    and to put down mob violence, and he gave us a paper written by
    his own hand, stating that he would do so. He also requested
    him, (Mr. Black) to call together the most influential men of
    the county the next day, that we might have an interview with
    them; to this he acquiesced, and accordingly, the next day, they
    assembled at the house of Col. Wight, and entered into a mutual
    covenant of peace to put down mob violence, and to protect each
    other in the enjoyment of their rights. After this, we all parted
    with the best of feelings, and each man returned to his own home.
    This mutual agreement of peace, however, did not last long; for,
    but a few days afterwards, the mob began to collect again, until
    several hundreds rendezvoused at Millport, a few miles distant from
    Diahman. They immediately commenced making aggressions upon the
    citizens called "Mormons," taking away their hogs and cattle, and
    threatening them with extermination, or utter destruction; saying
    that they had a cannon, and there should be no compromise only at
    its mouth; frequently taking men, women, and children prisoners,
    whipping them and lacerating their bodies with hickory withes, and
    tying them to trees, and depriving them of food until they were
    compelled to gnaw the bark from the trees to which they were bound,
    in order to sustain life, treating them in the most cruel manner
    they could invent or think of, and doing everything they could to
    excite the indignation of the "Mormon" people to rescue them, in
    order that they might make that a pretext for an accusation for
    the breach of the law, and that they might the better excite the
    prejudice of the populace, and thereby get aid and assistance to
    carry out their hellish purposes of extermination. Immediately
    on the authentication of these facts, messengers were despatched
    from Far West to Austin A. King, judge of the fifth judicial
    district of the state of Missouri, and also to Major-Gen. Atchison,
    Commander-in-Chief of that division, and Brigadier General
    Doniphan, giving them information of the existing facts, and
    demanding immediate assistance. General Atchison returned with the
    messengers, and went immediately to Diahman, and from thence to
    Millport, and he found the facts were true as reported to him; that
    the citizens of that county were assembled together in a hostile
    attitude, to the amount of two or three hundred men, threatening
    the utter extermination of the "Mormons." He immediately returned
    to Clay county, and ordered out a sufficient military force to
    quell the mob. Immediately after they were dispersed, and the army
    returned, the mob commenced collecting again; soon after, we again
    applied for military aid, when General Doniphan came out with a
    force of sixty armed men to Far West; but they were in such a state
    of insubordination, that he said he could not control them, and it
    was thought advisable by Colonel Hinkle, Mr. Rigdon, and others,
    that they should return home. General Doniphan ordered Colonel
    Hinkle to call out the militia of Caldwell, and defend the town
    against the mob, for, said he, you have great reason to be alarmed;
    for, he said, Neil Gillum, from the Platte Country, had come down
    with two hundred armed men, and had taken up their station at
    Hunter's Mill, a place distant about seventeen or eighteen miles
    northwest of the town of Far West, and, also, that an armed force
    had collected again at Millport, in Daviess county, consisting of
    several hundred men, and that another armed force had collected
    at De Witt, in Carroll county, about fifty miles south-east of
    Far West, where about seventy families of the "Mormon" people had
    settled, upon the bank of the Missouri river, at a little town
    called De Witt. Immediately a messenger, whilst he was yet talking,
    came in from De Witt, stating that three or four hundred men had
    assembled together at that place, armed cap-a-pie, and that they
    threatened the utter extinction of the citizens of that place, if
    they did not leave the place immediately, and that they had also
    surrounded the town and cut off all supplies of food, so that many
    of them were suffering with hunger. General Doniphan seemed to be
    very much alarmed, and appeared to be willing to do all he could
    to assist, and to relieve the sufferings of the "Mormon" people.
    He advised that a petition be immediately got up and sent to the
    Governor. A petition was accordingly prepared, and a messenger
    immediately despatched to the Governor, and another petition was
    sent to Judge King. The "Mormon" people throughout the country
    were in a great state of alarm, and also in great distress. They
    saw themselves completely surrounded with armed forces, on the
    north, and on the north-west, and on the south, and also Bogard,
    who was a Methodist preacher, and who was then a captain over a
    militia company of fifty soldiers, but who had added to his number,
    out of the surrounding counties, about a hundred more, which made
    his force about one hundred and fifty strong, was stationed at
    Crooked creek, sending out his scouting parties, taking men, women,
    and children prisoners, driving off cattle, hogs, and horses,
    entering into every house on Log and Long creeks, rifling their
    houses of their most precious articles, such as money, bedding,
    and clothing, taking all their old muskets and their rifles or
    military implements, threatening the people with instant death if
    they did not deliver up all their precious things, and enter into
    a covenant to leave the state or go into the city of Far West by
    the next morning, saying that "they calculated to drive the people
    into Far West, and then drive them to hell." Gillum also was doing
    the same on the north-west side of Far West; and Sashiel Woods,
    a Presbyterian minister, was the leader of the mob in Daviess
    county, and a very noted man, of the same society, was the leader
    of the mob in Carroll county; and they were also sending out their
    scouting parties, robbing and pillaging houses, driving away hogs,
    horses, and cattle, taking men, women, and children, and carrying
    them off, threatening their lives, and subjecting them to all
    manner of abuses that they could invent or think of.

    Under this state of alarm, excitement, and distress, the messengers
    returned from the Governor, and from the other authorities,
    bringing the fatal news that the "Mormons" could have no
    assistance. They stated that the Governor said, "that the 'Mormons'
    had got into a difficulty with the citizens, and they might fight
    it out, for all what he cared, he could not render them any
    assistance."

    The people of De Witt were obliged to leave their homes and go into
    Far West; but did not until many of them had starved to death for
    want of proper sustenance, and several died on the road there, and
    were buried by the wayside, without a coffin or a funeral ceremony,
    and the distress, sufferings, and privations of the people cannot
    be expressed. All the scattered families of the "Mormon" people, in
    all the counties except Daviess, were driven into Far West, with
    but few exceptions.

    This only increased their distress, for many thousands who were
    driven there had no habitations or houses to shelter them, and
    were huddled together, some in tents, and others under blankets,
    while others had no shelter from the inclemency of the weather.
    Nearly two months the people had been in this awful state of
    consternation, many of them had been killed, whilst others had been
    whipped until they had to swathe up their bowels to prevent them
    from falling out. About this time, General Parks came out from
    Richmond, Ray county, who was one of the commissioned officers
    who was sent out to Diahman, and I, myself, and my brother Joseph
    Smith, senior, went out at the same time.

    On the evening that General Parks arrived at Diahman, the wife of
    the late Don Carlos Smith, my brother, came into Colonel Wight's
    about eleven o'clock at night, bringing her two children along
    with her, one about two and a half years old, the other a babe
    in her arms. She came in on foot, a distance of three miles, and
    waded Grand River, and the water was then about waist deep, and
    the snow about three inches deep. She stated that a party of the
    mob, a gang of ruffians, had turned her out of doors, had taken
    her household goods, and had burnt up her house, and she had
    escaped by the skin of her teeth. Her husband at that time was in
    Virginia, and she was living alone. This cruel transaction excited
    the feelings of the people in Diahman, especially Col. Wight, and
    he asked Gen. Parks, in my hearing, how long we had got to suffer
    such base violence. Gen. Parks said he did not know how long. Col.
    Wight then asked him what should be done. Gen. Parks told him, "he
    should take a company of men, well armed, and go and disperse the
    mob wherever he should find any collected together, and take away
    their arms." Col. Wight did so precisely, according to the orders
    of Gen. Parks, and my brother, Joseph Smith, senior, made no words
    about it. And after Col. Wight had dispersed the mob, and put a
    stop to their burning houses belonging to the "Mormon" people and
    turning women and children out of doors, which they had done up
    to that time, to the amount of eight or ten houses, which were
    consumed to ashes, after being cut short in their intended designs,
    the mob started up a new plan. They went to work and moved their
    families out of the county, and set fire to their houses, and not
    being able to incense the "Mormons" to commit crimes, they had
    recourse to this strategem--to set their houses on fire, and send
    runners into all the counties adjacent, to declare to the people,
    that the "Mormons" had burned up their houses, and destroyed their
    fields; and if the people would not believe them, they would
    tell them to go and see if what they had said was not true. Many
    people came to see--they saw the houses burning, and being filled
    with prejudice, they could not be made to believe, but that the
    "Mormons" set them on fire; which deed was most diabolical and
    of the blackest kind; for indeed the "Mormons" did not set them
    on fire nor meddle with their houses or their fields. And the
    houses that were burnt, together with the pre-emption rights, and
    the corn in the fields, had all been previously purchased by the
    "Mormons," of the people, and paid for in money, and with wagons
    and horses, and with other property, about two weeks before; but
    they had not taken possession of the premises; but this wicked
    transaction was for the purpose of clandestinely exciting the minds
    of a prejudiced populace and the Executive, that they might get
    an order, that they could the more easily carry out their hellish
    purposes, in expulsion or extermination, or utter extinction of the
    "Mormon" people. After witnessing the distressed situation of the
    people in Diahman, my brother, Joseph Smith, senior, and myself,
    returned back to the city of Far West, and immediately dispatched
    a messenger, with written documents, to General Atchison, stating
    the facts as they did then exist, praying for assistance, if
    possible, and requesting the editor of the "Far West" to insert
    the same in his newspaper, but he utterly refused to do so. We
    still believed that we should get assistance from the Governor,
    and again petitioned him, praying for assistance, setting forth
    our distressed situation. And in the meantime, the presiding judge
    of the county court issued orders, upon affidavits made to him by
    citizens, to the sheriff of the county, to order out the militia
    of the county, to stand in constant readiness, night and day, to
    prevent the citizens from being massacred, which fearful situation
    they were exposed to every moment. Every thing was very portentious
    and alarming. Notwithstanding all this, there was a ray of hope
    yet existing in the minds of the people, that the Governor would
    render us assistance. And whilst the people were waiting anxiously
    for deliverance--men, women, and children frightened, praying
    and weeping--we beheld at a distance, crossing the prairies, and
    approaching the town, a large army in military array, brandishing
    their glittering swords in the sunshine, and we could not but feel
    joyful for a moment, thinking that probably the Governor had sent
    an armed force to our relief, notwithstanding the awful forebodings
    that pervaded our breasts. But to our great surprise, when the army
    arrived, they came up and formed a line in double file, in one-half
    mile on the east of the city of Far West, and despatched three
    messengers with a white flag to come to the city. They were met by
    Captain Morey, with a few other individuals, whose names I do not
    now recollect. I was, myself, standing close by, and could very
    distinctly hear every word they said. Being filled with anxiety, I
    rushed forward to the spot, expecting to hear good news, but, alas!
    and heart-thrilling to every soul that heard them--they demanded
    three persons to be brought out of the city, before they should
    massacre the rest. The names of the persons they demanded were
    Adam Lightner, John Cleminson, and his wife. Immediately the three
    persons were brought forth to hold an interview with the officers
    who had made the demand, and the officers told them they had now
    a chance to save their lives, for they calculated to destroy the
    people, and lay the city in ashes. They replied to the officers,
    and said, "If the people must be destroyed, and the city burned to
    ashes, we will remain in the city and die with them." The officers
    immediately returned, and the army retreated, and encamped about
    a mile and a half from the city. A messenger was immediately
    despatched with a white flag, from the colonel of the militia of
    Far West, requesting an interview with General Atchinson, and
    General Doniphan; but, as the messenger approached the camp, he
    was shot at by Bogard, the Methodist preacher. The name of the
    messenger was Charles C. Rich, who is now Brigadier-General in
    the Nauvoo Legion. However, he gained permission to see General
    Doniphan. He also requested an interview with General Atchison.
    General Doniphan said, that General Atchison had been dismounted
    by a special order of the Governor, a few miles back, and had been
    sent back to Liberty, Clay county. He also stated, that the reason
    was, that he (Atchison), was too merciful unto the "Mormons;" and
    Boggs would not let him have the command, but had given it to
    General Lucas, who was from Jackson county, and whose heart had
    become hardened by his former acts of rapine and bloodshed, he
    being one of the leaders in murdering, driving, plundering, and
    burning some two or three hundred houses belonging to the "Mormon"
    people in that county, in the years 1833 and 1834.

    Mr. Rich requested General Doniphan to spare the people, and not
    suffer them to be massacred until the next morning, it then being
    evening. He coolly agreed that he would not, and also said, that
    "he had not as yet received the Governor's order, but expected
    it every hour, and should not make any further move until he had
    received it; but he would not make any promises so far as regards
    Neil Gillum's army," (he having arrived a few minutes previously,
    and joined the main body of the army, he knowing well at what hour
    to form a junction with the main body). Mr. Rich then returned
    to the city, giving this information. The colonel immediately
    despatched a second messenger with a white flag, to request another
    interview with General Doniphan, in order to touch his sympathy
    and compassion, and if it were possible for him to use his best
    endeavors to preserve the lives of the people. On the return of
    this messenger, we learned that several persons had been killed
    by some of the soldiers, who were under the command of General
    Lucas. One Mr. Carey had his brains knocked out by the breech of
    a gun, and he lay bleeding several hours, but his family were not
    permitted to approach him, nor any one else allowed to administer
    relief to him whilst he lay upon the ground in the agonies of
    death. Mr. Carey had just arrived in the country, from the state
    of Ohio, only a few hours previous to the arrival of the army. He
    had a family consisting of a wife and several small children. He
    was buried by Lucius N. Scovil, who is now the senior warden of the
    Nauvoo Legion. Another man, of the name of John Tanner, was knocked
    on the head at the same time, and his skull laid bare the width
    of a man's hand, and he lay, to all appearance, in the agonies of
    death for several hours; but by the permission of General Doniphan,
    his friends brought him out of the camp, and with good nursing
    he slowly recovered, and is now living. There was another man,
    whose name is Powell, who was beat on the head with the breech of
    a gun until his skull was fractured, and his brains ran out in
    two or three places. He is now alive, and resides in this county,
    but has lost the use of his senses; several persons of his family
    were also left for dead, but have since recovered. These acts of
    barbarity were also committed by the soldiers under the command of
    General Lucas, previous to having received the Governor's order of
    extermination.

    It was on the evening of the thirtieth of October, according to the
    best of my recollection, that the army arrived at Far West, the sun
    about half an hour high. In a few moments afterwards, Cornelius
    Gillum arrived with his army and formed a junction. This Gillum had
    been stationed at Hunter's Mills for about two months previous to
    that time--committing depredations upon the inhabitants, capturing
    men, women, and children, and carrying them off as prisoners,
    lacerating their bodies with hickory withes. The army of Gillum
    were painted like Indians, some of them were more conspicuous than
    were others, designated by red spots, and he also was painted in
    a similar manner, with red spots marked on his face, and styled
    himself the "Delaware Chief." They would whoop, and hollow, and
    yell, as nearly like Indians as they could, and continued to do
    so all that night. In the morning early the colonel of militia
    sent a messenger into the camp, with a white flag, to have another
    interview with Gen. Doniphan. On his return he informed us that
    the Governor's order had arrived. General Doniphan said, "that
    the order of the Governor was, to exterminate the 'Mormons' by
    God, but he would be d--d if he would obey that order, but General
    Lucas might do as he pleased." We immediately learned from General
    Doniphan, that the Governor's order that had arrived was only
    a copy of the original, and that the original order was in the
    hands of Major General Clark, who was on his way to Far West, with
    an additional army of six thousand men. Immediately after this
    there came into the city a messenger from Haun's Mill, bringing
    the intelligence of an awful massacre of the people who were
    residing in that place, and that a force of two or three hundred,
    detached from the main body of the army, under the superior command
    of Colonel Ashley, but under the immediate command of Captain
    Nehemiah Comstock, who, the day previous, had promised them peace
    and protection, but on receiving a copy of the Governor's order,
    "to exterminate or expel," from the hands of Colonel Ashley, he
    returned upon them the following day, and surprised and massacred
    the whole population of the town, and then came on to the town
    of Far West, and entered into conjunction with the main body of
    the army. The messenger informed us that he, himself, with a few
    others, fled into the thickets, which preserved them from the
    massacre, and on the following morning they returned, and collected
    the dead bodies of the people, and cast them into a well; and there
    were upwards of twenty who were dead or mortally wounded, and there
    are several of the wounded, who are now living in this city. One of
    the name of Yocum, has lately had his leg amputated, in consequence
    of wounds he then received. He had a ball through his head, which
    entered near his eye and came out at the back part of his head, and
    another ball passed through one of his arms.

    The army during all the while they had been encamped in Far West,
    continued to lay waste fields of corn, making hogs, sheep, and
    cattle common plunder, and shooting them down for sport. One man
    shot a cow, and took a strip of her skin, the width of his hand,
    from her head to her tail, and tied it around a tree to slip his
    halter into to tie his horse to. The city was surrounded with a
    strong guard, and no man, woman, or child was permitted to go out
    or come in, under the penalty of death. Many of the citizens were
    shot, in attempting to get out to obtain sustenance for themselves
    and families. There was one field fenced in, consisting of twelve
    hundred acres, mostly covered with corn. It was entirely laid waste
    by the horses of the army, and the next day after the arrival of
    the army, towards evening, Col. Hinkle came up from the camp,
    requesting to see my brother Joseph, Parley P. Pratt, Sidney
    Rigdon, Lyman Wight, and George W. Robinson, stating that the
    officers of the army wanted a mutual consultation with those men,
    also stating that Generals Doniphan, Lucas, Wilson, and Graham,
    (however, General Graham is an honorable exception: he did all he
    could to preserve the lives of the people, contrary to the order
    of the Governor,) he (Hinkle) assured them that these generals
    had pledged their sacred honor, that they should not be abused or
    insulted; but should be guarded back in safety in the morning, or
    so soon as the consultation was over. My brother Joseph replied,
    that he did not know what good he could do in any consultation,
    as he was only a private individual: however, he said that he
    was always willing to do all the good he could, and would obey
    every law of the land, and then leave the event with God. They
    immediately started with Col. Hinkle to go down into the camp. As
    they were going down, about half way to the camp, they met General
    Lucas with a phalanx of men, with a wing to the right and to the
    left, and a four-pounder in the center. They supposed he was coming
    with this strong force to guard them into the camp in safety; but,
    to their surprise, when they came up to General Lucas, he ordered
    his men to surround them, and Hinkle stepped up to the general and
    said, "These are the prisoners I agreed to deliver up." General
    Lucas drew his sword, and said, "Gentlemen, you are my prisoners,"
    and about that time the main army were on their march to meet
    them. They came up in two divisions, and opened to the right and
    left, and my brother and his friends were marched down through
    their lines, with a strong guard in front, and the cannon in the
    rear, to the camp, amidst the whoopings, hollowings, yellings, and
    shoutings of the army, which were so horrid and terrific, that
    they frightened the inhabitants of the city. It is impossible to
    describe the feelings of horror and distress of the people. After
    being thus betrayed, they were placed under a strong guard of
    thirty men, armed _cap-a-pie_, which were relieved every two hours.
    There they were compelled to lie on the cold ground that night,
    and were told in plain language that they need never to expect
    their liberties again. So far for their honors pledged. However,
    this was as much as could be expected from a mob under the garb
    of military and executive authority in the state of Missouri. On
    the next day, the soldiers were permitted to patrol the streets,
    to abuse and insult the people at their leisure, and enter into
    houses and pillage them, and ravish the women, taking away every
    gun, and every other kind of arms or military implements. And
    about twelve o'clock that day, Col. Hinkle came to my house with
    an armed force, opened the door, and called me out of doors and
    delivered me up as a prisoner unto that force. They surrounded me
    and commanded me to march into the camp. I told them that I could
    not go, my family were sick, and I was sick myself, and could not
    leave home. They said they did not care for that, I must and should
    go. I asked when they would permit me to return. They made me no
    answer, but forced me along with the point of the bayonet into
    the camp, and put me under the same guard with my brother Joseph;
    and within about half an hour afterwards, Amasa Lyman was also
    brought, and placed under the same guard. There we were compelled
    to stay all that night, and lie on the ground; but along some time
    in the same night, Col. Hinkle came to me and told me that he had
    been pleading my case before the court-martial, but he was afraid
    he should not succeed. He said there was a court-martial then in
    session, consisting of thirteen or fourteen officers, Circuit
    Judge A. A. King, and Mr. Birch, District Attorney, also Sashiel
    Woods, Presbyterian priest, and about twenty other priests of the
    different religious denominations in that county. He said they were
    determined to shoot us on the next morning in the public square in
    Far West. I made him no reply. On the next morning about sunrise,
    Gen. Doniphan ordered his brigade to take up the line of march,
    and leave the camp. He came to us where we were under guard, to
    shake hands with us, and bid us farewell. His first salutation was,
    "By God, you have been sentenced by the court-martial to be shot
    this morning; but I will be d--d if I will have any of the honor
    of it, or any of the disgrace of it; therefore I have ordered my
    brigade to take up the line of march, and to leave the camp, for I
    consider it to be cold-blooded murder, and I bid you farewell," and
    he went away. This movement of General Doniphan made considerable
    excitement in the army, and there were considerable whisperings
    among the officers. We listened very attentively, and frequently
    heard it mentioned by the guard, that the d--d "Mormons" would not
    be shot this time. In a few moments the guard was relieved with a
    new set; one of the new guard said, that the d--d "Mormons" would
    not be shot this time, for the movement of General Doniphan had
    frustrated the whole plan, and that the officers had called another
    court-martial, and had ordered us to be taken to Jackson county,
    and there to be executed. And in a few moments two large wagons
    drove up, and we were ordered to get into them. While we were
    getting into them, there came up four or five men armed with guns,
    who drew up, and snapped their guns at us, in order to kill us.
    Some flashed in the pan, and others only snapped, but none of their
    guns went off. They were immediately arrested by several officers,
    and their guns taken from them, and the drivers drove off. We
    requested of General Lucas, to let us go to our houses and get
    some clothing. In order to do this we had to be driven up into the
    city. It was with much difficulty that we could get his permission
    to go and see our families, and get some clothing; but, after
    considerable consultation, we were permitted to go under a strong
    guard of five or six men to each of us, and we were not permitted
    to speak to any one of our families, under the pain of death. The
    guard that went with me ordered my wife to get me some clothes
    immediately--within two minutes; and if she did not do it, I should
    go off without them. I was obliged to submit to their tyrannical
    orders, however painful it was, with my wife and children clinging
    to my arms and to the skirts of my garments, and was not permitted
    to utter to them a word of consolation and in a moment was hurried
    away from them at the point of the bayonet. We were hurried back to
    the wagons and ordered into them, all in about the same space of
    time. In the meanwhile, our father, and mother, and sisters, had
    forced their way to the wagons to get permission to see us, but
    were forbidden to speak to us, and we were immediately driven off
    for Jackson county. We traveled about twelve miles that evening,
    and encamped for the night. The same strong guard was kept around
    us, and was relieved every two hours, and we were permitted to
    sleep on the ground. The nights were then cold, with considerable
    snow on the ground, and for the want of covering and clothing we
    suffered extremely with the cold. That night was the commencement
    of a fit of sickness from which I have not wholly recovered unto
    this day, in consequence of my exposure to the inclemency of the
    weather. Our provision was fresh beef, roasted in the fire on a
    stick; the army having no bread, in consequence of the want of
    mills to grind the grain. In the morning, at the dawn of day, we
    were forced on our journey, and were exhibited to the inhabitants
    along the road, the same as they exhibit a caravan of elephants
    or camels. We were examined from head to foot by men, women, and
    children, only I believe they did not make us open our mouths
    to look at our teeth. This treatment was continued incessantly,
    until we arrived at Independence, in Jackson county. After our
    arrival, at Independence, we were driven all through the town for
    inspection, and then we were ordered into an old log house, and
    there kept under guard as usual, until supper, which was served up
    to us, as we sat upon the floor, or on billets of wood, and we were
    compelled to stay in that house all that night and the next day.
    They continued to exhibit us to the public by letting the people
    come in and examine us, and then go away and give place for others
    alternately, all that day and the next night; but on the morning
    of the following day, we were all permitted to go to the tavern to
    eat and to sleep, but afterwards they made us pay our own expenses
    for board, lodging, and attendance, and for which they made a most
    exhorbitant charge. We remained in the tavern about two days and
    two nights, when an officer arrived with authority from General
    Clark to take us back to Richmond, Ray county, where the general
    had arrived with his army, to await our arrival there; but on the
    morning of our start for Richmond, we were informed by General
    Wilson that it was expected by the soldiers that we would be hung
    up by the necks on the road, while on the march to that place, and
    that it was prevented by a demand made for us by General Clark, who
    had the command in consequence of seniority, and, that it was his
    prerogative to execute us himself, and he should give us up into
    the hands of the officer, who would take us to General Clark, and
    he might do with us as he pleased. During our stay at Independence,
    the officers informed us that there were eight or ten horses in the
    place belonging to the "Mormon" people, which had been stolen by
    the soldiers, and that we might have two of them to ride upon, if
    we would cause them to be sent back to the owners after our arrival
    at Richmond. We accepted of them, and they were rode to Richmond,
    and the owners came there and got them. We started in the morning
    under our new officer, Colonel Price, of Keytsville, Chariton
    county, Mo., with several other men to guard us over. We arrived
    there on Friday evening, the ninth day of November, and were thrust
    into an old log house, with a strong guard placed over us. After
    we had been there for the space of half an hour, there came in
    a man, who was said to have some notoriety in the penitentiary,
    bringing in his hands a quantity of chains and padlocks. He said
    he was commanded by General Clark to put us in chains. Immediately
    the soldiers rose up, and pointing their guns at us, placed their
    thumb on the cock, and their finger on the trigger, and the state's
    prison keeper went to work, putting a chain around the leg of each
    man, and fastening it on with a padlock, until we were all chained
    together, seven of us.

    In a few moments came in General Clark. We requested to know of
    him what was the cause of all this harsh and cruel treatment.
    He refused to give us any information at that time, but said he
    would in a few days; so we were compelled to continue in that
    situation--camping on the floor, all chained together, without any
    chance or means to be made comfortable, having to eat our victuals
    as they were served up to us, using our fingers and teeth instead
    of knives and forks. Whilst we were in this situation, a young man,
    of the name of Grant, brother-inlaw to my brother, William Smith,
    came to see us, and put up at the tavern where General Clark made
    his quarters. He happened to come in time to see General Clark make
    choice of his men to shoot us on Monday morning, the twelfth day of
    November; he saw them make choice of their rifles, and load them
    with two balls in each; and after they had prepared their guns,
    General Clark saluted them by saying, "Gentlemen, you shall have
    the honor of shooting the 'Mormon' leaders, on Monday morning, at
    eight o'clock!" But in consequence of the influence of our friends,
    the heathen General was intimidated, so that he durst not carry his
    murderous design into execution, and sent a messenger immediately
    to Fort Leavenworth, to obtain the military code of laws. After
    the messenger's return, the General was employed, nearly a whole
    week, examining the laws, so Monday passed away without our being
    shot. However, it seemed like foolishness to me, for so great
    a man as General Clark pretended to be, should have to search
    the military law to find out whether preachers of the gospel,
    who never did military duty, could be subject to court-martial.
    However, the General seemed to learn that fact after searching
    the military code, and came into the old log cabin, where we were
    under guard and in chains, and told us he had concluded to deliver
    us over to the civil authorities, as persons guilty of treason,
    murder, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing. The poor, deluded
    General did not know the difference between theft, larceny, and
    stealing. Accordingly, we were handed over to the pretended civil
    authorities, and the next morning our chains were taken off, and we
    were guarded to the court house, where there was a pretended court
    in session; Austin A. King being the judge, and Mr. Birch, the
    district attorney, the two extremely, and very honorable gentlemen,
    who sat on the court-martial when we were sentenced to be shot.
    Witnesses were called up and sworn, at the point of the bayonet,
    and if they would not swear to the things they were told to do,
    they were threatened with instant death; and I do know, positively,
    that the evidence given in by those men, whilst under duress, was
    false. This state of things was continued twelve or fourteen days,
    and after that, we were ordered by the judge, to introduce some
    rebutting evidence, saying, if we did not do it, we would be thrust
    into prison. I could hardly understand what the judge meant, for
    I considered we were in prison already, and could not think of
    anything but the persecutions of the days of Nero, knowing that it
    was a religious persecution, and the court an inquisition; however,
    we gave him the names of forty persons, who were acquainted with
    all the persecutions and sufferings of the people. The judge made
    out a subpoena, and inserted the names of those men, and caused
    it to be placed in the hands of Bogard, the notorious Methodist
    minister, and he took fifty armed soldiers, and started for Far
    West. I saw the subpoena given to him and his company, when they
    started. In the course of a few days, they returned with most all
    those forty men, whose names were inserted in the subpoena, and
    thrust them into jail, and we were not permitted to bring one of
    them before the court; but the judge turned upon us, with an air of
    indignation, and said, "Gentlemen, you must get your witnesses, or
    you shall be committed to jail immediately, for we are not going
    to hold the court open, on expense, much longer for you, anyhow."
    We felt very much distressed and oppressed at that time. Colonel
    Wight said, "What shall we do? Our witnesses are all thrust into
    prison, and probably will be, and we have no power to do anything;
    of course we must submit to this tyranny and oppression; we cannot
    help ourselves." Several others made similar expressions, in the
    agony of their souls, but my brother Joseph did not say anything,
    he being sick at that time with the toothache, and ague in his
    face, in consequence of a severe cold brought on by being exposed
    to the severity of the weather. However, it was considered best by
    General Doniphan and Lawyer Reese, that we should try to get some
    witnesses, before the pretended court. Accordingly, I myself gave
    the names of about twenty other persons; the judge inserted them in
    a subpoena, and caused it to be placed in the hands of Bogard, the
    Methodist priest, and he again started off with his fifty soldiers,
    to take those men prisoners, as he had done to the forty others.
    The judge sat and laughed at the good opportunity of getting the
    names, that they might the more easily capture them, and so bring
    them down to be thrust into prison, in order to prevent us from
    getting the truth before the pretended court, of which himself
    was the chief inquisitor or conspirator. Bogard returned from his
    second expedition, with one prisoner only, whom he also thrust into
    prison.

    The people at Far West had learned the intrigue, and had left
    the state, having been made acquainted with the treatment of the
    former witnesses. But we, on learning that we could not obtain
    witnesses, whilst privately consulting with each other what we
    should do, discovered a Mr. Allen, standing by the window on the
    outside of the house; we beckoned to him as though we would have
    him come in. He immediately came in. At that time Judge King
    retorted upon us again, saying, "Gentlemen, are you not going to
    introduce some witnesses;" also saying it was the last day he
    should hold the court open for us, and if we did not rebut the
    testimony that had been given against us, he should have to commit
    us to jail. I had then got Mr. Allen into the house, and before
    the court, so called. I told the judge we had one witness, if he
    would be so good as to put him under oath; he seemed unwilling to
    do so, but after a few moments' consultation the state's attorney
    arose and said, he should object to that witness being sworn, and,
    that he should object to that witness giving in his evidence at
    all; stating that this was not a court to try the case, but only
    a court of investigation on the part of the state. Upon this,
    General Doniphan arose, and said, he would "be God d--d, if the
    witness should not be sworn, and that it was a damned shame, that
    these defendants should be treated in this manner; that they could
    not be permitted to get one witness before the court, whilst all
    their witnesses, even forty at a time, have been taken by force
    of arms, and thrust into the 'bull pen'--in order to prevent them
    from giving their testimony." After Doniphan sat down, the judge
    permitted the witness to be sworn, and enter upon his testimony.
    But so soon as he began to speak, a man by the name of Cook, who
    was a brother-in-law to priest Bogard, the Methodist, and who was
    a lieutenant, and whose place at that time was to superintend the
    guard, stepped in before the pretended court, and took him by the
    nape of his neck, and jammed his head down under the pole or log of
    wood that was placed up around the place where the inquisition was
    sitting, to keep the by-standers from intruding upon the majesty
    of the inquisitors, and jammed him along to the door, and kicked
    him out of doors. He instantly turned to some soldiers, who were
    standing by him, and said to them, "Go and shoot him, d--n him,
    shoot him, d--n him."

    The soldiers ran after the man to shoot him--he fled for his life,
    and with great difficulty made his escape. The pretended court
    immediately arose, and we were ordered to be carried to Liberty,
    Clay county, and there to be thrust into jail. We endeavored to
    find out for what cause, but, all that we could learn was, because
    we were "Mormons." The next morning a large wagon drove up to the
    door, and a blacksmith came into the house with some chains and
    handcuffs. He said his orders from the judge were to handcuff us,
    and chain us together. He informed us that the judge had made out
    a mittimus, and sentenced us to jail for treason; he also said,
    the judge had done this, that we might not get bail; he also said
    the judge stated his intention to keep us in jail, until all
    the "Mormons" were driven out of the state; he also said that
    the judge had further stated, that if he let us out before the
    "Mormons" had left the state, that we would not let them leave,
    and there would be another d--d fuss kicked up. I also heard the
    judge say myself, whilst he was sitting in his pretended court,
    that there was no law for us, nor the "Mormons" in the state of
    Missouri; that he had sworn to see them exterminated, and to see
    the Governor's order executed to the very letter, and that he
    would do so; however, the blacksmith proceeded, and put the irons
    upon us, and we were ordered into the wagon, and were driven off
    for Clay county, and as we journeyed along on the road, we were
    exhibited to the inhabitants. And this course was adopted all
    the way, thus making a public exhibition of us, until we arrived
    at Liberty, Clay county. There we were thrust into prison again,
    and locked up, and were held there in close confinement for the
    space of six months, and our place of lodging was the square side
    of a hewed white oak log, and our food was anything but good and
    decent. Poison was administered to us three or four times; the
    effect it had upon our system was that it vomited us almost to
    death, and then we would lay some two or three days in a torpid,
    stupid state, not even caring or wishing for life. The poison being
    administered in too large doses, or it would inevitably have proved
    fatal, had not the power of Jehovah interposed on our behalf, to
    save us from their wicked purpose. We were also subjected to the
    necessity of eating human flesh for the space of five days, or go
    without food, except a little coffee, or a little corn bread--the
    latter I chose in preference to the former. We none of us partook
    of the flesh, except Lyman Wight. We also heard the guard which
    was placed over us, making sport of us, saying, that they had fed
    us upon "'Mormon' beef." I have described the appearance of this
    flesh to several experienced physicians, and they have decided
    that it was human flesh. We learned afterwards, by one of the
    guard, that it was supposed, that that act of savage cannibalism,
    in feeding us with human flesh, would be considered a popular deed
    of notoriety, but the people, on learning that it would not take,
    tried to keep it secret; but the fact was noised abroad before
    they took that precaution. Whilst we were incarcerated in prison,
    we petitioned the supreme court of the state of Missouri twice for
    _habeas corpus_; but were refused both times, by Judge Reynolds,
    who is now the Governor of that state. We also petitioned one of
    the county judges for a writ of _habeas corpus_, which was granted
    in about three weeks afterwards, but were not permitted to have
    any trial--we were only taken out of jail, and kept out for a few
    hours, and then remanded back again. In the course of three or
    four days after that time, Judge Turnham came into the jail in the
    evening, and said he had permitted Mr. Rigdon to get bail, but
    said he had to do it in the night, and had also to get away in the
    night, and unknown to any of the citizens, or they would kill him,
    for they had sworn to kill him if they could find him. And as to
    the rest of us, he dared not let us go, for fear of his own life,
    as well as ours. He said it was d--d hard to be confined under
    such circumstances; for he knew we were innocent men! and he said
    the people also knew it; and that it was only a persecution and
    treachery, and the scenes of Jackson county acted over again, for
    fear that we would become too numerous in that upper country. He
    said the plan was concocted from the Governor, down to the lowest
    judge; and that that Baptist priest, Riley, was riding into town
    every day to watch the people, stirring up the minds of the people
    against us all he could, exciting them, and stirring up their
    religious prejudices against us, for fear they would let us go. Mr.
    Rigdon, however, got bail, and made his escape to Illinois. The
    jailor, Samuel Tillery, Esq., told us also, that the whole plan
    was concocted by the Governor, down to the lowest judge, in that
    upper country, early in the previous spring, and that the plan
    was more fully carried out at the time that General Atchison went
    down to Jefferson city with Generals Wilson, Lucas, and Gillum,
    the self-styled "Delaware Chief." This was sometime in the month
    of September, when the mob were collected at De Witt, in Carroll
    county. He also told us that the Governor was now ashamed enough
    of the whole transaction, and would be glad to set us at liberty
    if he dared to do it; but, said he, you need not be concerned, for
    the Governor has laid a plan for your release. He also said that
    Esquire Birch, the state's attorney, was appointed to be circuit
    judge, on the circuit passing through Daviess county, and that he
    (Birch) was instructed to fix the papers, so that we would be sure
    to be clear of any incumbrance in a very short time.

    Some time in April we were taken to Daviess county, as they said,
    to have a trial; but when we arrived at that place, instead
    of finding a court or jury, we found another inquisition, and
    Birch, who was the district attorney--the same man who was one of
    the court-martial when we were sentenced to death--was now the
    circuit judge of that pretended court, and the grand jury that was
    empannelled were all at the massacre at Haun's Mill, and lively
    actors in that awful, solemn, disgraceful, cool-blooded murder; and
    all the pretense they made of excuse was, they had done it because
    the Governor ordered them to do it. The same jury sat as a jury in
    the day time, and were placed over us as a guard in the night time;
    they tantalized and boasted over us of their great achievements at
    Haun's Mill and other places, telling us how many houses they had
    burned, and how many sheep, cattle, and hogs they had driven off,
    belonging to the "Mormons," and how many rapes they had committed,
    and what kicking and squealing there was among the d--d bitches,
    saying that they lashed one woman upon one of the d--d "Mormon"
    meeting benches, tying her hands and her feet fast, and sixteen of
    them abused her as much as they had a mind to, and then left her
    bound and exposed in that distressed condition. These fiends of the
    lower region boasted of these acts of barbarity, and tantalized
    our feelings with them for ten days. We had heard of these acts
    of cruelty previous to this time, but were slow to believe that
    such acts of cruelty had been perpetrated. The lady who was the
    subject of their brutality did not recover her health, to be able
    to help herself, for more than three months afterwards. This grand
    jury constantly celebrated their achievements with grog and glass
    in hand, like the Indian warriors at their dances, singing and
    telling each other of their exploits, in murdering the "Mormons,"
    in plundering their houses, and carrying off their property. At
    the end of every song, they would bring in the chorus, "God d--n
    God, God d--n Jesus Christ, God d--n the Presbyterians, God d--n
    the Baptists, God d--n the Methodists!" reiterating one sect after
    another in the same manner, until they came to the "Mormons;" to
    them it was, "God d--n, the God d--n 'Mormons!' we have sent them
    to hell." Then they would slap their hands and shout, "Hosannah,
    hosannah, glory to God!" and fall down on their backs, and kick
    with their feet a few moments; then they would pretend to have
    swooned away in a glorious trance, in order to imitate some of the
    transactions at camp meetings. Then they would pretend to come out
    of their trance, and would shout, and again slap their hands, and
    jump up, while one would take a bottle of whiskey and a tumbler,
    and turn it out full of whiskey, and pour it down each other's
    necks, crying, "D--n it, take it, you must take it;" and if any
    one refused to drink the whiskey, others would clinch him, while
    another poured it down his neck, and what did not go down the
    inside went down the outside. This is a part of the farce acted out
    by the grand jury of Daviess county, while they stood over us as
    guards for ten nights successively. And all this in the presence
    of the great Judge Birch! who had previously said in our hearing
    that there was no law for "Mormons" in the state of Missouri. His
    brother was then acting as district attorney in that circuit, and,
    if anything, was a greater cannibal than the judge. After all these
    ten days of drunkenness, we were informed that we were indicted
    for treason, murder, arson, larceny, theft, and stealing. We asked
    for a change of venue from that county to Marion county, but they
    would not grant it; but they gave us a change of venue from Daviess
    to Boon county, and a mittimus was made out by the pretended Judge
    Birch, without date, name, or place. They fitted us out with a
    two-horse wagon and horses, and four men, besides the sheriff, to
    be our guard. There were five of us. We started from Gallatin, the
    sun about two hours high, p. m., and went as far as Diahman that
    evening, and staid till morning. There we bought two horses of the
    guard, and paid for one of them in our clothing which we had with
    us, and for the other we gave our note. We went down that day as
    far as Judge Morin's, a distance of some four or five miles. There
    we staid until the morning, when we started on our journey to Boon
    county, and traveled on the road about twenty miles distance.
    There we bought a jug of whiskey, with which we treated the
    company, and while there the sheriff showed us the mittimus before
    referred to, without date or signature, and said that Judge Birch
    told him never to carry us to Boon county, and never to show the
    mittimus, "and," said he, "I shall take a good drink of grog, and
    go to bed, you may do as you have a mind to." Three others of the
    guard drank pretty freely of whiskey, sweetened with honey; they
    also went to bed, and were soon asleep, and the other guard went
    along with us and helped to saddle the horses. Two of us mounted
    the horses, and the other three started on foot, and we took our
    change of venue for the state of Illinois, and, in the course of
    nine or ten days, we arrived in Quincy, Adams county, Illinois,
    where we found our families in a state of poverty, although in
    good health, they having been driven out of the state previously,
    by the murderous militia, under the exterminating order of the
    Executive of Missouri. And now the people of that state, a portion
    of them, would be glad to make the people of this state believe
    that my brother Joseph has committed treason, for the purpose of
    keeping up their murderous and hellish persecution; and they seem
    to be unrelenting, and thirsting for the blood of innocence, for I
    do know, most positively, that my brother Joseph has not committed
    treason, nor violated one solitary item of law or rule in the state
    of Missouri.

    But I do know that the "Mormon" people, _en masse_, were driven out
    of that state after being robbed of all they had, and they barely
    escaped with their lives, as well as my brother Joseph, who barely
    escaped with his life. His family also were robbed of all they had,
    and barely escaped with the skin of their teeth, and all of this
    in consequence of the exterminating order of Governor Boggs, the
    same being confirmed by the Legislature of that state. And I do
    know, so does this court, and every rational man who is acquainted
    with the circumstances, and every man who shall hereafter become
    acquainted with the particulars thereof will know, that Governor
    Boggs, and Generals Clark, Lucas, Wilson, and Gilliam, also Austin
    A. King, have committed treason upon the citizens of Missouri,
    and did violate the constitution of the United States, and also
    the constitution and laws of the state of Missouri, and did exile
    and expel, at the point of the bayonet, some twelve or fourteen
    thousand inhabitants from the state; and did murder some three or
    four hundreds of men, women, and children, in cold blood, and in
    the most horrid and cruel manner possible; and the whole of it was
    caused by religious bigotry and persecution, because the "Mormons"
    dared to worship Almighty God according to the dictates of their
    own consciences, and agreeable to his divine will, as revealed in
    the scriptures of eternal truth, and had turned away from following
    the vain traditions of their fathers, and would not worship
    according to the dogmas and commandments of those men who preach
    for hire and divine for money, and teach for doctrine the precepts
    of men, expecting that the constitution of the United States would
    have protected them therein. But notwithstanding the "Mormon"
    people had purchased upwards of two hundred thousand dollars' worth
    of land, most of which was entered and paid for at the land office
    of the United States, in the state of Missouri; and although the
    President of the United States has been made acquainted with these
    facts, and the particulars of our persecutions and oppressions, by
    petition to him and to Congress, yet they have not even attempted
    to restore the "Mormons" to their rights, or given any assurance
    that we may hereafter expect redress from them. And I do also
    know most positively and assuredly, that my brother Joseph Smith,
    senior, has not been in the state of Missouri since the spring of
    the year 1839. And further this deponent saith not.

    _Hyrum Smith_.



CHAPTER L.

REMOVAL OF THE SMITH FAMILY TO ILLINOIS.

At the time when Joseph went into the enemy's camp, Mr. Smith and
myself stood in the door of the house in which we were then living, and
could distinctly hear their horrid yellings. Not knowing the cause, we
supposed they were murdering him. Soon after the screaming commenced,
five or six guns were discharged. At this, Mr. Smith, folding his arms
tight across his heart, cried out, "Oh, my God! my God! they have
killed my son! they have murdered him! and I must die, for I cannot
live without him!"

I had no word of consolation to give him, for my heart was broken
within me--my agony was unutterable. I assisted him to the bed, and
he fell back upon it helpless as a child, for he had not strength to
stand upon his feet. The shrieking continued; no tongue can describe
the sound which was conveyed to our ears; no heart can imagine the
sensations of our breasts, as we listened to those awful screams. Had
the army been composed of so many blood-hounds, wolves, and panthers,
they could not have made a sound more terrible.

My husband was immediately taken sick, and never afterwards entirely
recovered, yet he lived about two years, and was occasionally quite
comfortable, and able to attend meetings.

When they were about starting from Far West, a messenger came and
told us that if we ever saw our sons alive, we must go immediately to
them, for they were in a wagon that would start in a few minutes for
Independence, and in all probability they would never return alive.
Receiving this intimation, Lucy and myself set out directly for the
place. On coming within about a hundred yards of the wagon, we were
compelled to stop, for we could press no further through the crowd. I
therefore appealed to those around me, exclaiming, "I am the mother
of the Prophet--is there not a gentleman here, who will assist me to
that wagon, that I may take a last look at my children, and speak to
them ones more before I die?" Upon this, one individual volunteered
to make a pathway through the army, and we passed on, threatened with
death at every step, till at length we arrived at the wagon. The man
who led us through the crowd spoke to Hyrum, who was sitting in front,
and, telling him that his mother had come to see him, requested that
he should reach his hand to me. He did so, but I was not allowed to
see him; the cover was of strong cloth, and nailed down so close, that
he could barely get his hand through. We had merely shaken hands with
him, when we were ordered away by the mob, who forbade any conversation
between us, and, threatening to shoot us, they ordered the teamster to
drive over us. Our friend then conducted us to the back part of the
wagon, where Joseph sat, and said, "Mr. Smith, your mother and sister
are here, and wish to shake hands with you." Joseph crowded his hand
through between the cover and wagon, and we caught hold of it; but he
spoke not to either of us, until I said, "Joseph, do speak to your poor
mother once more--I cannot bear to go till I hear your voice." "God
bless you, mother!" he sobbed out. Then a cry was raised, and the wagon
dashed off, tearing him from us just as Lucy was pressing his hand
to her lips, to bestow upon it a sister's last kiss--for he was then
sentenced to be shot.

For some time our house was filled with mourning, lamentation, and
woe; but, in the midst of my grief, I found consolation that surpassed
all earthly comfort. I was filled with the Spirit of God, and received
the following by the gift of prophesy: "Let your heart be comforted
concerning your children, they shall not be harmed by their enemies;
and, in less than four years, Joseph shall speak before the judges
and great men of the land, for his voice shall be heard in their
councils. And in five years from this time he will have power over all
his enemies." This relieved my mind, and I was prepared to comfort
my children. I told them what had been revealed to me, which greatly
consoled them.

As soon as William was able to stir about a little he besought his
father to move to Illinois, but Mr. Smith would not consent to this,
for he was in hopes that our sons would be liberated, and peace again
be restored, but finally said that the family might get ready to move,
and then, if we were obliged to go, there would be nothing to hinder us.

Our business in Far West had been trading in corn and wheat, as well
as keeping a boarding house. When the mob came in, we had considerable
grain on hand, but very little flour or meal, therefore we sent a man
who was living with us to mill with fourteen sacks of grain; but the
miller considered it unsafe to allow the brethren to remain about his
premises, as the mob were near at hand, and he was afraid they would
burn his buildings. Consequently, the young man returned without his
grain, and, for breadstuff, we were for a long time obliged to pound
corn in a samp-mortar. Many subsisted altogether upon parched corn for
some length of time.

The brethren were all driven in from the country. There was an acre of
ground in front of our house, completely covered with beds, lying in
the open sun, where families were compelled to sleep, exposed to all
kinds of weather; these were the last who came into the city, and, as
the houses were all full, they could not find a shelter. It was enough
to make the heart ache to see the children, sick with colds, and crying
around their mothers for food, whilst their parents were destitute of
the means of making them comfortable.

It may be said that, if Joseph Smith had been a Prophet, he would have
foreseen the evil, and provided against it. To this I reply, he did
all that was in his power to prevail upon his brethren to move into
Far West, before the difficulty commenced, and at a meeting, three
weeks previous, he urged the brethren to make all possible haste in
moving both their houses and their provisions into the city. But this
counsel appeared to them unreasonable and inconsistent, therefore
they did not heed it. If the brethren at Haun's Mill had hearkened to
counsel, it would, without doubt, have saved their lives; but, as the
consequences of their negligence are already published, and as my mind
is loth to dwell upon these days of sorrow, I shall only give those
facts which have not been published.

While the mob was in the city, William went out one day to feed his
horse, but the horse was gone. It was not long, however, before a
soldier, who had been absent on a dispatch, rode him into the yard.
William took the horse by the bridle, and ordered the soldier to
dismount, which he did, and left the horse in William's hands again.

The brethren were compelled to lay down their arms, and sign away
their property. This was done quite near our house. I distinctly heard
General Clark's notable speech; and, without any great degree of alarm,
I heard him declare, concerning Joseph and Hyrum, that "their die was
cast, their doom was fixed, and their fate was sealed."

Not long after Hyrum was taken, Joseph Fielding, his youngest son, was
born. This was Mary's first child. She never saw her husband but once
after she became a mother before leaving the state. She suffered beyond
description in her sickness, but, in all her afflictions, her sister,
Mrs. Thompson, stood by her to nurse and comfort her, and, by the best
of attention, she gained sufficient strength to accompany Emma to the
prison once before she left the state.

At this time, my husband sent to Joseph to know if it was the will of
the Lord that we should leave the state. Whereupon Joseph sent him a
revelation which he had received while in prison, which satisfied my
husband's mind, and he was willing to remove to Illinois as soon as
possible.

After this, William took his own family, without further delay, to
Quincy, thence to Plymouth, where he settled himself, and afterwards
sent back the team for his father's family.

Just as we got our goods into the wagon, a man came to us and said,
that Sidney Rigdon's family were ready to start, and must have the
wagon immediately. Accordingly, our goods were taken out, and we were
compelled to wait until the team could come after us again. We put
our goods into the wagon a second time, but the wagon was wanted for
Emma and her family, so our goods were again taken out. However, we
succeeded, after a long time, in getting one single wagon to convey
beds, clothing, and provisions for our family, Salisbury's family, and
Mr. McLeries' family, besides considerable luggage for Don Carlos, who,
with his family and the remainder of his baggage, was crowded into a
buggy, and went in the same company with us.

The first day we arrived at a place called Tinney's Grove, where we
lodged, over night, in an old log house, which was very uncomfortable.
Half of the succeeding day I traveled on foot. That night we stayed at
the house of one Mr. Thomas, who was then a member of the Church. On
the third day, in the afternoon, it began to rain. At night we stopped
at a house, and asked permission to stay till morning. The man to whom
we applied showed us a miserable out-house, which was filthy enough
to sicken the stomach, and told us, if we would clean this place, and
haul our own wood and water, we might lodge there. To this we agreed,
and, with much trouble, we succeeded in making a place for our beds.
For the use of this loathsome hovel, he charged us seventy-five cents.
We traveled all the next day in a pouring rain. We asked for shelter
at many places, but were refused. At last we came to a place, quite
like the one where we spent the previous night. Here we spent the night
without fire. On the fifth day, just before arriving at Palmyra, in
Missouri, Don Carlos called to Mr. Smith, and said, "Father, this
exposure is too bad, and I will not bear it any longer; the first place
that I come to that looks comfortable, I shall drive up and go into the
house, and do you follow me."

We soon came to a farm house, surrounded with every appearance of
plenty. The house was but a short distance from the road, having
in front of it a large gate. Through this Don Carlos drove without
hesitating to ask the privilege, and, after assisting us through, he
started to the house, and, meeting the landlord, he said, "I do not
know but that I am trespassing, but I have with me an aged father, who
is sick, besides my mother, and a number of women, with small children.
We have traveled two days and a half in this rain, and if we are
compelled to go much further, we shall all of us die. If you will allow
us to stay with you over night, we will pay you almost any price for
our accommodation."

"Why, what do you mean, sir!" said the gentleman, "Do you not consider
us human beings? Do you think that we would turn anything that is flesh
and blood from our door, in such a time as this! Drive up to the house
and help your wife and children out; I'll attend to your father and
mother and the rest of them." The landlord then assisted Mr. Smith and
myself into the room in which his lady was sitting, but as she was
rather ill, and he feared that the dampness of our clothing would cause
her to take cold, he ordered a black servant to make a fire for her in
another room. He then assisted each of our family into the house, and
hung up our cloaks and shawls to dry.

At this house we had everything which could conduce to comfort. The
gentleman, who was Esquire Mann, brought us milk for our children,
hauled us water to wash with, and furnished us good beds to sleep in.

In the evening, he remarked that he was sent by his county, the year
before, to the House of Representatives, where he met one Mr. Carroll,
who was sent from the county in which the "Mormons" resided; "and if
ever," said Esquire Mann, "I felt like fighting any man, it was him.
He never once raised his voice, nor even his hand, in behalf of that
abused people, once while the House was in session. I was never a
member of the House before, and had not sufficient confidence to take a
stand upon the floor in their behalf, as I should have done, had I been
a man of a little more experience."

After spending the night with this good man, we proceeded on our
journey, although it continued raining, for we were obliged to travel
through mud and rain to avoid being detained by high water. When we
came within six miles of the Mississippi river, the weather grew
colder, and, in the place of rain, we had snow and hail; and the ground
between us and the river was so low and swampy, that a person on foot
would sink in over his ankles at every step, yet we were all of us
forced to walk, or rather wade, the whole six miles.

On reaching the Mississippi, we found that we could not cross that
night, nor yet find a shelter, for many Saints were there before us,
waiting to go over into Quincy. The snow was now six inches deep, and
still falling. We made our beds upon it, and went to rest with what
comfort we might under such circumstances. The next morning our beds
were covered with snow, and much of the bedding under which we lay was
frozen. We rose and tried to light a fire, but, finding it impossible,
we resigned ourselves to our comfortless situation.

Soon after this, Samuel came over from Quincy, and he with the
assistance of Seymour Brunson, obtained permission of the ferryman for
us to cross that day. About sunset, we landed in Quincy. Here Samuel
had hired a house, and we moved into it, with four other families.



CHAPTER LI.

JOSEPH AND HYRUM ESCAPE FROM THEIR PERSECUTORS, AND RETURN TO THEIR
FAMILIES.

We spent the evening after we arrived in Quincy in relating our
adventures and escapes, while making our exit from the land of
Missouri, and the following circumstance, during our evening's
conversation, was related by Samuel, who, in company with a number of
others, fled for his life before the enemy:--

He said that they traveled the most secluded route that they could
find, as they considered it unsafe to be seen by the inhabitants of the
country. Game being very scarce, they soon lacked for provisions, and
finally ran out altogether: yet they pursued their journey, until they
became so weak that they could proceed no further. They then held a
council, in which Samuel was appointed to receive the word of the Lord,
and they united in prayer to God, that he would make known to them the
means and time of their deliverance.

After a short supplication, it was manifested to Samuel that they might
obtain sustenance by traveling a short distance in a certain direction.
This he made known to the company, and immediately set out with two
others in quest of the promised food. After traveling a short time,
they came to an Indian wigwam, and made known to the Indians by signs
that they were hungry. Upon this the squaw, with all possible speed,
baked them some cakes, and gave each of them two; after which she sent
the same number to those who remained in the woods, giving them to
understand that she would send more, but she had very little flour, and
her papooses would be hungry.

From this time onward, the brethren succeeded in getting food
sufficient to sustain them, so that none of them perished.

In a few days, Samuel moved his family into another house, and we
were then less crowded. Soon after he left, Lucy was taken violently
ill, and for several days she refused to take any kind of nourishment
whatever. I had not long the privilege of taking care of her, as I
was shortly seized with the cholera myself, and, although I suffered
dreadfully with the cramp, which usually attends this disease, it was
nothing in comparison to another pain, which operated upon the marrow
of my bones. It seemed sometimes as though it would almost burst the
bones themselves asunder.

Everything that could be obtained which was considered good for such
diseases was administered in my case, but without effect. At length we
applied to a young botanic physician, who gave me some herb tea that
relieved me immediately.

During my sickness, Samuel brought Lucy down stairs several times
in his arms to see me, as they did not expect me to live any length
of time, and they were willing that she should be gratified. When I
recovered, I found that she had taken nothing but ice water while I was
sick, but her fever was broken, and, by careful nursing, she was soon
able to walk about.

Whilst we were sick, the ladies of Quincy sent us every delicacy
which the city afforded; in fact, we were surrounded with the kindest
of neighbors. One Mr. Messer and family, in particular sought every
opportunity to oblige us while we remained in the place.

Previous to our sickness in Quincy, my husband sent Brother Lamoreaux
to Missouri, under strict injunctions to see Joseph and Hyrum, or find
out where they were before he should return. About the time that Lucy
began to walk about a little, Brother Partridge and Brother Morley came
to our house from Lima, to see if Brother Lamoreaux had either written
or returned. When they came we had heard nothing of him, but while
they were with us he arrived in Quincy, and sent us word that he had
seen neither Joseph nor Hyrum. At this information Brother Partridge
was in despair, and said that, when another messenger was to be sent,
he would go himself, as he was instructed. I listened to him some time
in silence; at last the Spirit, which had so often comforted my heart,
again spoke peace to my soul, and gave me an assurance that I should
see my sons before the night should again close over my head. "Brother
Partridge," I exclaimed, in tears of joy, "I shall see Joseph and Hyrum
before tomorrow night." "No, mother Smith," said he, "I am perfectly
discouraged; I don't believe we shall ever see them again in the world.
At any rate, do not flatter yourself that they will be here as soon
as that, for I tell you that you will be disappointed. I have always
believed you before, but I cannot see any prospect of this prophecy
being fulfilled, but, if it is so, I will never dispute your word
again." I asked him if he would stay in town long enough to prove my
sayings whether they were true or false. He promised to do so. Brothers
Partridge and Morley soon afterwards left the house, in order to get
further information upon the subject.

After falling asleep that night, I saw my sons in vision. They were
upon the prairie traveling, and seemed very tired and hungry. They had
but one horse. I saw them stop and tie him to the stump of a burnt
sapling, then lie down upon the ground to rest themselves; and they
looked so pale and faint that it distressed me. I sprang up, and said
to my husband, "Oh, Mr. Smith, I can see Joseph and Hyrum, and they are
so weak they can hardly stand. Now they are lying asleep on the cold
ground! Oh, how I wish that I could give them something to eat!"

Mr. Smith begged me to be quiet, saying that I was nervous; but it was
impossible for me to rest--they were still before my eyes--I saw them
lie there full two hours; then one of them went away to get something
to eat, but not succeeding, they traveled on. This time, Hyrum rode and
Joseph walked by his side, holding himself up by the stirrup leather. I
saw him reel with weakness, but could render him no assistance. My soul
was grieved, I rose from my bed, and spent the remainder of the night
in walking the floor.

The next day I made preparations to receive my sons, confident that the
poor, afflicted wanderers would arrive at home before sunset. Sometime
in the afternoon, Lucy and I were coming down stairs--she was before
me. When she came to the bottom of the steps she sprang forward, and
exclaimed, "There is Brother Baldwin. My brothers--where are they?"
This was Caleb Baldwin, who was imprisoned with them. He told us that
Joseph and Hyrum were then crossing the river and would soon be in
Quincy. Lucy, hearing this, ran to carry the tidings to Hyrum's family,
but the excitement was not sufficient to keep up her strength. When she
came to the door she fell prostrate. After recovering a little, she
communicated the welcome news.

When Hyrum and Joseph landed, they went immediately to see their
families, and the next day, they, together with their wives and the
rest of our connections, visited us. The Quincy Grays also came to
our house, and saluted my sons in the most polite manner. During the
afternoon, I asked Joseph and Hyrum, in the presence of the company, if
they were not on the prairie the night previous in the situation which
I have already related. They replied in the affirmative. I then asked
Brother Partridge if he believed what I told him two days before. He
answered that he would for ever after that time acknowledge me to be
a true prophetess. The day passed pleasantly, and my sons returned to
their homes, happy in their freedom and the society of their friends.

In a short time after Joseph and Hyrum landed in Illinois, George
Miller, who is now the second Bishop of the Church, came and informed
us that he had a quantity of land in his possession; also, that upon
this land were a number of log houses, which the brethren might occupy
if they chose, and that he would charge them nothing for the use of
them, unless it would be to repair them a little, as they needed
something of this kind.

My sons were pleased with his offer, and Samuel, Don Carlos, and W. J.
Salisbury, renting some land of him, moved upon his premises as soon as
preparations could be made for their families.



CHAPTER LII.

A PURCHASE MADE IN THE TOWN OF COMMERCE--JOSEPH THE PROPHET GOES TO
WASHINGTON--THE DEATH OF JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR.

In the spring of 1839, Joseph and Hyrum made a purchase of a tract of
land in Commerce, of one Mr. White, and after moving their families
thither, sent Brother Jacob G. Bigler back for Mr. Smith and myself.

When our good friend, Mr. Messer, learned that we were about leaving
Quincy, he came and spent a whole day with us. The next day we set out
for Commerce. After proceeding about ten miles, our carriage broke down,
and, although my husband was quite sick, we were compelled to remain in
the sun at least three hours before another vehicle could be procured.
After this we started on, and soon arrived at Bear Creek, below Lima.
We found this stream so high that it was dangerous to ford, especially
for those who were unacquainted with the crossing place, but,
fortunately, we took the right direction, and, with much difficulty,
succeeded in getting across. That night we stayed with Sister Lawrence,
and the next day arrived in Commerce, where we found our children in
good health.

We moved into a small room attached to the house in which Joseph was
living. Here we might have enjoyed ourselves, but Mr. Smith continued
to sink, his health constantly failing, until we found that medicine
was of no benefit to him.

As the season advanced, the brethren began to feel the effects of the
hardships which they had endured, and also the unhealthiness of the
climate in which we were then situated. They came down with the agues
and bilious fevers to such an extent that there were whole families
in which not one was able to help himself to a drink of cold water.
Among the sick were Hyrum and his family, also my daughter Lucy. Joseph
and Emma, seeing the distress, commenced taking the sick into their
own house, with the view of taking care of them, and making them more
comfortable. This they continued to do, until their house became so
crowded that they were compelled to spread a tent for that part of the
family who were still on their feet, in order to make room in the house
for the sick. During this time of distress, Silas Smith, my husband's
brother, came up from Pike county, Illinois, to consult with Mr. Smith
in relation to some Church business, and returned with the intention
of bringing his family hither, but was taken sick and died before he
could accomplish it, and we never saw him again. My son William also
came from Plymouth about this time, and informed us that our provisions
and furniture, all had been destroyed in Missouri by the mob. When
he returned home he took Lovina, Hyrum's eldest daughter, with him,
hoping, as she was sick, that the ride would be a benefit to her. In
this he was disappointed, for she grew worse instead of better, so that
in a short time he considered it necessary to send for her father, as
she was not expected to live. As her father was not able to sit up
when the messenger arrived, myself and Lucy went in his stead. On our
arrival at Plymouth, we found Lovina better, and she continued to mend
until she regained her health. But the ague took a fresh hold on Lucy,
and she remained completely under the power of the disease until the
sickness in Commerce had so abated that Joseph was able to make us a
visit.

When he arrived, Lucy was lying up stairs in a high fever. Upon hearing
his voice below, she sprang from her bed and flew' down stairs, as
though she was altogether well, and was so rejoiced to hear that her
relatives were all still living, and in better health than when she
left them, that the excitement performed an entire cure. She soon
regained her strength and we returned home.

It now became necessary for Joseph to take a journey to the city of
Washington, for he had been commanded of the Lord, while in prison, to
pray for redress at the feet of the President, as well as Congress,
when his family should be so situated that he could leave home.

Accordingly, Joseph started, in company with Sidney Rigdon, Elias
Higbee, Dr. Foster and Porter Rockwell, to fulfill this injunction.
After arriving in Washington, Joseph and Sidney waited upon his
Excellency Martin Van Buren, but it was some time before they had an
opportunity of laying their grievances before him; however, they at
length succeeded in getting his attention. After listening to the
entire history of the oppression and abuse, which we had received at
the hands of our enemies, he replied, "Gentlemen, your cause is just;
but I can do nothing for you!"

The matter was, however, laid before Congress. They, too, concluded
that our cause was just, but that they could do nothing for us, as
Missouri was a sovereign, independent state; and that the "Mormons"
might appeal to her for redress, for, in their opinion, she neither
wanted the power nor lacked the disposition to redress the wrongs of
her own citizens. During Joseph's absence, Mr. Smith was at times very
weak, and coughed dreadfully, so that some nights we had to lift him
out of bed. On one occasion of this kind he expressed a fear that he
should die with me alone. I told him that this would not be the case,
for it was impressed upon my mind that, when he died, he would have his
children around him. This comforted him much, for he was very anxious
to live until Joseph should return, that he might bless him again
before he should die.

This was in the winter of 1840. Before spring he got some better, so
that he was able to walk about a little, and attend a few blessing
meetings, in one of which he blessed Mrs. Page, the wife of one of the
Twelve, and a young woman whom Brother Page had baptized and confirmed
on Bear Creek but a few days previous. In blessing the latter, Mr.
Smith repeated a prophecy which had been pronounced upon her head in
her confirmation, as precisely as though he had been present when it
was uttered, stating that the Spirit testified that these things had
been predicted upon her head in her confirmation, which very much
surprised her, as she knew that he had not received any intimation of
the same, except by the Spirit of God.

In March, 1840, Joseph returned from the city of Washington. At this
time Mr. Smith had suffered a relapse, and was confined to his bed.
On Joseph's arrival, he administered to him, and, for a short time,
my husband was better. In the ensuing April a Conference was held in
Nauvoo (formerly Commerce) during which the result of Joseph's mission
to Washington was made known to the brethren; who, after hearing that
their petition was rejected, concluded, as they had now tried every
court which was accessible to them on earth, to lay their case before
the Court of Heaven, and leave it in the hands of the great God.

Joseph, soon after his arrival, had a house built for us near his own,
and one that was more commodious than that which we previously occupied.

When the heat of the ensuing summer came on, my husband's health began
to decline more rapidly than before. This was perhaps caused, in part,
by the renewal of the Missouri persecutions, for our sons were now
demanded of the authorities of Illinois, as fugitives from justice. In
consequence of which, they were compelled to absent themselves from the
city, until the writs which were issued for their arrest, were returned.

About this time John C. Bennett came into the city, and undertook to
devise a scheme whereby Joseph and Hyrum, besides other brethren who
were persecuted in like manner, might remain at home in peace. I do
not know what he did, I only know that he seemed to be engaged in the
law, as well as the gospel. My heart was then too full of anxiety
about my husband, for me to enquire much into matters which I did not
understand; however, the result was, Joseph returned from Iowa.

On the evening of his return, my husband commenced vomiting blood. I
sent immediately for Joseph and Hyrum, who, as soon as they came, gave
him something that alleviated his distress. This was on Saturday night.
The next morning Joseph came in and told his father, that he should
not be troubled any more for the present with the Missourians; "and,"
said he, "I can now stay with you as much as you wish." After which, he
informed his father that it was then the privilege of the Saints to be
baptized for the dead. These two facts Mr. Smith was delighted to hear,
and requested that Joseph should be baptized for Alvin immediately;
and, as he expected to live but a short time, desired that his children
would stay with him, as much as they could consistently.

They were all with him, except Catharine, who was detained from coming
by a sick husband. Mr. Smith being apprised of this, sent Arthur
Miliken, who, but a short time previous, was married to our youngest
daughter, after Catharine and her children; but, before he went,
my husband blessed him, fearing that it would be too late when he
returned. He took Arthur by the hand, and said:--

    My son, I have given you my youngest, darling child, and will you
    be kind to her? "Yes, father," he replied, "I will." Arthur, he
    continued, you shall be blessed, and you shall be great in the
    eyes of the Lord; and if you will be faithful, you shall have all
    the desires of your heart in righteousness. Now, I want you to
    go after my daughter Catharine, for I know, that because of the
    faithfulness of your heart, you will not come back without her.

Arthur then left, and my husband next addressed himself to me:--

    Mother, do you not know, that you are the mother of as great a
    family as ever lived upon the earth? The world loves its own, but
    it does not love us. It hates us because we are not of the world;
    therefore, all its malice is poured out upon us, and they seek to
    take away our lives. When I look upon my children, and realize,
    that although they were raised up to do the Lord's work, yet they
    must pass through scenes of trouble and affliction as long as
    they live upon the earth; and I dread to leave them surrounded by
    enemies.

At this Hyrum bent over his father and said:--"Father, if you are taken
away, will you not intercede for us at the throne of grace, that our
enemies may not have so much power over us?" He then laid his hands
upon Hyrum's head and said:--

    My son, Hyrum, I seal upon your head your patriarchal blessing,
    which I placed upon your head before, for that shall be verified.
    In addition to this, I now give you my dying blessing. You shall
    have a season of peace, so that you shall have sufficient rest to
    accomplish the work which God has given you to do. You shall be
    as firm as the pillars of heaven unto the end of your days. I now
    seal upon your head the patriarchal power, and you shall bless the
    people. This is my dying blessing upon your head in the name of
    Jesus. Amen.

To Joseph he said:--

    Joseph, my son, you are called to a high and holy calling. You are
    even called to do the work of the Lord. Hold out faithful and you
    shall be blest and your children after you. You shall even live
    to finish your work. At this Joseph cried out, weeping, "Oh! my
    father, shall I?" Yes, said his father, you shall live to lay out
    the plan of all the work which God has given you to do. This is my
    dying blessing on your head in the name of Jesus. I also confirm
    your former blessing upon your head; for it shall be fulfilled.
    Even so. Amen.

To Samuel he said:--

    Samuel, you have been a faithful and obedient son. By your
    faithfulness you have brought many into the Church. The Lord has
    seen your diligence, and you are blessed, in that he has never
    chastised you, but has called you home to rest; and there is a
    crown laid up for you, which shall grow brighter and brighter unto
    the perfect day.

    When the Lord called you, he said, "Samuel, I have seen thy
    suffering, and heard thy cries, and beheld thy faithfulness; thy
    skirts are clear from the blood of this generation." Because of
    these things I seal upon your head all the blessings which I have
    heretofore pronounced upon you; and this my dying blessing, I now
    seal upon you. Even so. Amen.

To William he said:--

    William, my son, thou hast been faithful in declaring the word even
    before the Church was organized. Thou hast been sick, yet thou hast
    traveled to warn the people. And when thou couldst not walk, thou
    didst sit by the wayside and call upon the Lord, until he provided
    a way for thee to be carried. Thou wast sick and afflicted, when
    thou wast away from thy father's house, and no one knew it to
    assist thee in thy afflictions; but the Lord did see the honesty of
    thine heart, and thou wast blessed in thy mission. William, thou
    shalt be blest, and thy voice shall be heard in distant lands, from
    place to place, and they shall regard thy teachings. Thou shalt
    be like a roaring lion in the forest, for they shall hearken and
    hear thee. And thou shalt be the means of bringing many sheaves to
    Zion, and thou shalt be great in the eyes of many, and they shall
    call thee blessed, and I will bless thee, and thy children after
    thee. And the blessings which I sealed upon thy head before, I now
    confirm again, and thy days shall be many, thou shalt do a great
    work, and live as long as thou desirest life. Even so. Amen.

To Don Carlos he said:--

    Carlos, my darling son, when I blessed thee thy blessing was never
    written, and I could not get it done, but now I want you to get my
    book, which contains the blessings of my family. Take your pen and
    fill out all those parts of your blessing which were not written.
    You shall have the Spirit of the Lord and be able to fill up all
    the vacancies which were left by Oliver when he wrote it. You
    shall be great in the sight of the Lord, for he sees and knows the
    integrity of your heart, and you shall be blessed; all that know
    you shall bless you. Your wife and your children shall also be
    blessed, and you shall live to fulfill all that the Lord has sent
    you to do. Even so. Amen.

To Sophronia he said:--

    Sophronia, my oldest daughter, thou hadst sickness when thou wast
    young, and thy parents did cry over thee, to have the Lord spare
    thy life. Thou didst see trouble and sorrow, but thy troubles shall
    be lessened, for thou hast been faithful in helping thy father and
    thy mother in the work of the Lord. And thou shalt be blessed, and
    the blessings of heaven shall rest down upon thee. Thy last days
    shall be thy best. Although thou shalt see trouble, sorrow and
    mourning, thou shalt be comforted, and the Lord will lift thee up,
    and bless thee and thy family, and thou shalt live as long as thou
    desirest life. This dying blessing I pronounce and seal upon thy
    head, with thine other blessings. Even so. Amen.

After this he rested for some time, and then said:--

    Catharine has been a sorrowful child, trouble has she seen, the
    Lord has looked down upon her and seen her patience, and has heard
    her cries. She shall be comforted when her days of sorrow are
    ended, then shall the Lord look down upon her, and she shall have
    the comforts of life, and the good things of the world, then shall
    she rise up, and defend her cause. She shall live to raise up her
    family; and in time her sufferings shall be over, for the day is
    coming when the patient shall receive their reward. Then she shall
    rise over her enemies, and shall have horses and land, and things
    around her to make her heart glad. I, in this dying blessing,
    confirm her patriarchal blessing upon her head, and she shall
    receive eternal life. Even so. Amen.

To Lucy he said:--

    Lucy, thou art my youngest child, my darling. And the Lord gave
    thee unto us to be a comfort and a blessing to us in our old
    age, therefore, thou must take good care of thy mother. Thou
    art innocent, and thy heart is right before the Lord. Thou hast
    been with us through all the persecution; thou hast seen nothing
    but persecution, sickness and trouble, except when the Lord hath
    cheered our hearts. If thou wilt continue faithful, thou shalt be
    blest with a house and land; thou shalt have food and raiment, and
    no more be persecuted and driven, as thou hast hitherto been. Now,
    continue faithful, and thou shalt live long and be blessed, and
    thou shalt receive a reward in heaven. This dying blessing, and
    also thy patriarchal blessing, I seal upon thy head in the name of
    Jesus. Even so. Amen.

After this he spoke to me again, and said:--

    Mother, do you not know, that you are one of the most singular
    women in the world? "No," I replied, "I do not." Well I do, he
    continued, you have brought up my children for me by the fireside,
    and when I was gone from home, you comforted them. You have brought
    up all my children, and could always comfort them when I could
    not. We have often wished that we might both die at the same time,
    but you must not desire to die when I do, for you must stay to
    comfort the children when I am gone. So do not mourn, but try to
    be comforted. Your last days shall be your best days, as to being
    driven, for you shall have more power over your enemies than you
    have had. Again I say, be comforted.

He then paused for some time, being exhausted. After which he said, in
a tone of surprise, "I can see and hear, as well as ever I could." [_A
second pause of considerable length_] "I see Alvin." [_Third pause_.]
"I shall live seven or eight minutes." Then straightening himself, he
laid his hands together; after which he began to breathe shorter, and
in about eight minutes, his breath stopped, without even a struggle
or a sigh, and his spirit took its flight for the regions where the
justified ones rest from their labors. He departed so calmly, that, for
some time, we could not believe but that he would breathe again.

Catharine did not arrive until the evening of the second day; still we
were compelled to attend to his obsequeis the day after his decease,
or run the risk of seeing Joseph and Hyrum torn from their father's
corpse before it was interred, and carried away by their enemies to
prison. After we had deposited his last remains in their narrow house,
my sons fled from the city, and I returned to my desolate home; and
I then thought that the greatest grief which it was possible for
me to feel, had fallen upon me in the death of my beloved husband.
Although that portion of my life which lay before me, seemed to be a
lonesome, trackless waste, yet I did not think that I could possibly
find, in traveling over it, a sorrow more searching, or a calamity
more dreadful, than the present. But, as I hasten to the end of my
story, the reader will be able to form an opinion with regard to the
correctness of my conclusion.



CHAPTER LIII.

JOSEPH ARRESTED AT QUINCY--DISCHARGED AT MONMOUTH--JOSEPH CHARGED WITH
AN ATTEMPT TO ASSASSINATE EX-GOVERNOR BOGGS.

In the month of December, 1840, we received for Nauvoo, a city charter
with extensive privileges; and in February of the same winter, charters
were also received for the Nauvoo Legion, and for the University of the
city of Nauvoo.

Not long after this the office of Lieutenant-General was conferred upon
Joseph, by the vote of the people and a commission from the Governor
of the state. In the early part of the same winter, I made Brother
Knowlton a visit on Bear-Creek. While there I had the misfortune to
sprain one of my knees, in getting out of a wagon, and, a cold settling
in the injured part, rheumatism succeeded. Soon after I returned home,
I was confined to my bed, and for six weeks I had watchers every night.
Sophronia was then with me, her husband being absent on a mission,
and she assisted Lucy and Arthur in taking care of me. They were
indefatigable in their attentions, and by their faithful care I was
enabled, after a long season of helplessness, to stand upon my feet
again.

On the twenty-fifth of January, 1841, Mary Smith, Samuel's wife, died,
in consequence of her exposures in Missouri.

On the fifth of June the same year, Joseph went, in company with
several others, on a visit to Quincy. As he was returning, Governor
Carlin sent one of the Missouri writs after him, and had him arrested
for murder, treason, etc., etc. Joseph choosing to be tried at
Monmouth, Warren county, the officers brought him to Nauvoo, and, after
procuring witnesses, they proceeded to Monmouth. Esquire Browning spoke
in Joseph's defense, and was moved upon by the spirit that was given
him, in answer to the prayers of the Saints; and, suffice it to say,
he gained the case. The opposing attorney tried his utmost to convict
Joseph of the crimes mentioned in the writ, but before he had spoken
many minutes, he turned sick, and vomited at the feet of the judge;
which, joined to the circumstance of his advocating the case of the
Missourians, who are called _pukes_ by their countrymen, obtained for
him the same appellation, and was a source of much amusement to the
court.

When Joseph returned, the Church was greatly rejoiced, and besought him
never again to leave the city.

About the first of August, Don Carlos was taken sick, and on the
seventh he died. The particulars of his death will be given hereafter.

On the first day of September, Robert B. Thompson, who was Hyrum's
brother-in-law, and associate editor with Don Carlos of the _Times and
Seasons_, died of the same disease which carried Carlos out of the
world--supposed to be quick consumption.

On the fifteenth of September Joseph's youngest child died: he was
named Don Carlos, after his uncle.

On the twenty-eighth of September, Hyrum's second son, named Hyrum,
died of a fever.

The succeeding winter we were left to mourn over the ravages which
death had made in our family, without interruption; but sickness ceased
from among us, and the mob retired to their homes.

On the sixth of May, 1842, Lilburn W. Boggs, ex-governor of Missouri,
was said to have been shot by an assassin. And, in consequence of the
injuries which we had received, suspicion immediately fastened itself
upon Joseph, who was accused of having committed the crime. But, as he
was on that day at an officers drill in Nauvoo, several hundred miles
from where Boggs resided, and was seen by hundreds, and, on the day
following, at a public training, where thousands of witnesses beheld
him, we supposed that the crime, being charged upon him, was such an
outrage upon common sense, that, when his persecutors became apprised
of these facts, they would cease to accuse him. But in this we were
disappointed, for when they found it impossible to sustain the charge
in this shape, they preferred it in another, in order to make it more
probable. They now accused my son of sending O. P. Rockwell into
Missouri, with orders to shoot the ex-governor; and, from this time,
they pursued both Joseph and Porter, with all diligence, till they
succeeded in getting the latter into jail in Missouri.

Joseph, not choosing to fall into their hands, fled from the city, and
secreted himself, sometimes in one place, sometimes in another. He
generally kept some friend with him, in whom he had confidence, who
came frequently to the city. Thus communication was kept up between
Joseph, his family, and the Church. At this time, Brother John Taylor
lay very sick of the fever, and was so reduced that he was not able to
stand upon his feet. Joseph visited him, and, after telling him that
he wished to start that night on a journey of fifty miles, requested
Brother Taylor to accompany him, saying, if he would do so, he would
be able to ride the whole way. Brother Taylor believing this, they set
out together, and performed the journey with ease. This time Joseph
remained away two weeks; then made his family and myself a short visit,
after which he again left us. In this way he lived, hiding first in one
place, and then in another, until the sitting of the Legislature, when,
by the advice of Governor Ford, he went to Springfield, and was tried
before Judge Pope for the crime alleged against him; namely, that of
being accessory to the attempted assassination of ex-Governor Boggs. He
was again discharged, and, when he returned home, there was a jubilee
held throughout the city. The remainder of the winter, and the next
spring, we spent in peace.

About the middle of June, 1843, Joseph went with his wife to visit Mrs.
Wasson, who was his wife's sister. Whilst there, an attempt was made
to kidnap him, and take him into Missouri, by J. H. Reynolds, from
that state, and Harmon Wilson, of Carthage Hancock county, Illinois,
who was a Missourian in principle. You have read Hyrum's testimony,
and can judge of the treatment which Joseph received at their hands.
Suffice to say, he was shamefully abused. Wilson had authority from the
governor of Illinois to take Joseph Smith, Junior, and deliver him into
the hands of the before named Reynolds; but as neither of them showed
any authority save a brace of pistols, Joseph took them for false
imprisonment. He then obtained a writ of habeas corpus of the master in
chancery of Lee county, returnable before the nearest court authorized
to determine upon such writs; and the Municipal Court of Nauvoo being
the nearest one invested with this power, an examination was had before
said court, when it was made to appear that the writ was defective and
void: furthermore, that he was innocent of the charges therein alleged
against him. It was in this case that Hyrum's testimony was given,
which is rehearsed in a preceding chapter.

Not long after this I broke up house-keeping, and at Joseph's request,
I took up my residence at his house. Soon after which I was taken very
sick, and was brought nigh unto death. For five nights Emma never left
me, but stood at my bed-side all the night long, at the end of which
time, she was overcome with fatigue, and taken sick herself. Joseph
then took her place, and watched with me the five succeeding nights,
as faithfully as Emma had done. About this time I began to recover,
and, in the course of a few weeks, I was able to walk about the house
a little, and sit up during the day. I have hardly been able to go on
foot further than across the street since.

On the third day of October, 1843, Sophronia, second daughter of Don
Carlos, died of the scarlet fever, leaving her widowed mother doubly
desolate.



CHAPTER LIV.

JOSEPH AND HYRUM ASSASSINATED.

About the time that John C. Bennett left Nauvoo, an election was held
for the office of mayor, and Joseph, being one of the candidates, was
elected to that office. I mention this fact, in order to explain a
circumstance that took place in the winter of 1843 and 1844, which was
as follows. Joseph, in organizing the city police, remarked, that,
"were it not for enemies within the city, there would be no danger from
foes without," adding, "If it were not for a Brutus, I might live as
long as Caesar would have lived."

Some one, who suspected that Joseph alluded to William Law, went to the
latter and informed him that Joseph regarded him as a Brutus; and, that
it was his own opinion, that he (Law) was in imminent danger. Law, on
hearing this tale, went immediately to Joseph, who straightway called a
council, and had all that knew anything concerning the matter brought
together, and thus succeeded in satisfying Law, that he intended no
evil in what he had said.

About this time, a man by the name of Joseph Jackson, who had been in
the city several months, being desirous to marry Lovina Smith, Hyrum's
oldest daughter, asked her father if he was willing to receive him as
a son-in-law. Being answered in the negative, he went and requested
Joseph to use his influence in his favor. As Joseph refused to do that,
he next applied to Law, who was our secret enemy, for assistance in
stealing Lovina from her father, and from this time forth, he continued
seeking out our enemies, till he succeeded in getting a number to join
him in a conspiracy to murder the whole Smith family. They commenced
holding secret meetings, one of which was attended by a man named
Eaton, who was our friend, and he exposed the plot.

This man declared that the Higbees, Laws and Fosters were all connected
with Jackson in his operations. There was also another individual,
named Augustine Spencer, a dissolute character, (although a member of
an excellent family,) who, I believe, was concerned in this conspiracy.
About the time of Eaton's disclosures, this man went to the house of
his brother Orson, and abused my sons and the Church at such a rate,
that Orson finally told him that he must either stop or leave the
house. Augustine refused, and they grappled. In the contest Orson was
considerably injured. He went immediately to Joseph, and, stating the
case, asked for a warrant. Joseph advised him to go to Dr. Foster,
who was a justice of the peace. Accordingly, he went and demanded a
warrant of Foster, but was refused. On account of this refusal, Foster
was brought before Esquire Wells, and tried for non-performance of
duty. At this trial Joseph met Charles Foster, the doctor's brother,
who attempted to shoot him, as soon as they met, but was hindered by
Joseph's catching his hands, and holding him by main force, in which
way Joseph was compelled to confine him above an hour, in order to
preserve his own life.

Jackson and the apostates continued to gather strength, till, finally,
they established a printing press in our midst. Through this organ
they belched forth the most intolerable, and the blackest lies that
were ever palmed upon a community. Being advised by men of influence
and standing, to have this scandalous press removed, the city council
took the matter into consideration, and finding that the law would
allow them to do so, they declared it a nuisance, and had it treated
accordingly.

At this the apostates left the city, in a great rage, swearing
vengeance against Joseph and the city council, and, in fact, the whole
city. They went forthwith to Carthage, and got out writs for Joseph
and all those who were in any wise concerned in the destruction of the
press. But, having no hope of justice in that place, the brethren took
out a writ of habeas corpus, and were tried before Esquire Wells, at
Nauvoo. With this the apostates were not satisfied. They then called
upon one Levi Williams, who was a bitter enemy to us, whenever he was
sufficiently sober to know his own sentiments, for he was a drunken,
ignorant, illiterate brute, that never had a particle of character
or influence until he began to call mob meetings, and placed himself
at the head of a rabble like unto himself, to drive the "Mormons,"
at which time he was joined by certain unmentionable ones in Warsaw
and Carthage; and for his zeal in promoting mobocracy, he became
the intimate acquaintance and confidential friend of some certain
preachers, lawyers, and representatives, and, finally, of Joseph
Jackson and the apostates. He, as Colonel Levi Williams, commands the
militia, (alias mob) of Hancock county. On this man, I say, they called
for assistance to drag Joseph and Hyrum, with the rest of the council,
to Carthage. Williams swore it should be done, and gathered his band
together. Joseph, not wishing to fall into the hands of wolves or
tigers, called upon the Legion to be in readiness to defend the city
and its chartered rights. Just at this crisis, Governor Ford arrived
in Quincy. The apostates then appealed from the mob to the Governor.
At this time he came into the midst of the mob, and asked them if
they would stand by him in executing and defending the law. They said
they would; and so he organized them into militia, and then demanded
the brethren for trial upon the warrant issued by Smith; (as he did
not choose to recognize the right of habeas corpus granted us in the
city charter). At the same time he pledged the faith of the state
that the brethren should be protected from mob violence. Those called
for in the warrant, made their appearance at Carthage, June 24, 1844.
On the morning of the twenty-fifth, Joseph and Hyrum were arrested
for treason, by a warrant founded upon the oaths of A. O. Norton and
Augustine Spencer.

I will not dwell upon the awful scene which succeeded. My heart is
thrilled with grief and indignation, and my blood curdles in my veins
whenever I speak of it.

My sons were thrown into jail, where they remained three days in
company with Brothers Richards, Taylor and Markham. At the end of this
time, the Governor disbanded most of the men, but left a guard of
eight of our bitterest enemies over the jail, and sixty more of the
same character about a hundred yards distant. He then came into Nauvoo
with a guard of fifty or sixty men, made a short speech, and returned
immediately. During his absence from Carthage, the guard rushed Brother
Markham out of the place at the point of the bayonet. Soon after this,
two hundred of those discharged in the morning rushed into Carthage,
armed, and painted black, red and yellow, and in ten minutes fled
again, leaving my sons murdered and mangled corpses!

In leaving the place, a few of them found Samuel coming into Carthage,
alone, on horseback, and, finding that he was one of our family, they
attempted to shoot him, but he escaped out of their hands, although
they pursued him at the top of their speed for more than two hours. He
succeeded the next day in getting to Nauvoo in season to go out and
meet the procession with the bodies of Hyrum and Joseph, as the mob had
the _kindness_ to allow us the privilege of bringing them home, and
burying them in Nauvoo, notwithstanding the immense reward which was
offered by the Missourians for Joseph's head.

Their bodies were attended home by only two persons, save those that
went from this place. These were Brother Willard Richards and a Mr.
Hamilton; Brother John Taylor having been shot in prison, and nearly
killed, he could not be moved until some time afterwards.

After the corpses were washed and dressed in their burial clothes, we
were allowed to see them. I had for a long time braced every nerve,
roused every energy of my soul, and called upon God to strengthen me;
but when I entered the room, and saw my murdered sons extended both at
once before my eyes, and heard the sobs and groans of my family, and
the cries of "Father! Husband! Brothers!" from the lips of their wives,
children, brothers and sisters, it was too much, I sank back, crying
to the Lord, in the agony of my soul, "My God, my God, why hast thou
forsaken this family!" A voice replied, "I have taken them to myself,
that they might have rest." Emma was carried back to her room almost
in a state of insensibility. Her oldest son approached the corpse, and
dropped upon his knees, and laying his cheek against his father's, and
kissing him, exclaimed, "Oh, my father! my father!" As for myself, I
was swallowed up in the depths of my afflictions; and though my soul
was filled with horror past imagination, yet I was dumb, until I arose
again to contemplate the spectacle before me, Oh! at that moment how
my mind flew through every scene of sorrow and distress which we had
passed, together, in which they had shown the innocence and sympathy
which filled their guileless hearts. As I looked upon their peaceful,
smiling countenances, I seemed almost to hear them say,--"Mother, weep
not for us, we have overcome the world by love; we carried to them
the gospel, that their souls might be saved; they slew us for our
testimony, and thus placed us beyond their power; their ascendency is
for a moment, ours is an eternal triumph."

I then thought upon the promise which I had received in Missouri, that
in five years Joseph should have power over all his enemies. The time
had elapsed and the promise was fulfilled.

I left the scene and returned to my room, to ponder upon the calamities
of my family. Soon after this, Samuel said, "Mother, I have had a
dreadful distress in my side ever since I was chased by the mob, and I
think I have received some injury which is going to make me sick." And
indeed he was then not able to sit up, as he had been broken of his
rest, besides being dreadfully fatigued in the chase, which, joined to
the shock occasioned by the death of his brothers, brought on a disease
that never was removed.

On the following day the funeral rites of the murdered ones were
attended to, in the midst of terror and alarm, for the mob had made
their arrangements to burn the city that night, but by the diligence of
the brethren, they were kept at bay until they became discouraged, and
returned to their homes.

In a short time Samuel, who continued unwell, was confined to his
bed, and lingering till the thirtieth of July, his spirit forsook its
earthly tabernacle, and went to join his brothers, and the ancient
martyrs, in the Paradise of God.

At this time, William was absent on a mission to the Eastern States.
And he had taken his family with him, in consequence of his wife
being afflicted with the dropsy, hoping that the journey might be a
benefit to her. Thus was I left desolate in my distress. I had reared
six sons to manhood, and of them all, one only remained, and he was
too far distant to speak one consoling word to me in this trying
hour. It would have been some satisfaction to me, if I had expected
his immediate return, but his wife was lying at the point of death,
which compelled him to remain where he was. His case was, if it were
possible, worse than mine, for he had to bear all his grief alone
in a land of strangers, confined to the side of his dying wife, and
absent from those who felt the deepest interest in his welfare; whilst
I was surrounded with friends, being in the midst of the Church; my
daughters, too, were with me, and from their society I derived great
comfort.

The Church at this time was in a state of gloomy suspense. Not knowing
who was to take the place of Joseph, the people were greatly wrought
upon with anxiety, lest an impostor should arise and deceive many.
Suddenly, Sidney Rigdon made his appearance from Pittsburgh, and
rather insinuated that the Church ought to make choice of him, not as
President, but as guardian; for "Joseph," said he, "is still President,
and the Church must be built up unto him." But before he could carry
his measures into effect, the Twelve, who had also been absent,
arrived, and assuming their proper places, all was set to rights.

William, however, did not return till the spring of 1845, when, with
great difficulty, he got his wife to Nauvoo. She survived but a short
time after her arrival, for in about two weeks, to complete the sum of
William's afflictions, he followed her to the grave. Her disease was
brought on by her exposures in Missouri, so that she was what might be
termed an indirect martyr to the cause of Christ, which makes the sum
of martyrs in our family no less than six in number.

Shortly after William's return from the east, he was ordained Patriarch
of the Church, in the place of Hyrum, who held the keys of that
Priesthood previous to his death.

Here ends the history of my life, as well as that of my family, as far
as I intend carrying it for the present. And I shall leave the world
to judge, as seemeth them good, concerning what I have written. But
this much I will say, that the testimony which I have given is true,
and will stand for ever; and the same will be my testimony in the
day of God Almighty, when I shall meet them, concerning whom I have
testified, before angels, and the spirits of the just made perfect,
before archangels and seraphims, cherubims and gods; where the brief
authority of the unjust man will shrink to nothingness before him who
is the Lord of lords, and God of gods; and where the righteousness of
the just shall exalt them in the scale, wherein God weigheth the hearts
of men. And now having, in common with the Saints, appealed in vain
for justice, to Lilburn W. Boggs, Thomas Carlin, Martin Van Buren, and
Thomas Ford, I bid them a last farewell, until I shall appear with
them before Him who is the judge of both the quick and dead; to whom I
solemnly appeal in the name of Jesus Christ. Amen.



APPENDIX.

* * * *

A JOURNAL KEPT BY DON C. SMITH, WHILE ON A MISSION WITH GEORGE A.
SMITH, HIS COUSIN.

At a meeting of the High Council held in Adam-ondi-Ahman, I was
appointed, in company with my cousin, George A. Smith, Lorenzo D.
Barnes and Harrison Sagers, to take a mission to the east and south,
for the purpose of raising means to buy out the mobbers in Daviess
county, Missouri; also to effect an exchange of farms between the
brethren in the east, and the mobbers in our immediate neighborhood.

On the twenty-sixth of September, 1838, we took leave of our friends,
and started on our mission, in company with Brother Earl, who proposed
taking us in his wagon as far as Richmond, a distance of seventy
miles. We stopped at Far West to see Brother Joseph. He sanctioned our
mission, and bid us God-speed. On our way to Richmond, we stayed over
night with Captain Alpheus Cutler, formerly of the United States army.
He and his family treated us with much kindness. We also called on John
Goodson, who a few days previous had shared freely in the hospitality
of my uncle's house, yet he had not the politeness to ask either cousin
George or myself to take breakfast with him.

When we got to the landing, we found the river very low, and but one
boat up, which was the _Kansas_. Whilst waiting for this boat, we had
an interview with David Whitmer. He had not confidence to look us in
the face, for he had become our enemy; yet, when we parted, he shook
hands with us quite cordially, and wished us success.

On the thirtieth of September, we went on board the _Kansas_; this was
a very slow conveyance, for one of the wheels was broken; besides,
the river being very low, and full of snags and sand bars, we got
along but slowly on our journey. Here we traveled in company with
General Wilson and Samuel Lucas, besides many others who had taken an
active part in the expulsion of the Saints from Jackson County, in
1833. General Atchison was also on board. On arriving at De Witt, we
found about seventy of the brethren with their families, surrounded
by a mob of about two hundred men. When the boat landed, the women
and children were much frightened, supposing that we also were mob.
We would have stopped and assisted them what we could, but we were
unarmed, and, upon consulting together, it was thought advisable for
us to fulfil our mission, so we returned to the boat, and proceeded on
our journey. From this onward, the "Mormons" were the only subject of
conversation, and nothing was heard but the most bitter imprecations
against them. General Wilson related many of his deeds of noble daring
in the Jackson mob, one of which was the following: "I went in company
with forty others to the house of one Hiram Page, who was a 'Mormon,'
in Jackson county. We got logs and broke in every door and window at
the same instant; and pointing our rifles at the family, we told them,
we would be God d--d if we didn't shoot every one of them if Page did
not come out. At that, a tall woman made her appearance with a child
in her arms. I told the boys, she was too d--d tall. In a moment the
boys stripped her, and found it was Page. I told them to give him a
d--d good one. We gave him sixty or seventy lashes with hickory withes
which we had prepared. Then, after pulling the roof off this house, we
went to the next d--d 'Mormon's' house, and whipped him in like manner.
We continued until we whipped ten or fifteen of the God d--d 'Mormons'
and demolished their houses that night. If the Carroll boys would do
that way, they might conquer; but it is no use to think of driving them
without about four to one. I wish I could stay, I would help drive the
d--d 'Mormons' to hell, old Joe, and all the rest."

At this, I looked the General sternly in the face, and told him that
he was neither a republican nor a gentleman, but a savage, without a
single principle of honor. "If," said I, "the 'Mormons' have broken the
law, let it be strictly executed against them; but such anti-republican
and unconstitutional acts as these related by you, are below the
brutes." We were upon the hurricane deck, and a large company present
were listening to the conversation. When I ceased speaking, the General
placed his hand upon his pistol, but I felt safe, for Cousin George
stood by his side, watching every move the General made, and would have
knocked him into the river instantly, had he attempted to draw a deadly
weapon. But General Atchinson saved him the trouble by saying, "I'll
be God d--d, if Smith ain't right." At this, Wilson left the company
rather crest-fallen. In the course of the conversation, Wilson said
that the best plan was, to rush into the "Mormon" settlement, murder
the men, make slaves of the children, take possession of the property,
and use the women as they pleased.

There was a gentleman present from Baltimore, Maryland; he said he
never was among such a pack of d--d savages before; that he had passed
through Far West, and saw nothing among the "Mormons" but good order.
Then, drawing his pistols, he discharged them; and re-loading, he said,
"If God spares my life till I get out of Upper Missouri, I will never
be found associating with such devils again."

Shortly after this, we were invited to preach on board. Elder Barnes
gave them a good lecture, and I bore testimony. The rest of the way we
were treated more civilly, but, being deck passengers, and having very
little money, we suffered much for food. On one occasion we paid twelve
and a half cents for one dozen ears of [Indian] corn; and after grating
it, we paid a woman twelve and a half cents more for baking it into
bread, although it was badly done, being neither sifted, nor the whole
kernels taken out; but we were so hungry that we were glad to get it.

We continued our journey together through every species of hardship and
fatigue, until the eleventh of October, when Elder Barnes and H. Sagers
left us, after our giving them all the money we had; they started for
Cincinnati, and we to visit the churches in West Tennessee, Soon after
this, Julian Moses, who had fallen in company with us on the way, gave
us a five franc piece, and bade us farewell. This left cousin George
and myself alone and in a strange land; and we soon found that the mob
spirit was here as well as in Missouri, for it was not long before we
were mobbed by near twenty men, who surrounded the house in the night,
and terrified the family very much; however, we succeeded in driving
them away. After which we continued our journey until we arrived at
Brother Utley's, in Benton county, a neighborhood where Brothers Patten
and Woodruff were mobbed some years ago. We soon made our business
known to all the Saints, who said they would use every effort to be
on hand with their money and means--some in the fall, others in the
spring. We received from Brother West twenty-eight dollars to bear our
expenses; and also from others, acts of kindness which will never be
forgotten.

About this time our minds were seized with an awful foreboding--horror
seemed to have laid his grasp upon us--we lay awake night after night,
for we could not sleep. Our forebodings increased, and we felt sure
that all was not right; yet we continued preaching until the Lord
showed us that the Saints would be driven from Missouri. We then
started home, and, on arriving at Wyatt's Mills, which was on our
return, we were told that, if we preached there, it should cost us
our lives. We gave out an appointment at the house of sister Foster,
a wealthy widow. She advised us to give it up; but, as she had no
fears for herself, her property or family, we concluded to fulfil
our appointment. The hour of meeting came, and many attended. Cousin
George preached about an hour, during which time a man named Fitch,
came in at the head of twelve other mobbers, who had large, hickory
clubs, and they sat down with their hats on. When Cousin George took
his seat, I arose and addressed them for an hour and a half, during
which time, I told them that I was a patriot--that I was free--that
I loved my country--that I loved liberty--that I despised both mobs
and mobbers--that no gentleman or Christian at heart, would ever be
guilty of such things or countenance them. At this the mob pulled off
their hats, laid down their clubs, and listened with almost breathless
attention.

After meeting, Mr. Fitch came to us and said that he was ashamed of
his conduct, and would never do the like again, that he had been
misinformed about us by some religious bigots.

We continued our journey until we reached the town of Columbus, Hickman
county, Kentucky. Here we put up with Captain Robinson, formerly an
officer in the army, who treated us very kindly, assuring us that we
were welcome to stay at his house until a boat should come, if it were
three months. While here a company of thirteen hundred Cherokee Indians
encamped on the bank of the river, to wait for ferry privileges. They
felt deeply wounded at leaving their native country for the west. They
said they were leaving a fine country, rich in mineral, but the whites
knew very little of its value. They excited our sympathies very much;
little did I think that my own wife and helpless babes were objects of
greater sympathy than these.

At length a boat came along, and we went on board. We had to pay all
our money (five dollars) for fare, and eat and lie among negroes, as we
took a deck passage. About ninety miles from St. Louis, our boat got
aground, where it lay for three days. During this time we had nothing
to eat but a little parched corn. They finally gave up the boat and
left her. We went to the clerk and got two dollars of our money back,
after which we went on board of a little boat that landed us in St.
Louis the next morning. Here we found Elder Orson Pratt; he told us
that Joseph was a prisoner with many others, and that David Patten was
killed, giving us a long and sorrowful account of the sufferings of the
Saints, which filled our hearts with sorrow.

The next morning we started again on our journey. When we arrived
at Huntsville, we stopped at the house of George Lyman, to rest, he
being uncle to Cousin George, whose feet had now become very sore
with traveling. Here we heard dreadful tales concerning our friends
in Daviess county, that they were all murdered, and that my brothers,
Joseph and Hyrum, were shot with a hundred balls.

We had not been long in Huntsville till the mob made a rally to use
us up with the rest of the Smiths, and, at the earnest request of
our friends, we thought best to push on. The wind was in our faces,
the ground was slippery, it was night, and very dark, nevertheless
we proceeded on our journey. Traveling twenty-two miles, we came to
the Chariton river, which we found frozen over, but the ice too weak
to bear us, and the boat on the west side of the river. We went to
the next ferry. Finding that there was no boat here, and that in the
next neighborhood a man's brains were beat out for being a "Mormon,"
we returned to the first ferry, and tried by hallooing to raise the
ferryman on the opposite side of the river, but were not able to
awaken him. We were almost benumbed with cold, and to warm ourselves
we commenced scuffling and jumping, we then beat our feet upon the
logs and stumps, in order to start a circulation of blood; but at
last Cousin George became so cold and sleepy that he said he could
not stand it any longer, and lay down. I told him he was freezing to
death; I then cut a stick and said I would thrash him. At this he got
up and undertook to thrash me, this stirred his blood a little, but he
soon lay down again; however, the ferryman in a short time came over,
and set us on our own side of the river. We then traveled on until
about breakfast time, when we stopped at the house of a man, who, we
afterwards learned, was Senator Ashby, that commanded the mob at Haun's
Mill. That night we stayed at one of the bitterest of mobocrats, by the
name of Fox, and started the next morning without breakfast. Our route
lay through a wild prairie, where there was but very little track,
and only one house in forty miles. The northwest wind blew fiercely
in our faces, and the ground was so slippery that we could scarcely
keep our feet, and when the night came on, to add to our perplexity,
we lost our way. Soon after which, I became so cold that it was with
great difficulty I could keep from freezing. We also became extremely
thirsty; however, we found a remedy for this, by cutting through ice
three inches thick. While we were drinking we heard a cow bell, this
caused our hearts to leap for joy, and we arose and steered our course
towards the sound. We soon entered a grove, which sheltered us from the
wind, and we felt more comfortable. In a short time we came to a house,
where George was well acquainted; here we were made welcome and kindly
entertained. We laid down to rest about 2 o'clock in the morning, after
having traveled one hundred and ten miles in two days and two nights.
After breakfast, I set out for Far West, leaving George sick with our
hospitable friend. When I arrived, I was fortunate enough to find my
family alive and in tolerable health, which was more than I could have
expected, considering the scenes of persecution through which they had
passed.

* * * *

LETTERS OF DON C. SMITH TO HIS WIFE, AGNES.

    Cohocton, Steuben Co., June 25, 1836.

    Dear Companion,

    I received your letter bearing the date June 15, which I perused
    with eagerness, being the first I had received from you during
    my absence. I was rejoiced to hear that you were as well as you
    expressed, but grieved that your rest should be disturbed by
    the nervous affection of which you speak. You say that you are
    willing to submit to the will of the Lord in all things, this
    also is a source of great consolation to me; for if these be your
    feelings, even when deprived of my society, in order to advance
    the prosperity of the kingdom of God (as nothing else would tear
    me from you), I feel that the Lord will bless, keep, preserve and
    uphold you, so let your faith fail not, and your prayers cease not,
    and you shall be healed of your nervous complaint, and all other
    afflictions. For God is willing, and abundantly able, to raise you
    up and give you all the righteous desires of your heart, for he has
    said, "Ask and ye shall receive," and he has never lied; and I can
    truly say that he has been my help in every time of need.

    When I left home, I set my face, like a flint, towards Boston,
    until I found that it was my duty to return home. On arriving at
    Seneca Falls, I laid the matter before Samuel and Wilber, and we
    united our hearts in prayer before the Lord, who signified, by
    the voice of his Spirit, to Samuel, that he should continue his
    journey, but that we should return, after a short time, to our
    families; so tell Mary that we have not forsaken him; no, nor ever
    will, for he is as faithful as the sun--the Lord will not forsake
    him, and angels will bear him up, and bring him off triumphant and
    victorious. I heard of the death of grandmother, while at Aven, I
    could not help weeping for her, although she has gone to rest. I
    called at Uncle John's--grandmother was asleep--I laid my hand on
    her head, and asked the Lord to spare her, that I might see her
    again in the flesh. But when I left, I felt as though she would be
    taken before I returned, which caused me to feel sorrowful; but I
    do not desire to call her back to this world of trouble. I must
    close by saying, that I expect to labor in the vineyard, until I
    start for home. And, if the Lord will, I shall see you as soon as
    the last of July, then I shall finish this letter.

    Yours till death,

    Don C. Smith.

Agnes M. Smith.

In the month of June, 1839, Don Carlos came from McDonough county
to Commerce, for the purpose of making preparations to establish a
printing press. As the press and type had been buried during the
Missouri troubles, and were considerably injured by the dampness which
they had gathered, it was necessary to get them into use as soon as
possible; and in order to do this, Carlos was under the necessity of
cleaning out a cellar, through which a spring was constantly flowing,
for there was no other place at liberty where he could put up the
press. The dampness of the place, together with his labor, caused him
to take a severe cold, with which he was sick some time; nevertheless,
he continued his labor, until he got the press into operation, and
issued one number of the paper. He then went to McDonough, and visited
his family; after which, he returned to Commerce, but found the
distress so great that no business could be done. Upon his arrival
in Commerce, he wrote to his wife the following letter, which shows
the situation of the Church at that time, as well as his affectionate
disposition, which was breathed in every word he spoke to his family,
and stamped upon every line he wrote to them when absent.

    Commerce, July 25, 1839.

    Beloved,

    I am in tolerable health, and have just risen from imploring the
    Throne of Grace, in behalf of you and our children, that God would
    preserve you all in health, and give you every needed blessing,
    and protect you by day and by night. When I arrived here, nothing
    had been done in the office, as Brother Robinson had been sick
    every day since I left. And I have done but little labor since I
    returned, except struggling against the destroyer, and attending
    upon the sick--there are not well ones enough to take care of the
    sick--there has been but one death, however, since my return.
    McLerry, Sophronia and Clarinda, are very sick. Sister E. Robinson
    has been nigh unto death. Last Tuesday, I in company with George A.
    Smith, administered to sixteen souls; some notable miracles were
    wrought under our hands. I never had so great power over disease,
    as I had this week; for this let God be glorified. There is now
    between fifty and one hundred sick, but they are generally on the
    gain; I do not know of more than two or three who are considered
    dangerous. I send you some money that you may not be destitute, in
    case you should be sick, and need anything which you have not in
    the house. Agnes, the Lord being my helper, you shall not want,
    Elijah's God will bless you, and I will bless you, for you are
    entwined around my heart with ties that are stronger than death,
    and time cannot sever them. Deprived of your society, and that of
    my prattling babes, life would be irksome. Oh! that we may all
    live, and enjoy health and prosperity, until the coming of the Son
    of Man, that we may be a comfort to each other, and instil into
    the tender and noble minds of our children, principles of truth
    and virtue, which shall abide with them for ever, is my constant
    prayer. From your husband, who will ever remain, devoted and
    affectionate, both in time and eternity,

    Don C. Smith.

While Don Carlos was at work in the before mentioned cellar, he took a
severe pain in his side, which was never altogether removed. About a
fortnight prior to his death, his family were very sick; and in taking
care of them, he caught a violent cold--a fever set in, and the pain
in his side increased, and with all our exertions, we were unable to
arrest the disease, which I have no doubt was consumption, brought on
by his working in a damp room, in which he printed his paper.

* * * *

ELEGY

ON THE DEATH OF THE DEARLY BELOVED AND MUCH LAMENTED FATHER IN ISRAEL,
JOSEPH SMITH, SENIOR, A PATRIARCH IN THE CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF
LATTER-DAY SAINTS, WHO DIED AT NAUVOO, SEPTEMBER 14 1840.

_By Miss E. R. Snow_.

  Zion's noblest sons are weeping;
    See her daughters bathed in tears,
  Where the Patriarch is sleeping
    Nature's sleep--the sleep of years.
  Hushed is every note of gladness--
    Every minstrel bows full low--
  Every heart is tuned to sadness--
    Every bosom feels the blow.

  Zion's children loved him dearly;
    Zion was his daily care:
  That his loss is felt sincerely,
    Thousand weeping Saints declare;
  Thousands, who have shared his blessing,
    Thousands whom his service blessed,
  By his faith and prayers suppressing
    Evils which their lives opprest.

  Faith and works, most sweetly blended,
    Proved his steadfast heart sincere;
  And the power of God attended
    His official labors here;
  Long he stemmed the powers of darkness,
    Like an anchor in the flood:
  Like an oak amid the tempest,
    Bold and fearlessly he stood.

  Years have witnessed his devotions,
    By the love of God inspired,
  When his spirit's pure emotions,
    Were with holy ardor fired.
  Oft he wept for suffering Zion--
    All her sorrows were his own:
  When she passed through grievous trials,
    Her oppressions weighed him down.

  Now he's gone, we'd not recall him
    From a paradise of bliss,
  Where no evil can befall him,
    To a changing world like this.
  His loved name will never perish,
    Nor his mem'ry crown the dust;
  For the Saints of God will cherish
    The remembrance of the JUST.

  Faith's sweet voice of consolation,
    Soothes our grief: his spirit's flown,
  Upward to a holier station,
    Nearer the celestial throne;
  There to plead the cause of Zion,
    In the council of the JUST--
  In the court the Saints rely on,
    Pending causes to ADJUST.

  Though his earthly part is sleeping,
    Lowly 'neath the prairie sod;
  Soon the grave will yield its keeping--
    Yield to life the man of God.
  When the heavens and earth are shaken,
    When all things shall be restored--
  When the trump of God shall waken
    Those that sleep in Christ the Lord.

* * * *

LINES WRITTEN ON THE DEATH OF GEN. DON CARLOS SMITH

_By Miss E. R. Snow_.

"Thy shaft flew thrice, and thrice my peace was slain."

  The insatiate archer, Death, once more
  Has bathed his shaft in human gore;
  The pale-faced monarch's crimsoned bow.
  Once more has laid a good man low.

  If tears of love could ever save
  A noble victim from the grave;
  If strong affection e'er had power
  To rescue in the dying hour;
  If kindred sympathy could hold
  A jewel in its sacred fold;
  If friendship could produce a charm.
  The heartless tyrant to disarm;
  If wide-acknowledged worth could be
  A screen from mortal destiny;
  If pure integrity of heart
  Could baffle death's malignant dart;
  If usefulness and noble zeal,
  Devotedness to Zion's weal,
  A conduct graced with purposed aim,
  A reputation free from blame,
  Could save a mortal from the tomb,
  And stamp with an eternal bloom;
  He never could have bowed to death,
  Or yielded up his mortal breath.

  Ours is the sorrow, ours the loss,
  For, through the triumphs of the Cross,
  His noble part, by death set free,
  On wings of immortality,
  Tracing the steps the Savior trod,
  Has reached the Paradise of God.
  There he rejoins the ransomed choir,
  There, there he hails his noble sire,
  A patriarch of these latter-days,
  Whose goodness memory loves to trace
  With reverence, gratitude, and love;
  He left us for the courts above.
  There with the spirits of the just,
  Where Zion's welfare is discussed,
  Once more their efforts to combine
  In Zion's cause.--And shall we mourn
  For those who have been upwards borne!
  And shall the Legion's sorrow flow,
  As if a Chieftain were laid low,
  Who threw his frail escutcheon by,
  To join the Legion formed on high?
  Yes, mourn.--The loss is great to earth,
  A loss of high exalted worth.

* * * *

THE ASSASSINATION OF JOSEPH AND HYRUM SMITH, FIRST PRESIDENTS OF THE
CHURCH OF JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS, WHO WERE MASSACRED BY A
MOB IN CARTHAGE, HANCOCK COUNTY, ILL., ON JUNE 27, 1844.

By Miss E. R. Snow.

  Ye heavens attend! Let all the earth give ear!
  Let Gods and Seraphs, men and angels hear--
  The worlds on high--the universe shall know
  What awful scenes are acted here below!
  Had Nature's self a heart, her heart would bleed,
  For never, since the Son of God was slain,
  Has blood so noble flowed from human vein,
  As that which now, on God, for vengeance calls
  From "Freedom's ground"--from Carthage prison walls!

  Oh! Illinois! thy soil has drunk the blood
  Of Prophets, martyred for the truth of God.
  Once loved America! What can atone
  For the pure blood of innocence thou'st sown?
  Were all thy streams in teary torrents shed
  To mourn the fate of those illustrious dead,
  How vain the tribute, for the noblest worth
  That graced thy surface, degraded earth!

  Oh! wretched murd'rers! fierce for human blood!
  You've slain the Prophets of the living God,
  Who've borne oppression from their early youth,
  To plant on earth the principles of truth.

  Shades of our patriotic fathers! Can it be?
  Beneath your blood-stained flag of liberty!
  The firm supporters of our country's cause
  Are butchered, while submissive to her laws!
  Yes, blameless men, defamed by hellish lies,
  Have thus been offer'd as a sacrifice
  T' appease the ragings of a brutish clan,
  That has defied the laws of God and man!
  'Twas not for crime or guilt of theirs they fell;
  Against the laws they never did rebel.
  True to their country, yet her plighted fate
  Has proved an instrument of cruel death!
  Where are thy far-famed laws, Columbia, where
  Thy boasted freedom--thy protecting care?
  Is this a land of rights? Stern FACTS shall say,
  If legal justice here maintains its sway,
  The official powers of state are sheer pretense,
  When they're exerted in the Saints' defense.

  Great men have fallen, and mighty men have died;
  Nations have mourned their fav'rites and their pride;
  But two, so wise, so virtuous, great, and good,
  Before on earth, at once, have never stood
  Since the creation. Men whom God ordained
  To publish truth where error long had reigned,
  Of whom the world itself unworthy proved.
  It knew them not, but men with hatred moved,
  And with infernal spirits have combined
  Against the best, the noblest, of mankind.

  Oh! persecution! shall thy purple hand
  Spread utter destruction through the land?
  Shall freedom's banner be no more unfurled?
  Has peace, indeed, been taken from the world?

  Thou God of Jacob, in this trying hour,
  Help us to trust in thy Almighty power;
  Support thy Saints beneath this awful stroke,
  Make bare thine arm to break oppression's yoke.
  We mourn thy Prophet, from whose lips have flowed
  The words of life thy Spirit has bestowed;
  A depth of thought no human art could reach,
  From time to time rolled in sublimest speech,
  From the celestial fountain, through his mind,
  To purify and elevate mankind.
  The rich intelligence by him brought forth,
  Is like the sunbeam spreading o'er the earth.

  Now Zion mourns, she mourns an earthly head;
  The Prophet and the Patriarch are dead!
  The blackest deed that men or devils know, Since
  Calvary's scene, has laid the brothers low.
  One in their life, and one in death--they proved
  How strong their friendship--how they truly loved.
  True to their mission, until death they stood,
  Then sealed their testimony with their blood.
  All hearts with sorrow bleed, and every eye
  Is bathed in tears--each bosom heaves a sigh--
  Heart-broken widows' agonizing groans
  Are mingled with the helpless orphans' moans!

  Ye Saints! be still, and know that God is just,
  With steadfast purpose in his promise trust.
  Girded with sackcloth, own his mighty hand,
  And wait his judgments on this guilty land!
  The noble martyrs' now have gone to move
  The cause of Zion in the courts above.

The End.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of History of the Prophet Joseph by His
Mother, by Lucy Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK HISTORY PROPHET JOSEPH BY MOTHER ***

***** This file should be named 45619.txt or 45619.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/5/6/1/45619/

Produced by the Mormon Texts Project. See
http://mormontextsproject.org/ for a complete list of
Mormon texts available on Project Gutenberg, to help
proofread similar books, or to report typos. Special thanks
to Trevor Nysetvold for proofreading.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
