The Project Gutenberg EBook of Gospel Doctrine, by Joseph F. Smith

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and most
other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms of
the Project Gutenberg License included with this eBook or online at
www.gutenberg.org.  If you are not located in the United States, you'll have
to check the laws of the country where you are located before using this ebook.

Title: Gospel Doctrine
       Selections from the Sermons and Writings of Joseph F. Smith

Author: Joseph F. Smith

Editor: John Andreas Widtsoe

Release Date: October 14, 2014 [EBook #47109]

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOSPEL DOCTRINE ***




Produced by Noah Read and the Mormon Texts Project
(MormonTextsProject.org)








GOSPEL DOCTRINE

* * * *

SELECTIONS FROM

THE SERMONS AND WRITINGS

OF

JOSEPH F. SMITH

Sixth President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints

* * * *

THE DESERET NEWS

SALT LAKE CITY, UTAH

1919



PREFACE

President Joseph F. Smith was so long in the public service of the
Church that his published sermons and writings would fill many
volumes. The difficult problem of the compilers of this volume has
been to make a collection of extracts that would do full justice to
the man and that, at the same time, could be contained in a volume of
moderate size. Every reader who knows Church literature will note the
shortcomings of the work; and none more than the compilers. However,
incomplete as it may be, this collection is well worth while, for it
contains a wealth of gospel wisdom, to instruct, comfort, and inspire
the Saints.

The literature of the Church has been carefully and systematically
searched to discover all of President Smith's public writings and
sermons. Those of a historical nature have not been used in this
collection, as they may well be made into another volume.

The compilers give their thanks to the many who, with hearts full of
love for President Smith, have helped in the work.

The work has reaffirmed to us that prophets, speaking for God, are with
us.

The Compilers.



INTRODUCTION

President Joseph F. Smith incidentally stated on one occasion that when
he should pass away, unlike many of his brethren, he would leave no
written work, by which he might be remembered. It was his modest way
of viewing his own ministry and literary labors, for President Smith
would live in the hearts of the people even if he had said nothing for
the printed page; but on the contrary, it was discovered that there are
volumes in print, though at that time it had not been gathered and was
therefore not so well known.

One of the compilers of this volume, Dr. John A. Widtsoe, listening to
his remark, thought to himself, "certainly it cannot be true that he
has left no written work." He then decided to look into his published
writings and sermons, conceived the idea of making extracts from them
and arranging these extracts by subjects and in chapters, in the form
of a book. The result is this splendid volume now presented to the
public under the title GOSPEL DOCTRINE.

Doctor John A. Widtsoe interested his brother, Prof. Osborne J. P.
Widtsoe, also Albert E. Bowen, Doctor F. S. Harris, and Joseph Quinney,
in the work of compiling and classifying from the voluminous writings
and sermons of President Smith, such extracts as would bear upon the
subjects chosen for consideration--subjects covering a wide range in
gospel doctrine and philosophy, as taught by the Latter-day Saints.
Lorenzo N. Stohl generously paid the expenses of the work.

Without price, and as a matter of love for the work in hand, these
brethren proceeded with the compilation, had four typewritten copies
prepared, nicely bound and titled, and were privileged, sometime before
the death of the President, to offer him the first typewritten copy of
the work, with their love and gratitude for his life, his example, and
his inspired teachings, as well as for his gentle kindness and constant
helpfulness to each of them.

Needless to say, the presentation and the work were gladly accepted and
gave President Smith great delight.

The Committee on Study for the Priesthood Quorums, being apprised by
the compilers of the work, conceived the idea, under the initiative of
Elder David O. McKay, of the Council of the Twelve, of making it a text
book for the Priesthood. The volume is now presented to the Melchizedek
Priesthood Quorums of the Church for their study and consideration. To
accompany it is "A Guide" for the direction of teachers and students,
and adopted for convenience in reference and study.

The sermons and writings of President Joseph F. Smith teach, in wisdom
and moderation, practically every essential doctrine of the Latter-day
Saints concerning the present life and the life hereafter. Not only
that, but they abound in helpful counsel and advice on everyday
practices in right living, stated in simple and persuasive language.
President Smith's sermons and writings breathe the true spirit of the
Gospel, are sound as gold in tenet and precept, and express the will of
the Master in every word. Gathered, classified, arranged, and printed
as in this volume, they constitute a compendium of the doctrine and
teachings of the Church that we believe will stand as a safe guide for
its members for generations to come.

In presenting this compilation to the public, we are confident that
every reader will be fully repaid in its perusal, containing, as it
does, rich and vital selections from the sayings, teachings and sermons
of one of the foremost prophets of the Lord in the Dispensation of the
Fulness of Times.

COMMITTEE ON COURSES OF STUDY FOR THE PRIESTHOOD.

SALT LAKE CITY, MAY, 1919.



CONTENTS

CHAPTER I

Truth, the Foundation

Our Hope Founded on Truth--The Gospel Founded in Truth--Truth,
the Foundation--Man Saved by Truth--Gospel Truth Cannot be
Superseded--Man's Greatest Achievement--Truth and Righteousness Will
Prevail--Reality of the Faith of the Saints--Meaning of Science--All
Truth From God--The Saints May Know the Truth--How Truth May be
Known--How Man Lays an Imperishable Foundation of Truth--Reward
of All Honest People--The Gospel is Simple--Our Knowledge is
Limited--Blessings for the Love of Truth

CHAPTER II

The Eternal Nature of the Church, the Priesthood, and Man

Eternal Nature of Plan of Salvation--Gospel Principles are
Eternal--Pre-existing States--Spirit Memories--The Immortality
of Man--Man Eternally Responsible--Our Indestructible, Immortal
Identity--No New Principles in the Gospel--Fountain of Truth--Eternity
of the Spirit of man--Purposes of Almighty Unchangeable

CHAPTER III

Revelation

Value of the Spirit of Revelation--The Spirit of Inspiration--The
Spirit of Revelation Enjoyed by All--New Revelation--When to Expect
New Revelation--How the Lord Reveals His Purposes Concerning
the Church--Modern Revelation is Necessary--Theory and Divine
Revelation--Revelation and Legal Evidence--Proper Channels
for Revelation--The Doctrine and Covenants--How to Read the
Bible--Persecution Follows Revelation

CHAPTER IV

Free Agency

The Latter-day Saints a Free People--The Use of Freedom and Human
Judgment--Latter-day Saints Should Exercise Free Agency--How to Obtain
Blessings of God

CHAPTER V

God and Man

God has Directed His Latter-day Work--A Personal Knowledge of God--God
Speaks to the Honest in Heart--God Constantly Mindful of us--God's Will
to Exalt Man--God's Right to Rule in the World--The Lesson in Natural
Calamities--Extent of God's Power--Beware of Limiting God--Misfortune
and Evil Not Attributable to the Will of God--God's Warfare--We are in
God's Image--God's Rest--Importance of Being Under the Influence of
the Holy Spirit--Holy Ghost, Holy Spirit, Comforter--God Inspires Man
to Know and to Do--Trust in God--I Know that My Redeemer Lives--Our
Personal Responsibility--The Church a Democratic Institution--How
to Secure God's blessings--Jesus is the Son--Jehovah, the
First-born--Nothing Temporal with God--The Important Consideration

CHAPTER VI

The Purpose and the Mission of the Church

The Kingdom of God Defined--"Mormonism" Defined--The Mission of the
Church--The Plan of Life Restored--Our Mission is to Save--The Gospel
Message--We are as Leaven--Man Insignificant Compared to Cause--Where
the Gospel Spirit Leads--The Fruits of True Religion--Latter-day Saints
Possess the Spirit of Salvation--May Israel Flourish--The Work of
the Lord Will Grow--The Kingdom of God to Continue--Zion Established
to Remain--The Progress of God's Work Cannot be Stopped--Divinity of
the Gospel--The Gospel All Comprehensive--Let Your Light Shine--No
Cause for Worry--The Gospel a Shield from Terror--The Gospel
Trumpet--What Church Leaders Advocate--Our Message one of Love--Whence?
Whither?--Latter-day Saints are Law-Abiding

CHAPTER VII

The First Principles of the Gospel

How the Sinner May be Cleansed--Fallacy of Death-Bed Repentance--The
Change that Comes with Repentance and Baptism--The Necessity of
Baptism--When to Baptize Children--Through Atonement Sins are Washed
away--Conditions for Baptism--The First Principles of the Gospel

CHAPTER VIII

The Church and the Man

The Church in Advance of Its Members--The Gospel the Most Important
Thing--Personal Advancement is Help to the Church--Covenants of the
Latter-day Saints--A Privilege to be Associated with the Church--Worth
of a Standing in the Church--Importance of Having Names on Church
Records--Secret Organizations--Secret Societies--Gossip--We Want to be
Known as We are--Treatment of Those Who Will Not Obey the Law of the
Church--Latter-day Saints Must be Thinkers and Workers--The Identity
of the Church Unchanged--No Classes or Nationalities in the Church--No
Neutrals in the Church--Don't Have Religious Hobbies--Wealth Does
Not Bring Church Favors--The Gospel Causes Disturbance--"Having Done
All, Stand"--Not Naturally Religious--Strive to be as Broad as the
Gospel--Search and Ye shall Find--The Spirit of Religion--The Meaning
of Success--What is to Become of Such as Me?--Rest for the Peaceable
Followers of Christ--Harmony--Character, Mettle, and Mission of the
Latter-day Saints

CHAPTER IX

Priesthood

God is at the Helm--Distinction Between Keys of the Priesthood
and Priesthood--Conferring the Priesthood--An Authoritative
Declaration--The Church Not Man-made--What is the Priesthood?--The
Priesthood--Definition, Purpose and Power--Mission of the
Priesthood--What are the Keys of the Priesthood?--Sanctity of the
Ordinances of the Priesthood--On Church Government--A Blessing and
an Explanation of the Priesthood--The Privilege of the Priesthood
to Bless--The Priesthood Greater than Any of its Offices--Necessity
of Organization--Acceptance of the Priesthood a Serious matter--How
Authority Should be Administered--Authority Gives Enduring
Power--Ministry Should Know its Duties and the Use of Authority--How
Officers in the Church are Chosen--A Word to Bishops--Jurisdiction
of Quorums of Priesthood--Jurisdiction in Stakes and Wards--Duties
of Those Engaged in the Ministry--The Purpose and the Duty of the
Church: Qualities of Leaders--Leaders Must be Courageous--Duties
of Officers of the Church--Truth Will Unite Us--Words to Church
Officers--Officers to Set the Example--Duty of the Holy Priesthood--How
to Vote on Church Propositions--Order of Voting for Officers of
the Church--Officers Dependent on Voice of People--Nearly All
Male Members Hold the Priesthood; Responsibility--Many hold the
Melchizedek Priesthood--Priesthood Quorums' Responsibilities--What is
Priesthood?--Where and How Counsel Should be Sought--Parents Should
be Consulted--Proper use of Titles of the Priesthood--All Officers of
the Priesthood Necessary and Should be Respected--Checks Upon Church
Members--The Priesthood Should Know Section 107 of the Doctrine and
Covenants--Who is Fit to Preside?--Obligations of the Priesthood--How
Honor for Those Who Bear the Priesthood is Begotten--Priesthood
Membership Rolls--All Should Exercise Their Authority--The Leaders
in Israel--A Testimony of Joseph Smith and His Successors--Goodness
of the Leaders of the Church--Divine Missions of Presidents of the
Church--The Presidents of the Church Have Been Inspired--When to
Organize the First Presidency--First Presidency Not Necessarily
Apostles--The Priesthood and Its Offices--Authority of the President
of the Church--Relation of Members of First Presidency--Duties of
Apostles--Testimony of the Apostles--The Presiding Bishopric--When
to Submit Questions to the General Authorities--No Need to Point Out
Defects of Church Leaders--Help the General Authorities--Temporal
Support of General Authorities--A Blessing Upon Stake Presidencies and
Other Officers--Counsel to Stake Presidents and Bishops--Duties of
Stake Presidents--Duty of High Councils--Duties of Patriarchs--Duties
of High Priests--Duties of High Priests' Quorums--Duty of High
Priests--Purpose and Duties of Seventies--Duty of Seventies--Duties
of Seventies--Seventies' Quorums to be Replenished from Elders'
Quorums--Elders to Proclaim Gospel--Duties of Elders--Authority of
the Bishops and Other Presiding Officers--Duties of Bishops--Bishops
and Lesser Priesthood Should be Active--Duties of the Lesser
Priesthood--Lesser Priesthood--The Work of the Bishopric--Dignity of
Teachers' Calling--Value of Teachers' Work--The Restoration of the
Melchizedek Priesthood--Tribute to Heber C. Kimball--Tribute to Erastus
Snow--Purpose of Visits of Church Leaders

CHAPTER X

Spiritual Gifts

The Gift of Tongues--The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper--Order of
Administering to the Sick--The Use of a Testimony--Purpose and
Practice of Testimony Bearing--The Temporal and the Spiritual Not
Separate--Spiritual and Temporal Salvation--The Gospel Designed for
Temporal Benefits, Also--The Spirit Needs Food

CHAPTER XI

Obedience

Obedience an Eternal Principle--How to Rise Above the Weakness of
Mortality--Obedience to Church Ordinances Indispensable--Obedience
Brings Light and Freedom--Blessings from Obedience

CHAPTER XII

Prayer

Pray Every Day--Pray In Wisdom--Keep the Spirit of Prayer--True
Prayer--How to Pray--An Address on Prayer--Practical Prayer and
Healing--Pray for the Authorities--Blessings Follow Prayers--Correct
Our Neglects

CHAPTER XIII

Tithing; the Poor; Industry

Why the Law of Tithing was Instituted--Essential Nature of the Law
of Tithing--The Law of Tithing a Test--The Law of Tithing, the
Law of Revenue--Tithing--The Widow and Her Tithing--The Widow and
Tithing--Who Receive Church Help Should be Tithe Payers--Use of
Tithing--Commercialism and Tithing--Tithing Used Carefully and Full
Accounts Kept--Books Open to Tithe-Payers--We Should Sympathize with
the Unfortunate--Charity to be Accepted Only When Necessary--Cease
to Waste Time; Cease to be Idle--Gospel Blessings Obtained by
Labor--Idlers Have No Place in Zion--A Message of the Latter-day Saints
on Behalf of the Poor

CHAPTER XIV

Temperance; the Sabbath

Man Should Be Master of His Appetites--Moderation--Temperance--How
to Teach Temperance--Use of Tobacco and Strong Drinks--Do Not
Smoke--The Saloon--Defeat the Liquor Interests--Vitality and Patent
Medicines--Stamp Out Profanity and Vulgarity--Saturday's Work;--Purpose
of the Sabbath--The Meaning of Sunday--What Shall We Do on the Sabbath
Day?--Necessity of Sunday Worship--Be Wise in All You Do--The Nature
and Purpose of Fasting--Keeping the Sabbath Holy--Do Not Rob the
Sabbath Day--Man Must Be Master of Himself

CHAPTER XV

Many Duties of Man

The Object of Man's Existence--We Deal with the Lord--Necessity
for All to Accomplish their Missions--God Honors Those Who Honor
Him--Qualifications of Latter-day Saints--Perfection in Our
Sphere--Let Every Man Live to Bear Closest Inspection--Need of
Individual Responsibility--Conquer Ourselves First--Let Us Conquer
Ourselves--Charity the Greatest Principle--Look for Good; Not
for Evil--Estimate Men by their Noble Deeds--Let Us Sustain One
Another--Do Not Bear Malice Against One Another--Honor Yourselves and
Your Neighbors--Avoid Courts--Let Us Live Our Religion--Let Us Be
True to the Faith--Church Duties are Paramount--We Should Study the
Gospel--Encourage Singing--Cultivate Singing--Be Free From Debt--What
the Lord Requires of His Saints--Cultivate Gratitude--Back-biting--Do
Not Inflict Wounds, But Heal Wounds--Use Good Language--Do Not Destroy
Life Wantonly--Commencement Address--Our Main Purpose of Life--How to
Love Your Neighbor--Question of Church Leaders--The Sin of Ingratitude

CHAPTER XVI

Marriage, the Home and the Family

Necessity of Marriage--Marriage, God-Ordained and
Sanctioned--Righteousness and Necessity of Marriage--Male and
Female Enter Heaven--Marriage to Replenish the Earth--Eternal
Marriage--Eternity of the Family Organization--Importance of
Marriage Within the Church--No Marriage in Heaven--Plural Marriage
Forbidden--Further Statement--Marriage and Large Families Desirable--Be
True to Your Wives and Children--Respect the Rights of Others--Mutual
Treatment of Husband, Wife and Children--We Should Be Examples to
Our Families--The Truest Greatness--Parents Responsible for their
Children--The Father, the Presiding Authority of the Family--Duties
of Fathers--Motherhood the Foundation of Home and Nation--Husband's
Success Dependent Upon Wife's Fitness--Duty of Parents--Watch Your
Children--Duty to Teach Children--What to Teach Your Children--What
Children Should Be Taught--Training of Children at Home and in
Sunday School--Teach Children the Gospel--Teach Children the
Story of Jesus' Death--Wise Giving to Children--Do Not Place
Children Under Pledges--Children Have Equal Rights with Elders in
the House of the Lord--Don't Mortgage Your Houses--No Substitute
for the Home--Worship in the Home--The Basis of a True Home--The
Ideal Home--Foundation of All Good in Home--Secure Homes--Own
Your Homes--Do Not Mortgage Your Homes--Evils of Mortgaging--Our
First Duty to Our Household--Unchastity, a Dominant Evil--Degrees
of Sexual Sin--Purity--Three Threatening Dangers--The Gospel the
Greatest Thing--Duty of Husband to Wife--Wives and Husbands in
Eternity--Importance of Filial Affection--Family Government by
Love--The Home and the Child

CHAPTER XVII

Amusements and Fashions

Youth Should Look Forward--Proper Amusements--Proper Character of
Amusements--Social Duties--The Danger of Pleasure Hunting--Harmful
Effects of Bad Books--Proper Reading--Raffling and Gambling--Games of
Chance--The Evil of-Cards--Wasting Time with Cards--Card Playing--Stop
Card Playing--Pernicious Nature of Card Playing--Cards in the
Home--Evil Fashions--Improper Fashions--Exclusive Clubs Among Church
Members--A Lesson for the Boys

CHAPTER XVIII

Love Your Enemies

We Are Not Discouraged--I Forgive All Men--We Leave Our Enemies in
God's Hands--Leave Results in God's Hands--Our Debt to Our Enemies--A
Prayer for Our Enemies--The Golden Rule--Why the World Does Not Love
Us--Love One Another--Keep Aloof from the Wicked--The Enemies to Fear

CHAPTER XIX

Education and Industrial Pursuits

We Are Ever Learning--Address on Ignorance--The Value of Practical
Education--Practical Education Advocated--Boys Should Be Taught the
Arts of Industry--Manual Training and Agriculture--Agriculture and
Mechanic Arts in Church Schools--We Should Study Agriculture--Dignity
of Agriculture--Encourage Forestry--Young Women Should Have Practical
Preparation for Life--Object of Church Schools--Value of Church
Schools--Purpose of Church Schools--The Church Ample for All Necessary
Organizations--Develop Faculties in Church Organizations--The
Foundation of Prosperity--The Object of Cooperation

CHAPTER XX

Missionaries

How Missionaries Are Called--Requirements of Prospective
Missionaries--The Kind of Men Wanted for Missionaries--Necessary
Qualifications of Missionaries--Further Qualifications of
Missionaries--What Missionaries Should Teach--What and How to
Teach--Not All Men Ready to Accept the Gospel--Our People Generous
to Missionaries--Advice to Missionaries--Missionaries and the
Word of Wisdom--Caution to Missionaries--Health of Missionaries
To Be Guarded--Missionaries In Ill Health--Care of Returned
Missionaries--Work for Returned Missionaries--Duty of a Person Called
on a Mission

CHAPTER XXI

False Teachings

The Devil's Knowledge--The Enemy of Truth Always Arrayed Against
This Work--Why the Truth is Hated--Only Those Who Deny the
Faith Contend--Beware of False Teachers--Where to Expect False
Doctrines--Knowledge of Sin Unnecessary--Retreat from Evil--The Law of
Recompense--Sympathy with Criminals--The Crime of Witchcraft and Other
Superstitions--Superstitious Practices--The Messiah Craze--One Mighty
and Strong

CHAPTER XXII

Auxiliary Organizations

Definition of Auxiliary Organizations--Place of Auxiliary Organizations
in the Church--Relation Between Authorities of Ward and Auxiliary
Organizations--Purpose and Duties of Relief Society--Objects of the
Relief Society--Duties and Purpose of the Relief Society--The Relief
Society--Object of Sunday Schools and Church Schools--The Teacher
Essential in Sunday School Work--The First Qualification of a Sunday
School Teacher--The Principle of Sabbath School Teaching--The Stake
Sunday School Board--The Importance of M. I. A. Work--The Field of
the Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations--Purpose of Mutual
Improvement Associations--The Fountain of Truth--Purpose and Duties of
Religion Classes--Teachers Must Believe in Jesus Christ

CHAPTER XXIII

Political Government

The Ten Commandments--The Laws of God and the Laws of the Land--No
Nationalities in the Church--The Latter-day Saints Loyal to the United
States--Loyalty to the Constitution of the United States--Proud of the
United States--Origin and Destiny of the United States: Loyalty of the
Latter-day Saints--Saints to Serve God--Guided by God to the West--True
Patriotism--Importance of National Patriotism--The Church Not
Partisan--The Church Loyal--Latter-day Saints Are Good Citizens--Church
Not Responsible for Political Parties--The Church Not In Politics--Shun
the Spirit of Mob Violence--The Danger of Mobs--The Basis of Labor
Unions--Cause of War--Attitude Towards War--We Want Peace--When Peace
Shall Come--Peace on Earth, Good Will to Men--The Key to Peace--God
Strives with Warring Nations--Conduct of the Boys in the Army--Message
to the Boys in War Service

CHAPTER XXIV

Eternal Life and Salvation

Eternal Life and Salvation--Close Relation of the Next
Life--Condition in a Future Life--Spiritual Death--The Unpardonable
Sin--The Resurrection--Nature of Ministering Angels--Redemption
Beyond the Grave--Nature of Death--The Resurrection--On the
Resurrection--Resurrection and Final Judgment--Condition of Children
in Heaven--Status of Children in the Resurrection--Address at Funeral
Services of Mary A. Freeze--The Resurrection--Work for the Dead--Temple
Ordinances Unchanged--Care and Need of Temples--Preaching the Gospel
in the Spirit World--Vision of the Redemption of the Dead--Moderation
in Burial Displays--Who Cannot be Reached by the Gospel--Principle of
Baptism for the Dead

CHAPTER XXV

Joseph Smith, the Prophet

The Reality of Joseph's Vision--Joseph Smith's Name Will Never
Perish--The Prophet Joseph Smith--Prediction of Joseph Smith
Fulfilled--Joseph Smith the Boy--Joseph Smith a Restorer--Plural
Wives of Joseph Smith, the Prophet--What Does the Martyrdom of
Joseph and Hyrum Teach Us--Divine Authority of Joseph Smith and His
Successors--God's Guiding Hand Seen in Church History

CHAPTER XXVI

Personal Testimonies and Blessings

A Testimony--This is God's Work, a Testimony--A Testimony--The
Pledge of My Life--A Blessing--A Testimony--I Know that My Redeemer
Lives--Testimony

President Joseph F. Smith

An Appreciation--Reminiscences--A Biographical Sketch--Last of the Old
School of Veteran Leaders



Gospel Doctrine

{1}



Chapter I

TRUTH, THE FOUNDATION

OUR HOPE FOUNDED ON TRUTH. Our hope of salvation must be founded upon
the truth, the whole truth, and nothing but the truth, for we cannot
build upon error and ascend into the courts of eternal truth and enjoy
the glory and exaltation of the kingdom of our God. That cannot be
done.--_Oct. C. R.,_[A] 1917, p. 3.

[Footnote A: _October Conference Report_.]

THE GOSPEL FOUNDED IN TRUTH. I have no fears in my heart, or mind, that
that which is called "Mormonism"--which is indeed the gospel of Jesus
Christ--will not bear the scrutiny of science and the researches of the
learned and literate into all truth. The gospel of Jesus is founded in
truth. Every principle of it is susceptible of demonstration beyond any
just reason for contradiction. The Lord is doing his work and will do
it, and no power can stay it.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 127.

TRUTH THE FOUNDATION. We believe in righteousness. We believe in all
truth, no matter to what subject it may refer. No sect or religious
denomination in the world possesses a single principle of truth that
we do not accept or that we will reject. We are willing to receive
all truth, from whatever source it may come; for truth will stand,
truth will endure. No man's faith, no man's religion, no religious
organization in all the world, can ever rise above the truth. The truth
must be at the foundation of religion, or it is in vain and it will
fail of its purpose. I say that the truth is at the foundation, at the
bottom and top of, and it {2} entirely permeates this great work of the
Lord that was established through the instrumentality of Joseph Smith,
the prophet. God is with it; it is his work, not that of man; and it
will succeed, no matter what the opposition may be. We look now at the
opposition arrayed against the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, and smile, so to speak, with feelings of confidence, doubly
assured by the experience of the past, in comparison to the feelings
that possessed the souls of our fathers and mothers in the early days
of the Church, when they were but a handful, with all the world arrayed
against them; just a few poor, homeless people, driven from their
possessions, cast out from the communities in which they sought to
establish themselves and build their homes. When I think of our people,
thrust into the wilderness wandering and seeking for a place where
the soles of their feet might rest, and see, then, the world arrayed
against them, and think of the little chance that appeared before them,
for success and the accomplishment of their purposes, I wonder that
more of them did not tremble and falter than did; but some of them were
true in the midst of it all, even unto death. If it had been necessary
for them to have been martyred for the truth, willingly would they have
given their lives, as they gave all else that they possessed in the
world, for the knowledge they had of the divinity of the work in which
they were engaged. Are we as faithful today? Are we as devout as our
fathers were? Oh, my God, help me to be as true as they were! Help me
to stand as they stood, upon the pedestal of eternal truth, that no
power on earth, or in hell, may remove me from that foundation. This
is my prayer to the Lord for my own sake, and it is my prayer to him
for every Latter-day Saint throughout the length and breadth of the
world.--_Apr. C. R.,_[A] 1909, p. 7.

[Footnote A: _April Conference Report_.]

MAN SAVED BY TRUTH. We have no ill feelings in our {3} hearts toward
any living creature. We forgive those who trespass against us. Those
who have spoken evil of us, and who have misrepresented us before the
world, we have no malice in our hearts toward them. We say, let God
judge between them and us; let him recompense them for their work. We
will not raise a hand against them; but we will extend the hand of
fellowship and friendship to them, if they will repent of their sins
and come unto the Lord and live. No matter how malicious they may have
been, or how foolish they may have acted, if they will repent of it we
will receive them with open arms and we will do all we can to help them
to save themselves. I cannot save you; you cannot save me; we cannot
save each other, only so far as we can persuade each other to receive
the truth, by teaching it. When a man receives the truth he will be
saved by it. He will not be saved merely because some one talks to him,
but because he received and acted upon it. The gospel is consistent,
it is common sense, reason, revelation; it is almighty truth from the
heavens made known to man.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 86.

GOSPEL TRUTH CAN NOT BE SUPERSEDED. There is no science, nor
philosophy, that can supersede God Almighty's truth. The Lord has said,
"My word is truth," and indeed it is; and I believe that the Latter-day
Saints know enough about the word of God to know it is his word when
they see it and shun whatever is not; and that they win abide by the
word of God, for it is truth. As the Savior said, "If ye continue in my
word, then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free." I believe that the Latter-day Saints,
and especially the leading men in Israel, have sufficient knowledge
and understanding of the principles of the gospel that they know the
truth, and they are made free by its possession--free from sin, free
from error, free from darkness, from the traditions of men, from vain
philosophy, and from {4} the untried, unproven theories of scientists,
that need demonstration beyond the possibility of a doubt. We have had
science and philosophy through all the ages, and they have undergone
change after change. Scarcely a century has passed but they have
introduced new theories of science and of philosophy that supersede
the old traditions and the old faith and the old doctrines entertained
by philosophers and scientists. These things may undergo continuous
changes, but the word of God is always true, is always right. I want
to say to you that the principles of the gospel are always true--the
principles of faith in God, of repentance from sin, of baptism for
the remission of sins by authority of God, and the laying on of hands
for the gift of the Holy Ghost; these principles are always true and
are always absolutely necessary for the salvation of the children of
men, no matter who they are or where they are. These principles are
always true, and you cannot get away from them. No other name, under
heaven, is given, but that of Jesus Christ, by which you can be saved
or exalted in the Kingdom of God. No man can enter into the kingdom
of heaven except he be born again of the water and of the Spirit.
These principles are indispensable, for God has declared them. Not
only has Christ declared them by his own voice, and his disciples from
generation to generation, in the olden time, but in these latter days,
they have taken up the same testimony and declared these things to the
world. They are true today as they were true then, and we must obey
these things.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1911, pp. 7, 8.

MAN'S GREATEST ACHIEVEMENT. The greatest achievement mankind can make
in this world is to familiarize themselves with divine truth, so
thoroughly, so perfectly, that the example or conduct of no creature
living in the world can ever turn them away from the knowledge that
they have obtained. "In the footsteps of the Master," the greatest of
all the teachers that this world has ever received, is the {5} safest
and surest course to pursue that I know of in the world. We can absorb
the precepts, the doctrines and the divine word of the Master, without
any fear that the exemplar will fail of carrying out and executing his
own precepts and fulfilling his own doctrines and requirements.

From my boyhood I have desired to learn the principles of the gospel
in such a way and to such an extent that it would matter not to me who
might fall from the truth, who might make a mistake, who might fail to
continue to follow the example of the Master, my foundation would be
sure and certain in the truths that I have learned, though all men else
go astray and fail of obedience to them. We all have heard of people
who have pinned their faith to the arm of flesh, who have felt that
their belief, their confidence and their love for the principles of
the gospel of Jesus Christ would be shattered, if their ideals--those
possibly who first taught them the principles of the gospel--should
make a mistake, falter or fall.

I know of but One in all the world who can be taken as the first and
only perfect standard for us to follow, and he is the Only Begotten Son
of God. I would feel sorry indeed, if I had a friend or an associate
in this life who would turn away from the plan of life and salvation
because I might stumble or make a failure of my life. I want no man
to lean upon me nor to follow me, only so far as I am a consistent
follower in the footsteps of the Master.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ 1915,
Vol. 50, pp. 738, 739.

TRUTH AND RIGHTEOUSNESS WILL PREVAIL. I do not expect any victory,
any triumph, anything to boast of, to come to the Latter-day Saints,
except upon the principles of righteousness and of truth. Truth and
righteousness will prevail and endure. If we will only continue to
build upon the principles of righteousness, of truth, of justice, and
of honor, I say to you there is no power beneath the celestial kingdom
that can stay the progress of this work. And as {6} this work shall
progress, and shall gain power and influence among men, so the powers
of the adversary and of darkness will diminish before the advancement
and growth of this kingdom, until the kingdom of God, and not of men,
will triumph.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 4.

REALITY OF THE FAITH OF THE SAINTS. There is no doubt in the minds
of Latter-day Saints in relation to the existence and personage of
the Lord God Almighty, who is the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus
Christ. There is no doubt in the minds of Latter-day Saints that Jesus
is the Son of God, being begotten of the Father in the flesh. And there
is no Latter-day Saint in all the world but knows as truly and as fully
as God can impart that knowledge to the soul of man, that he shall live
again after death, and that men and women shall be associated together
as God has ordained, and they have been united by his power, to dwell
together forever and forever; and they shall know as they are known,
they shall see as they are seen, and they shall understand as God
understands; for they are his children.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 39.

MEANING OF SCIENCE. True science is that system of reasoning which
brings to the fore the simple, plain truth. The Savior of the world was
pre-eminently the Scientist of this earth, and the truths he uttered
1900 years ago have withstood the assaults of science and prejudice and
hate.--_Logan Journal,_ Logan, February 6, 1912.

ALL TRUTH FROM GOD. Let us sustain the cause of Zion. Let no man
speak lightly of the principles of the gospel. Let no one treat
lightly the ordinances of the house of God. Let no one hold in
derision the Priesthood that the Lord has restored to the earth,
which is the authority that he has given unto men. Let no man look
contemptuously upon the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints as it has been established in the earth through the
instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith, {7} whom the Lord raised
up when he was but a child to lay the foundation of the same. Let no
man treat these things lightly or doubtingly; but let every man seek
earnestly to understand the truth and teach his children to become
familiar with those truths of heaven that have been restored to the
earth in the latter-days. I believe with all my soul in God the Father
and our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. I believe with all my might,
mind and strength in the Savior of the world, and in the principle of
redemption from death and sin. I believe in the divine mission of the
Prophet Joseph Smith. I believe in all the truth that I know, and I
believe that there are many principles of eternal truth that still lie
hidden from me and from the understanding of men, which will yet be
revealed by the power of God unto his faithful servants. I believe that
the Lord has revealed to the children of men all that they know. I do
not believe that any man has discovered any principle of science, or
art, in mechanism, or mathematics, or anything else, that God did not
know before man did. Man is indebted to the Source of all intelligence
and truth, for the knowledge that he possesses; and all who will yield
obedience to the promptings of the Spirit, which lead to virtue, to
honor, to the love of God and man, and to the love of truth and that
which is ennobling and enlarging to the soul, will get a cleaner, a
more expansive, and a more direct and conclusive knowledge of God's
truths than anyone else can obtain. I tell you this, because I know it
is true. The Lord Almighty lives; he made the heavens and the earth,
and the fountains of water; and we are his children, his offspring,
and we are not here by chance. The Lord designed our coming, and the
object of our being. He designs that we shall accomplish our mission,
to become conformed to the likeness and image of Jesus Christ, that,
like him, we may be without sin unto salvation, like him we may be
filled with pure intelligence, and like him we may be exalted to the
right {8} hand of the Father, to sit upon thrones and have dominion,
and power in the sphere in which we shall be called to act. I testify
to this doctrine, for the Lord has made me to know and feel the truth
of it from the crown of my head to the soles of my feet. I love good,
honorable men--even men who may be mistaken, as far as their judgment
is concerned, but who try to do right; I love them for the reason that
they are my brethren, the sons of my Father, and I would that they
might all see the truth as it is in Christ Jesus, and accept it, and
receive all the benefits of it, in time and throughout all eternity. If
the Lord has revealed to the world the plan of salvation and redemption
from sin, by which men may be exalted again into his presence and
partake of eternal life with him, I submit, as a proposition that
cannot be controverted, that no man can be exalted in the presence of
God and attain to a fulness of glory and happiness in his kingdom and
presence, save and except he will obey the plan that God has devised
and revealed.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1902, pp. 85, 86.

THE SAINTS MAY KNOW THE TRUTH. To the faithful Latter-day Saint is
given the right to know the truth, as God knows it; and no power
beneath the celestial kingdom can lead him astray, darken his
understanding, becloud his mind or dim his faith or his knowledge of
the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. It can't be done, for the
light of God shines brighter than the illumination of a falsehood and
error; therefore, those who possess the light of Christ, the spirit of
revelation and the knowledge of God, rise above all these vagaries in
the world; they know of this doctrine, that it is of God and not of
man.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 9.

HOW THE TRUTH MAY BE KNOWN. It is a wicked and adulterous generation
that seeketh after a sign. Show me Latter-day Saints who have to feed
upon miracles, signs and visions in order to keep them steadfast in the
Church, and {9} I will show you members of the Church who are not in
good standing before God, and who are walking in slippery paths. It is
not by marvelous manifestations unto us that we shall be established
in the truth, but it is by humility and faithful obedience to the
commandments and laws of God. When I as a boy first started out in
the ministry, I would frequently go out and ask the Lord to show me
some marvelous thing, in order that I might receive a testimony. But
the Lord withheld marvels from me, and showed me the truth, line upon
line, precept upon precept, here a little and there a little, until he
made me to know the truth from the crown of my head to the soles of my
feet, and until doubt and fear had been absolutely purged from me. He
did not have to send an angel from the heavens to do this, nor did he
have to speak with the trump of an archangel. By the whisperings of
the still small voice of the Spirit of the living God, he gave to me
the testimony I possess. And by this principle and power he will give
to all the children of men a knowledge of the truth that will stay
with them, and it will make them to know the truth, as God knows it,
and to do the will of the Father as Christ does it. And no amount of
marvelous manifestations will ever accomplish this. It is obedience,
humility, and submission to the requirements of heaven and to the order
established in the kingdom of God upon the earth, that will establish
men in the truth. Men may receive the visitation of angels; they may
speak in tongues; they may heal the sick by the laying on of hands;
they may have visions and dreams; but except they are faithful and pure
in heart, they become an easy prey to the adversary of their souls,
and he will lead them into darkness and unbelief more easily than
others.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, pp. 40, 41.

HOW MAN LAYS AN IMPERISHABLE FOUNDATION OF TRUTH. But the men and
the women who are honest before God, who humbly plod along, doing
their duty, paying their tithing, and exercising that pure religion
and undefiled before {10} God and the Father, which is to visit the
fatherless and the widows in their afflictions and to keep oneself
unspotted from the world, and who help look after the poor; and who
honor the holy Priesthood, who do not run into excesses, who are
prayerful in their families, and who acknowledge the Lord in their
hearts, they will build up a foundation that the gates of hell cannot
prevail against; and if the floods come and the storms beat upon
their house, it shall not fall, for it will be built upon the rock of
eternal truth. I pray that this vast congregation will build upon this
imperishable foundation, upon the principle expressed by the words
of Joshua, "as for me and my house, we will serve God," and as also
expressed by Job, "though he slay me, yet will I trust in him." If you
have that spirit toward God and his work in these latter days, you will
build steadily and slowly, it may be, but surely, upon a foundation
that will endure throughout the countless ages of eternity. And if you
do not get any great manifestations, you need not worry about it. You
will get the testimony of Jesus Christ in your hearts, and you will
know God and Jesus whom he has sent, whom to know is life eternal, just
as well as those who receive visions. For those who do receive visions,
the devil will try to make them believe that they were delusions, and
if they commit sin, he will be sure to make them believe it. God bless
you, is my prayer. Amen.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 42.

REWARD OF ALL HONEST PEOPLE. In some instances you will find examples
of people out in the world who do not know as much as you do of the
gospel of Jesus Christ, who have not the testimony of the Spirit in
their hearts, as you have, of the divinity of Christ and of Joseph
Smith, who are just as devout, just as humble, just as contrite in
spirit, and as devoted to what they know, as some of us are, and they
will be rewarded according to their works, every one of them, and will
receive reward far surpassing anything that they dream of.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1912, p. 8.

{11} THE GOSPEL IS SIMPLE. Some subjects are in themselves, perhaps,
perfectly harmless, and any amount of discussion over them would
not be injurious to the faith of our young people. We are told, for
example, that the theory of gravitation is at best a hypothesis, and
that such is the atomic theory. These theories help to explain certain
things about nature. Whether they are ultimately true can not make
much difference to the religious convictions of our young people.
On the other hand, there are speculations which touch the origin of
life and the relationship of God to his children. In a very limited
degree that relationship has been defined by revelation, and until we
receive more light upon the subject we deem it best to refrain from the
discussion of certain philosophical theories which rather destroy than
build up the faith of our young people. One thing about this so-called
philosophy of religion that is very undesirable lies in the fact that
as soon as we convert our religion into a system of philosophy, none
but philosophers can understand, appreciate, or enjoy it. God, in
his revelation to man, has made his word so simple that the humblest
of men, without special training, may enjoy great faith, comprehend
the teachings of the gospel, and enjoy undisturbed their religious
convictions. For that reason we are averse to the discussion of certain
philosophical theories in our religious instructions.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 46, pp. 208, 209, April, 1911.

OUR KNOWLEDGE IS LIMITED. Our methods in speculation and reasoning
about the things of God may often be harmless; but if we depart from
the simplicity of God's word into a spirit of rationalism, we become
the victims of vanity, which endangers the true spirit of worship in
the human heart. It is not easy for men to give up their vanities, to
overcome their preconceived notions, and surrender themselves heart
and soul to the will of God which is always higher than their own. The
dangers of religious {12} speculations are as great today as they were
in the days of Christ, and if we would avoid these dangers we must
adhere to the simplicity of our religious beliefs and practices. When
men and women realize they are getting into deep water where their
footing is insecure, they should retreat, for they may be sure that
the course they have been taking will lead them more and more away
from their bearings which are not always easy to regain. The religion
of the heart, the unaffected and simple communion which we should hold
with God, is the highest safeguard of the Latter-day Saints. It is no
discredit to our intelligence or to our integrity to say frankly in the
face of a hundred speculative questions, "I do not know."

One thing is certain, and that is, God has revealed enough to our
understanding for our exaltation and for our happiness. Let the Saints,
then, utilize what they already have; be simple and unaffected in their
religion, both in thought and word, and they will not easily lose their
bearings and be subjected to the vain philosophies of man.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 46, p. 269, May, 1911.

BLESSINGS FOR THE LOVE OF TRUTH. If you love the truth, if you have
received the gospel in your hearts, and love it, your intelligence
will be added upon, your understanding of truth will be expanded,
become larger than in any other way. Truth is the thing, above all
other things in the world, that makes men free--free from indolence
and carelessness, free from the fearful consequences of neglect, for
it will be a fearful consequence, if we neglect our duty before the
living God. If you will learn the truth and walk in the light of truth,
you shall be made free from the errors of men and of crafts; you will
be above suspicion and above wrong-doing of every description. God
will approve of you and bless you and your inheritances, and make you
prosper and flourish like a green bay tree.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
21, p. 102, December, 1917.

{13}



CHAPTER II

THE ETERNAL NATURE OF THE CHURCH, THE PRIESTHOOD, AND MAN

ETERNAL NATURE OF THE PLAN OF SALVATION. I feel this morning as I
have felt all my life, but I feel it stronger this morning, perhaps,
than ever before, that there is nothing under the heavens of so much
importance to me or to the children of men as the great plan of life
and salvation which was devised in the heavens in the beginning,
and which has been handed down from period to period through the
inspiration of holy men called of God until the day of the coming of
the Son of Man, for this gospel and this plan of salvation was revealed
to our first parents. The angel of God carried to them the plan of
redemption, and of salvation from death and sin that has been revealed
from time to time by divine authority to the children of men, and it
has undergone no change. There was nothing in it, in the beginning,
that was superfluous or unnecessary; nothing in it that could be
dispensed with; it was a complete plan devised in the beginning by
the wisdom of the Father and the holy ones for the redemption of the
human race and for their salvation and exaltation in the presence of
God. It was taught more fully, and exemplified more perfectly in the
being, the life and mission, the instruction and doctrine, of the Son
of God, than ever before, unless there may be an exception in the days
of Enoch; but through all the generations of time, the same gospel,
the same plan of life and salvation, the same ordinances, burial with
Christ, remembrance of the great sacrifice to be offered for the sins
of the world and for man's redemption, have been handed down from time
to time, from the time of the creation.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 2.

{14} GOSPEL PRINCIPLES ARE ETERNAL. Faith in God is an irrevocable
principle, just as much as "thou shalt not kill;" "thou shalt not
steal;" "thou shalt not commit adultery." Repentance of a sin is an
eternal principle, and is as essential in its place, and is as much an
integral part of the gospel of Jesus Christ as: "thou shalt not kill,"
or, "thou shalt have no other gods before me."

Baptism for the remission of sin, by one having authority, is an
eternal principle, for God devised it, and commanded it, and Christ
himself was not above obeying it; he had to obey it in order to fulfil
the law of righteousness.

And then the rites of the Priesthood of the Church, as the Lord has
revealed them, and the principles that underlie the organization of the
Church of Jesus Christ, are irrevocable, unchanging and unchangeable.
We talk of the "everlasting gospel of Jesus Christ," which "is the
power of God unto salvation," and these principles in and of themselves
are eternal principles, and will last while life, or thought, or being
last, or immortality endures.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1912, p. 11.

PRE-EXISTING STATES.

_Mrs. Martha H. Tingey, President, Y. L. M. I. A._

DEAR SISTER: The First Presidency have nothing to advance concerning
pre-existing states but that which is contained in the revelations to
the Church. The written standards of scripture show that all people
who come to this earth and are born in mortality had a pre-existent,
spiritual personality as the sons or daughters of the Eternal Father.
(See _Pearl of Great Price,_ Chap. 3, verses 5-7.) Jesus Christ was the
Firstborn. A spirit born of God is an immortal being. When the body
dies the spirit does not die. In the resurrected state the body will
be immortal as well as the spirit. Speculations as to the career of
Adam before he {15} came to the earth are of no real value. We learn
by revelation that he was Michael, the Archangel, and that he stands
at the head of his posterity on earth (_Doctrine and Covenants,_ Sec.
107:53-56.) Dogmatic assertions do not take the place of revelation,
and we should be satisfied with that which is accepted as doctrine, and
not discuss matters that, after all disputes, are merely matters of
theory.

Your brethren,

JOSEPH F. SMITH,

ANTHON H. LUND,

CHARLES W. PENROSE,

First Presidency.

--_Young Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 23, pp. 162, 163, 1912.

SPIRIT MEMORIES. (Letter written to Elder O. F. Whitney who was a
missionary in England.) I heartily endorse your sentiments respecting
congeniality of spirits. Our knowledge of persons and things before we
came here, combined with the divinity awakened within our souls through
obedience to the gospel, powerfully affects, in my opinion, all our
likes and dislikes, and guides our preferences in the course of this
life, provided we give careful heed to the admonitions of the Spirit.

All those salient truths which come home so forcibly to the head and
heart seem but the awakening of the memories of the spirit. Can we know
anything here that we did not know before we came? Are not the means of
knowledge in the first estate equal to those of this? I think that the
spirit, before and after this probation, possesses greater facilities,
aye, manifold greater, for the acquisition of knowledge, than while
manacled and shut up in the prison-house of mortality.

Had we not known before we came the necessity of our coming, the
importance of obtaining tabernacles, the glory to be achieved in
posterity, the grand object to be {16} attained by being tried
and tested--weighed in the balance, in the exercise of the divine
attributes, god-like powers and free agency with which we are endowed;
whereby, after descending below all things, Christ-like, we might
ascend above all things, and become like our Father, Mother and Elder
Brother, Almighty and Eternal!--we never would have come; that is, if
we could have stayed away.

I believe that our Savior is the ever-living example to all flesh
in all these things. He no doubt possessed a foreknowledge of all
the vicissitudes through which he would have to pass in the mortal
tabernacle, when the foundations of this earth were laid, "when the
morning stars sang together, and all the sons of God shouted for joy."
When he conversed with the brother of Jared, on the Mount, in his
spiritual body, he understood his mission, and knew the work he had to
do, as thoroughly as when he ascended from the Mount of Olives before
the wondering gaze of the Jewish disciples, with his resurrected,
glorious and immortal body.

And yet, to accomplish the ultimatum of his previous existence,
and consummate the grand and glorious object of his being, and the
salvation of his infinite brotherhood, he had to come and take upon
him flesh. He is our example. The works he did, we are commanded to
do. We are enjoined to follow him, as he followed his Head; that
where he is, we may be also; and being with him, may be like him. If
Christ knew beforehand, so did we. But in coming here, we forgot all,
that our agency might be free indeed, to choose good or evil, that
we might merit the reward of our own choice and conduct. But by the
power of the Spirit, in the redemption of Christ, through obedience,
we often catch a spark from the awakened memories of the immortal
soul, which lights up our whole being as with the glory of our former
home.--_Contributor,_ 1883, Vol. 4, pp. 114, 115.

THE IMMORTALITY OF MAN. We are called mortal beings {17} because in
us are seeds of death, but in reality we are immortal beings, because
there is also within us the germ of eternal life. Man is a dual
being, composed of the spirit which gives life, force, intelligence
and capacity to man, and the body which is the tenement of the spirit
and is suited to its form, adapted to its necessities, and acts in
harmony with it, and to its utmost capacity yields obedience to the
will of the spirit. The two combined constitute the soul. The body is
dependent upon the spirit, and the spirit during its natural occupancy
of the body is subject to the laws which apply to and govern it in the
mortal state. In this natural body are the seeds of weakness and decay,
which, when fully ripened or untimely plucked up, in the language
of scripture, is called "the temporal death." The spirit is also
subject to what is termed in the scriptures and revelations from God,
"spiritual death." The same as that which befell our first parents,
when, through disobedience and transgression, they became subject to
the will of Satan, and were thrust out from the presence of the Lord
and became spiritually dead, which the Lord says, "is the first death,
even that same death which is the last death, which is spiritual,
which shall be pronounced upon the wicked when I shall say, Depart, ye
cursed!" And the Lord further says, "But behold, I say unto you, that I
the Lord God gave unto Adam and unto his seed that they should not die
as to the temporal death, until I the Lord God should send forth angels
to declare unto them repentance and redemption (from the first death),
through faith on the name of mine Only Begotten Son. And thus did I,
the Lord God, appoint unto man the days of his probation; that by his
natural death he might be raised in immortality unto eternal life,
even as many as would believe; and they that believe not, unto eternal
damnation, for they cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall,
because they repent not." From the natural death, that is the death of
the body, and {18} also from the first death, "which is spiritual,"
there is redemption through belief on the name of the Only Begotten
Son, in connection with repentance and obedience to the ordinances of
the gospel, declared by holy angels, for if one "believe," he must also
obey; but from the "second death," even that same death which is the
first death, "which is spiritual," and from which man may be redeemed
through faith and obedience, and which will again be pronounced upon
the wicked when God shall say, "depart, ye cursed," there is no
redemption, so far as light on this matter has been revealed.

It is written that "all manner of sin and blasphemy shall be forgiven
unto men" who receive me and repent; "but the blasphemy against the
Holy Ghost, it shall not be forgiven unto men." If men will not repent
and come unto Christ, through the ordinances of his gospel, they
cannot be redeemed from their spiritual fall, but must remain forever
subject to the will of Satan and the consequent spiritual darkness
or death unto which our first parents fell, subjecting all their
posterity thereto, and from which none can be redeemed but by belief or
faith on the name of the Only Begotten Son and obedience to the laws
of God. But, thanks be to the eternal Father, through the merciful
provisions of the gospel, all mankind will have the opportunity of
escape, or deliverance, from this spiritual death, either in time or in
eternity, for not until they are freed from the first can they become
subject unto the second death, still if they repent not "they cannot
be redeemed from their spiritual fall," and will continue subject to
the will of Satan, the first spiritual death, so long as "they repent
not, and thereby reject Christ and his gospel;" but what of those who
do believe, repent of their sins, obey the gospel, enter into its
covenants, receive the keys of the priesthood and the knowledge of the
truth by revelation and the gift of the Holy Ghost, and afterwards turn
away wholly from that light and knowledge? They "become {19} a law unto
themselves," and "will to abide in sin;" of such it is written, "whoso
breaketh this covenant, after he hath received it, and altogether
turneth therefrom, shall not have forgiveness in this world nor in the
world to come." And again, "Thus saith the Lord, concerning all those
who know my power, and have been made partakers thereof, and suffered
themselves, through the power of the devil, to be overcome, and to
deny the truth and defy my power--they are they who are the sons of
perdition, of whom I say that it had been better for them never to have
been born, for they are vessels of wrath, doomed to suffer the wrath of
God, with the devil and his angels in eternity; concerning whom I have
said there is no forgiveness in this world nor in the world to come,
having denied the Holy Spirit after having received it, and having
denied the Only Begotten Son of the Father--having crucified him unto
themselves, and put him to an open shame."--_Doc. and Cov._ 76:31-35.

Now, there is a difference between this class and those who simply
repent not and reject the gospel in the flesh. Of these latter it is
written, "they shall be brought forth by the resurrection of the dead,
through the triumph and the glory of the Lamb," and "shall be redeemed
in the due time of the Lord after the sufferings of his wrath." But of
the others it is said, "they shall not be redeemed," for "they are the
only ones on whom the second death shall have any power." The others,
never having been redeemed from the first, cannot be doomed to the
second death, or in other words cannot be made to suffer eternally
the wrath of God, without hope of redemption through repentance, but
must continue to suffer the first death until they repent, and are
redeemed therefrom through the power of the atonement and the gospel
of salvation, thereby being brought to the possession of all the keys
and blessings to which they will be capable of attaining or to which
they may be entitled, through the mercy, justice and power of the
everlasting God; or, on the other {20} hand, forever remain bound in
the chains of spiritual darkness, bondage and banishment from his
presence, kingdom and glory. The "temporal death" is one thing, and
the "spiritual death" is another thing. The body may be dissolved and
become extinct as an organism, although the elements of which it is
composed are indestructible or eternal, but I hold it as self-evident
that the spiritual organism is an eternal, immortal being, destined
to enjoy eternal happiness and a fulness of joy, or suffer the wrath
of God, and misery--a just condemnation, eternally. Adam became
spiritually dead, yet he lived to endure it until freed therefrom by
the power of the atonement, through repentance, etc. Those upon whom
the second death shall fall will live to suffer and endure it, but
without hope of redemption. The death of the body, or natural death, is
but a temporary circumstance to which all were subjected through the
fall, and from which all will be restored or resurrected by the power
of God, through the atonement of Christ.

Man existed before he came to this earth, and he will exist after he
passes from it; and will continue to live throughout the countless ages
of eternity.

There are three classes of beings; or rather, man exists in three
separate conditions, before and after his probation upon this
earth--first, in the spirit or pre-existent state; second, in the
disembodied state, the condition which exists after the dissolution of
the body and spirit until the resurrection take place; and third, in
the resurrected state. For instance, some two thousand years before
the coming of Christ into the world to sojourn in the flesh, he showed
himself to the brother of Jared and said, "Behold, this body, which ye
now behold, is the body of my spirit; and man have I created after the
body of my spirit; and even as I appear unto thee to be in the spirit,
will I appear unto my people in the flesh." He further declared,
"Behold, I am he who {21} was prepared from the foundation of the world
to redeem my people. Behold, I am Jesus Christ."

Here Jesus showed himself unto this man in the spirit, even after the
manner and in the likeness of the same body, even as he showed himself
unto the Nephites--that is, prior to his coming in the flesh. This I
consider typical of the first condition of all spirits. Again it is
written, "For Christ also hath once suffered for sins, the just for
the unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the
flesh, but quickened by the Spirit: by which also he went and preached
unto the spirits in prison: which sometime were disobedient, when
once the longsuffering of God waited in the days of Noah, while the
ark was a preparing, wherein few, that is, eight souls were saved by
water," etc. Thus we see that while the body of our Savior slept in
the tomb, he went in the spirit and preached his glorious gospel to
"the spirits in prison," who were disobedient in the days of Noah,
and were destroyed in the flesh by the flood. This was their second
condition or state in the spirit, awaiting the resurrection of their
bodies which were slumbering in death. "Marvel not at this:" saith
Jesus, "for the hour is coming, in the which all that are in the graves
shall hear his [the Redeemer's] voice, and shall come forth; they that
have done good, unto the resurrection of life; and they that have done
evil, unto the resurrection of damnation." In reference to the third
condition or state, we will refer to the account given of the risen
Redeemer before his ascension. John tells us that he appeared unto his
disciples three times after his resurrection, on which occasions he
ate bread, broiled fish and honeycomb, and opened the eyes of their
understanding, that they began to comprehend the Scriptures and the
prophecies concerning Christ. But when he appeared unto them they were
terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they had seen a spirit.
And he said unto them, "Why {22} are ye troubled? and why do thoughts
arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that it is I myself:
handle me, and see; for a spirit hath not flesh and bones, as ye see me
have." Here is presented the true type of the resurrected being. And
after this manner are all those who have their resurrected bodies, and
there are many of these, for we are told in the scriptures that "the
graves were opened, and many bodies of the Saints which slept arose and
came out of the graves, after his resurrection, and went into the holy
city and appeared unto many." This class of beings dwell in heaven, or
in the paradise of the just, having been counted worthy to come forth
in the first resurrection, even with Christ, to dwell with him and to
be associated with the members of the kingdom of God and his Christ.
These comprise the three conditions or estates of man in heaven. Not
all, however, of the disembodied spirits enjoy the same privileges,
exaltation and glory. The spirits of the wicked, disobedient, and
unbelieving, are denied the privileges, joys and glory of the spirits
of the just and good. The bodies of the Saints will come forth in the
first resurrection, and those of the unbelieving, etc., in the second,
or last. In other words, the Saints will rise first, and those who are
not Saints will not rise until afterwards, according to the wisdom,
justice and mercy of God.

Christ is the great example for all mankind, and I believe that
mankind were as much foreordained to become like him, as that he was
foreordained to be the Redeemer of man. "Whom God did foreknow"--and
whom did he not foreknow?--"he also did predestinate to be conformed
to the image of his Son, that he might be the firstborn among many
brethren." It is very plain that mankind are very far from being
like Christ, as the world is today, only in form of person. In this
we are like him, or in the form of his person, as he is the express
image of his Father's person. We are therefore in the form of God,
physically, and may {23} become like him spiritually, and like him in
the possession of knowledge, intelligence, wisdom and power.

The grand object of our coming to this earth is that we may become like
Christ, for if we are not like him, we cannot become the sons of God,
and be joint heirs with Christ.

The man who passes through this probation, and is faithful, being
redeemed from sin by the blood of Christ, through the ordinances of the
gospel, and attains to exaltation in the kingdom of God, is not less
but greater than the angels, and if you doubt it, read your Bible, for
there it is written that the Saints shall "judge angels," and also they
shall "judge the world." And why? Because the resurrected, righteous
man has progressed beyond the pre-existent or disembodied spirits, and
has risen above them, having both spirit and body as Christ has, having
gained the victory over death and the grave, and having power over sin
and Satan; in fact, having passed from the condition of the angels to
that of a God. He possesses keys of power, dominion and glory that
the angel does not possess--and cannot possess without gaining them
in the same way that he gained them, which will be by passing through
the same ordeals and proving equally faithful. It was so ordained when
the morning stars sang together, before the foundations of this earth
were laid. Man in his pre-existent condition is not perfect, neither
is he in the disembodied estate. There is no perfect estate but that
of the risen Redeemer, which is God's estate, and no man can become
perfect except he become like the Gods. And what are they like? I have
shown what Christ is like, and he is like his Father, but I will refer
to an undoubted authority to this people, on this point: "The Father
has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as man's; the Son also; but
the Holy Ghost has not a body of flesh and bones, but is a personage
of Spirit, were it not so, the Holy Ghost could not dwell in us."
(Doc. {24} and Cov., Sec. 130.) There is not time to refer to the many
scriptural passages which might be cited in proof of these important
facts, enough already have been referred to, to place the matter beyond
a doubt.

It is believed by many, in the Christian world, that our Savior
finished his mission when he expired upon the cross, and his last
words on the cross, as given by the Apostle John--"It is finished,"
are frequently quoted as evidence of the fact; but this is an error.
Christ did not complete his mission upon the earth until after his body
was raised from the dead. Had his mission been completed when he died,
his disciples would have continued fishermen, carpenters, etc., for
they returned to their several occupations soon after the crucifixion,
not yet knowing the force of their holy calling, nor understanding the
mission assigned them by their Master, whose name would soon have been
buried with his body in the grave to perish and be forgotten, "for
as yet they knew not the scripture, that he must rise again from the
dead." But the most glorious part of his mission had to be accomplished
after the crucifixion and death of his body. When on the first day
of the week some of the disciples went to the tomb with certain
preparations for the body of their Lord, they were met there by two men
clothed in "shining garments," who said unto them, "Why seek ye the
living among the dead? He is not here, but is risen. Remember how he
spoke unto you when he was yet in Galilee, saying, The Son of Man must
be delivered into the hands of sinful men and be crucified, and the
third day rise again." And not until then did the disciples remember
these words of the Savior, or begin to understand their meaning. Why
were they thus forgetful and seemingly ignorant of all they had been
taught by the Savior respecting the objects of his mission to the
earth? Because they lacked one important qualification, they had not
yet been "endowed with power from on high." They had not yet obtained
the gift of the {25} Holy Ghost. And the presumption is, they never
would have received this important and essential endowment had Christ's
mission been completed at the time of his death.

It may seem strange to some who may not have reflected on this
matter fully, that the disciples of Christ were without the gift of
the Holy Ghost until after his resurrection. But so it is written,
notwithstanding the Savior on one occasion declared, "blessed art thou
Simon, etc., for flesh and blood hath not revealed this unto thee, but
my Father which is in heaven." While Jesus was with them he was their
light and their inspiration. They followed him by sight, and felt the
majestic power of his presence, and when these were gone they returned
to their nets and to their various occupations and to their homes
saying, "we trusted that it had been he which should have redeemed
Israel, but the chief priests and our rulers have delivered him to
be condemned to death, and have crucified him." No wonder that Jesus
exclaimed unto some of them, "O fools, and slow of heart to believe all
that the prophets have spoken."

If the disciples had been endowed with the "gift of the Holy Ghost,"
or "with power from on high," at this time, their course would have
been altogether different from this, as the sequel abundantly proved.
If Peter, who was the chief apostle, had received the gift of the
Holy Ghost, and the power and testimony thereof prior to the terrible
night on which he cursed and swore and denied his Lord, the result
would have been very different with him, for then he would have sinned
against "light and knowledge," and "against the Holy Ghost," for which
there is no forgiveness. The fact, therefore, that he was forgiven,
after bitter tears of repentance, is an evidence that he was without
the witness of the Holy Ghost, never having received it. The other
disciples or apostles of Christ were precisely in the same condition,
and it was not until the evening of the day on which Jesus came out of
the grave that he bestowed upon {26} them this inestimable gift. John
gives a careful description of this important event which concludes
as follows: "Then said Jesus to them again, Peace be unto you: as my
Father hath sent me, even so send I you. And when he had said this,
he breathed on them, and saith unto them, Receive ye the Holy Ghost:
whose soever sins ye remit, they are remitted unto them," etc. This was
their glorious commission, and now were they prepared to receive the
witness of the Spirit--even the testimony of Jesus Christ. Yet they
were told to tarry in Jerusalem, until they were endued with power
from on high, which they did. Jesus further told them that if he went
not away the "Comforter"--that is, the Holy Ghost--would not come unto
them, but if he went away he would "send him," and he it was who should
testify of Christ, and of the Father, and bring to their remembrance
"all things whatsoever" he had commanded or taught them, and it should
"lead them into all truth." Thus we see that the resurrection from the
dead, not only of Christ, but of all mankind, in the due time of the
Lord; the endowment of the apostles with the Holy Ghost, and their
glorious commission from Christ, being sent out by him as he was sent
by the Father; the opening of the eyes of the disciples to understand
the prophecies of the Scriptures, and many other things did Jesus after
he cried out upon the cross, "it is finished." Further, the mission
of Jesus will be unfinished until he redeems the whole human family,
except the sons of perdition, and also this earth from the curse that
is upon it and both the earth and its inhabitants can be presented to
the Father redeemed, sanctified and glorious.

Things upon the earth, so far as they have not been perverted by
wickedness, are typical of things in heaven. Heaven was the prototype
of this beautiful creation when it came from the hand of the Creator,
and was pronounced "good."--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 23 (1883),
pp. 169-175, delivered June 18, 1882.

{27} MAN ETERNALLY RESPONSIBLE. Man will be held responsible in the
life to come for the deeds that he has done in this life, and will
have to answer for the stewardships entrusted to his care here, before
the judge of the quick and the dead, the Father of our spirits, and of
our Lord and Master. This is the design of God, a part of his great
purpose. We are not here to live a few months or years, to eat, drink
and sleep, then to die, pass away and perish. The Lord Almighty never
designed man to be so ephemeral, useless and imperfect as this. I
would pity the being who had such a conception as this of the Creator
of the starry heavens, the planets, and the world on which we dwell,
poor as it is in glory in comparison to the many others created. Is
it conceivable that one possessing such power, majesty, intelligence,
light and knowledge would create a world like this and people it with
beings in his own image and likeness only to live and grovel through a
short, miserable existence, then die and perish? No such thing! There
is no death here, but there is life!

God is the God of the living, and not of the dead. He is the God of
Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, and of the ancient prophets. They live!
They live not only in the words they spoke, the predictions they
made, and in the promises handed down from generation to generation
to the children of men; they live not only in the record they made,
in the doctrines that they taught, and in the hope that they held out
for redemption, atonement and salvation, but they live in spirit, in
entity, as they lived here. They are prophets, as they were prophets
here, the chosen of God; patriarchs, as they were here; possessing
the same identity, the same entity; and by and by, if not already,
they will possess the same bodies they possessed while journeying
in mortality. Those bodies will become purified, cleansed, and made
perfect; and the spirit and the body will be reunited, never more to be
separated, never again to taste of death. This is the law {28} and the
promise of God, and the words spoken to his ancient prophets, come down
to us through the generations that have followed.--_Improvement Era,_
Vol. 21, p. 357, Feb., 1918.

OUR INDESTRUCTIBLE, IMMORTAL IDENTITY. What a glorious thing it is
to know and be true to that which has been revealed in these latter
times through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith. It was
revealed anciently by the Savior himself, and he exemplified that
glorious principle of which I wish to say a few words, and which has
been renewed and emphasized more especially in these latter days
through Joseph Smith--I refer to our identity, our indestructible,
immortal identity. As in Christ we have the example, he was born of
woman, he lived, he died, and he lived again in his own person and
being, bearing even the marks of the wounds in his flesh, after his
resurrection from the dead--so also a testimony has been given to you,
in later days, through the Prophet Joseph Smith, and others who have
been blessed with knowledge, that the same individual Being still
lives and will always live. Jesus is possessed of immortality, and
eternal life; and in evidence of his existence and his immortality, and
in evidence of the great and glorious truths of the gospel which he
taught, the death which he died, and the resurrection that he wrought
from the dead, he has revealed himself and borne his own record and
testimony to those who have lived and still live in this day and age.
What a glorious thought it is, to me at least, and it must be to all
who have conceived of the truth or received it in their hearts, that
those from whom we have to part here, we will meet again and see as
they are. We will meet the same identical being that we associated
with here in the flesh--not some other soul, some other being, or
the same being in some other form, but the same identity and the same
form and likeness, the same person we knew and were associated with in
our mortal existence, even to the {29} wounds in the flesh. Not that
a person will always be marred by scars, wounds, deformities, defects
or infirmities, for these will be removed in their course, in their
proper time, according to the merciful providence of God. Deformity
will be removed; defects will be eliminated, and men and women shall
attain to the perfection of their spirits, to the perfection that God
designed in the beginning. It is his purpose that men and women, his
children, born to become heirs of God, and joint heirs with Jesus
Christ, shall be made perfect, physically as well as spiritually,
through obedience to the law by which he has provided the means that
perfection shall come to all his children. Therefore, I look for the
time when our dear Brother William C. Staines, whom we all knew so
well, and with whom we were familiar for years--I was familiar with
him, all my life, just as I was familiar with Aunt Rachel here all my
life, and do not remember the time when I did not know her--I look for
the time, I say, when Brother Staines will be restored. He will not
remain the crippled and deformed William C. Staines that we knew, but
he will be restored to his perfect frame--every limb, every joint,
every part of his physical being will be restored to its perfect frame.
This is the law and the word of God to us, as it is contained in the
revelations that have come to us, through the Prophet Joseph Smith. The
point in my mind which I desire to speak of particularly is this: When
we shall have the privilege to meet our mother, our aunt, our sister,
this noble woman whose mortal remains lie here now, but whose immortal
spirit has ascended to God from whence it came, when that spirit shall
return to take up this tabernacle again, she will be Aunt Rachel in her
perfection. She will not always remain just as she will appear when
she is restored again to life, but she will go on to perfection. Under
that law of restoration that God has provided, she will regain her
perfection, the perfection of her youth, the perfection of her glory
and of her {30} being, until her resurrected body shall assume the
exact stature of the spirit that possessed it here in its perfection,
and thus we shall see the glorified, redeemed, exalted, perfected Aunt
Rachel, mother, sister, saint and daughter of the living God, her
identity being unchanged, as a child may grow to manhood or womanhood
and still be the same being.

I want to say to my friends, my brethren and sisters, and to the
kindred, that the Lord Almighty has revealed these truths to us in
these days. We not only have it in the written word, we have it in the
testimony of the spirit of God in the heart of every soul who has drunk
from the fountain of truth and light, and that witness bears record of
these words to us. What else would satisfy us? What else would satisfy
the desire of the immortal soul? Would we be satisfied to be imperfect?
Would we be satisfied to be decrepit? Would we be satisfied to remain
forever and ever in the form of infirmity incident to age? No! Would
we be satisfied to see the children we bury in their infancy remain as
children only, throughout the countless ages of eternity? No! Neither
would the spirits that did possess the tabernacles of our children be
satisfied to remain in that condition. But we know our children will
not be compelled to remain as a child in stature always, for it was
revealed from God, the fountain of truth, through Joseph Smith the
prophet, in this dispensation, that in the resurrection of the dead
the child that was buried in its infancy will come up in the form of
the child that it was when it was laid down; then it will begin to
develop. From the day of the resurrection, the body will develop until
it reaches the full measure of the stature of its spirit, whether it be
male or female. If the spirit possessed the intelligence of God and the
aspirations of mortal souls, it could not be satisfied with anything
less than this. You will remember we are told that the spirit of Jesus
Christ visited one of the ancient {31} prophets and revealed himself
to him, and he declared his identity, that he was the same Son of God
that was to come in the meridian of time. He said he would appear in
the flesh just as he appeared to that prophet. He was not an infant; he
was a grown, developed spirit; possessing the form of man and the form
of God, the same form as when he came and took upon him a tabernacle
and developed it to the full stature of his spirit. These are truths
that have been revealed to us. What for? To give us intelligent hope;
to give us intelligent aspiration; to lead us to think, to hope, to
labor and accomplish what God has aimed and does aim and design that we
should accomplish, not only in this life, but in the life to come.

I rejoice exceedingly that I know and have known nearly all my life
such a noble woman. I do not remember the first time that I saw Aunt
Rachel, I can't recall it; it seems to me I always knew her, just as
I knew my mother in my childhood and all the way through life; and I
rejoice exceedingly in this testimony of the Spirit of the Lord that
has come to us through revelation in the latter days. Through this
testimony I am confident that I shall see Aunt Rachel, by and by; and
when I go--and I expect to go, perhaps, long before she shall recover
this tabernacle--I expect to meet her there. I expect to meet the same
individual that I knew here. I expect to be able to recognize her, just
as I could recognize her tomorrow, if she were living. I believe I will
know just exactly who she is and what she is, and I will remember all
I knew about her; and enjoy her association in the spirit as I did in
the flesh; because her identity is fixed and indestructible, just as
fixed and indestructible as the identity of God the Father and Jesus
Christ the Son. They cannot be any other than themselves. They cannot
be changed; they are from everlasting to everlasting, eternally the
same; so it will be with us. We will progress and develop and grow in
wisdom and understanding, but our {32} identity can never change. We
did not spring from spawn. Our spirits existed from the beginning, have
existed always, and will continue forever. We did not pass through
the ordeals of embodiment in the lesser animals in order to reach the
perfection to which we have attained in manhood and womanhood, in the
image and likeness of God. God was and is our Father, and his children
were begotten in the flesh of his own image and likeness, male and
female. There may have been times when they did not possess the same
intelligence that they possessed at other times. There are periods
in the history of the world when men have dwindled into ignorance
and barbarism, and then there were other times when they have grown
in intelligence, developed in understanding, enlarged in spirit and
comprehension, approaching nearer to the condition and likeness of
their Father and God, and then losing faith, losing the love of God,
losing the light of the Spirit and returning again to semi-barbarism.
Then again, they have been restored, by the power and operation of
the Spirit of the Lord upon their minds, until they again reached a
degree of intelligence. We have reached a degree of intelligence in our
dispensation. Will this same degree of intelligence, that now exists
throughout the world, continue to exist? Yes; if the world continue
to abide in the light that has been shed abroad in the world by the
Father of light, with whom there is no variableness nor shadow of
turning. But let them deny God, let them deny truth, let them depart
from righteousness, let them begin again to wallow in wickedness
and transgression of the laws of God, and what will be the result?
They will degenerate; they will again recede possibly into absolute
barbarism, unless they repent, and the power of God will be again
restored to them and they be again lifted up by that light which shines
and is never dim, except to men who shut their hearts and eyes and ears
against it and will not receive it.

{33} I did not expect to enter into any lengthy discourse. I thank God
for my relationship and acquaintance with this noble, good mother. I
expect to be associated with her throughout all the ages to come, if
I can be as faithful as she has been. I desire to be, and that isn't
all--with the help of God, I intend to be faithful, as she has been
faithful, that in the end I may be worthy to dwell where she will
dwell, with the Prophet Joseph Smith, with her husband with whom she
was associated here in the flesh, with her son and her children, from
generation to generation. I expect to be associated with them in the
mansions that are prepared for the righteous, where God and Christ are,
where those shall be who believe in his name, who receive his work and
abide in his law! Oh! that I could be instrumental in the bands of the
Lord in bringing every loved soul unto him, for there are souls that
are still lacking, whom I love, and if it were possible, how I would
love to be instrumental in the band of the Lord in bringing those loved
souls to a knowledge of this truth, that they might receive of its
glory, benefits and blessings, in this life and in the life to come.
From my childhood, I have always tried to be a savior on Mount Zion, a
savior among men. I have that desire in my heart. I may not have been
very successful in my ambition to accomplish this work, but I have
desired it, and I still desire that I may be instrumental in helping to
spread this truth to the earth's remotest bounds and the testimony of
it to the children of men in every land. I know it is true. It appeals
to my judgment, to my desires, and to the aspirations of my soul; I
want my family; I want those the Lord has given to me; I want them
now; I want them forever! I want to be associated with them forever.
I do not want them to change their identity. I do not want them to be
somebody else. This idea of theosophy, which is gaining ground even
among so-called Christians, in these latter days, is a fallacy of the
deepest kind. It is absolutely repugnant {34} to the very soul of man
to think that a civilized, intelligent being might become a dog, a
cow, a cat; that he might be transformed into another shape, another
kind of being. It is absolutely repulsive and so opposed to the great
truth of God, that has been revealed from the beginning, that he is
from the beginning always the same, that he cannot change, and that
his children cannot change. They may change from worse to better; they
may change from evil to good, from unrighteousness to righteousness,
from humanity to immortality, from death to life everlasting. They
may progress in the manner in which God has progressed; they may grow
and advance, but their identity can never be changed, worlds without
end--remember that; God has revealed these principles, and I know they
are true. They assert their truth upon the intelligent mind and soul
of man. They embrace or embody that which the Lord has planted in our
hearts and souls to desire, and to give it unto us. They put us in the
way of receiving that which we most desire and most love, that which
is most necessary and essential to our happiness and exaltation. They
take of the things of God and give them to us, and they prepare us for
the future, for exaltation and for eternal happiness, a reward which
all the souls in the world desire, if they are correct in their lives
and thoughts. It is only the vicious and the truly wicked who do not
desire purity; they do not love purity and truth. I do not know whether
it is possible for any soul to become so debased as to lose all regard
for that which is pure and chaste, good and true and godlike. I believe
that there still lingers in the heart of the most vicious and wicked,
at times at least, a spark of that divinity that has been planted in
the souls of all the sons of God. Men may become so corrupt that they
do not have more than mere glimpses of that divine inspiration that
strives to lead them toward and to love good; but I do not believe
there is a soul in the world that has absolutely lost all conception
{35} and admiration of that which is good and pure, when he sees it.
It is hard to believe that a human being may become so depraved that
he has lost all desire that he might also be good and pure, if it were
possible; but many people have abandoned themselves to evil and have
come to the conclusion that there is no chance for them. While there is
life there is hope, and while there is repentance there is a chance for
forgiveness; and if there is forgiveness, there is a chance for growth
and development until we acquire the full knowledge of these principles
that will exalt and save us and prepare us to enter into the presence
of God the Father, who is the Father of our spirits, and who is the
Father in the flesh, of his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ, who joined
divine immortality with the mortal, welded the link between God and man
made it possible for mortal souls, on whom the sentence of death had
been placed, to acquire eternal life, through obedience to his laws.
Let us, therefore, seek the truth and walk in the light as Christ is in
the light, that we may have fellowship with him, and with each other,
that his blood may cleanse us from all sin.

May the Lord comfort my brother Heber, and I know he will. Brother
Heber does not feel that there is any death here. I don't think I
could weep for sorrow. I could give way to tears just now, but they
would not be tears of sorrow, of mourning, or of grief, for this good
soul. They would only express the love I have for her; they would only
indicate my feelings toward her, for the noble and pure example she
set before me and all who have known her. I could weep for joy in the
knowledge that I possess that she, in her spirit life and being, is
and will be associated with all those who have been endeared to her by
the persecutions, the experiences and the trials through which she has
had to pass in this world. With them she is rejoicing today, as one
born of death into life everlasting. She is not dead; she lives! What
greater proof do you want of that fact {36} than to see her lifeless
form? Who is she? This is her casket. This is her mortal tenement;
this is but the clay that enveloped the immortal, living Aunt Rachel,
the living spirit. The spirit has fled. Her spirit, the immortal part,
has departed from this tabernacle; hence, this tabernacle lies here
lifeless and ready to return to mother earth from whence it came, but
to be restored again, every element to be recalled and re-formed in its
perfect frame, when Aunt Rachel will come and take possession of it and
inherit it forever, just as Christ came and took up his body that was
not suffered to see corruption, and inherited it in its immortal state,
never to be separated again; so it will be with her.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 12, p. 591, June, 1909. Speech at the funeral services of
Rachel Grant, mother of President Heber J. Grant.

NO NEW PRINCIPLES IN THE GOSPEL. We have no new principle to advocate;
but we have come to preach the gospel of life and salvation, to testify
to the divinity of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, and of the divine
mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith, through whose instrumentality the
truth was restored in this dispensation.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21,
p. 98, December, 1917.

FOUNDATION OF TRUTH. We hear frequently of men who throw discredit on
the doctrine of Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, because some of
the principles, doctrines, and philosophy which he taught are said to
have been spoken before his day by heathen philosophers.

A variety of examples are sometimes quoted to show that the ideals
which have grown from the doctrines of Christ are a direct development
of what is found in the teachings of the Old Testament, particularly
in the Psalms and in the second part of Isaiah. But, on the other
hand, it is just as certain that these ideals receive a finish and an
enrichment, by the touch of the Savior, vastly beyond and above what
they possessed before, and also they are placed {37} on deeper and
firmer foundations. This, let it be said to begin with, is because they
were his before they were ever uttered by man.

Even in the five distinctive and characteristic topics generally
considered by commentators original in the teachings of Jesus, we find
little if anything new, except the enlargement. These are named as,
the Fatherhood of God, the Kingdom of God; subjects or members of the
Kingdom; the Messiah, the Holy Ghost; and the Trinity of God.

But the idea of the Fatherhood of God was not unknown either to the
Pagans or to Israel. Zeus, from the time of Homer, had borne the name
"father of gods and men." But, both in Jewish and Pagan literature,
the idea was superficial and meant little more than "originator" (Gen.
1:26); and in the old Jewish scripture God is more particularly called
the "Father of his people, Israel" (Deut. 14:1; Isaiah 63:16). But in
the teachings of Christ there is a fuller embodiment of revelation in
the word Father, and the application which he makes of the Fatherhood
of God invests his life with supreme tenderness and beauty. As an
example: In the old scripture, we are told, "Like as a father pitieth
his children, so the Lord pitieth them that fear him" (Psalm 103:13);
but by the interpretation of Jesus, the love of God as Father extends
beyond these limitations even to those who are unthankful and evil:
"But I say unto you, Love your enemies, bless them that curse you, do
good to them that hate you, and pray for them which despitefully use
you and persecute you; that ye may be the children of your Father which
is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the evil and on the
good, and sendeth rain on the just and on the unjust" (Matt. 5:45).
"But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping for nothing
again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the children of
the Highest; for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the evil" (Luke
6:35).

{38} And so with other doctrines of Christ; while perhaps not
new they are enriched by the addition of fuller, broader, more
loving conceptions of God and his purposes; in which compulsion
was eliminated, and lowly service, love, and self-sacrifice were
substituted and made the true forces of an acceptable life. Even the
answer to the lawyer's question, often called the eleventh commandment:
"Master, which is the great commandment in the law?" had been given to
the children of Israel (Lev. 19:19), over two thousand years before its
perfected meaning was impressed upon the learned Pharisee (Matt. 22:34,
40).

But what of all this? Are we therefore to discredit the teachings of
the Savior? Verily no. Let it be remembered that Christ was with the
Father from the beginning, that the gospel of truth and light existed
from the beginning and is from everlasting to everlasting. The Father,
Son and Holy Ghost, as one God, are the fountain of truth. From this
fountain all the ancient learned philosophers have received their
inspiration and wisdom--from it they have received all their knowledge.
If we find truth in broken fragments through the ages, it may be set
down as an incontrovertible fact that it originated at the fountain,
and was given to philosophers, inventors, patriots, reformers, and
prophets by the inspiration of God. It came from him through his Son
Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, in the first place, and from no other
source. It is eternal.

Christ, therefore, being the fountain of truth, is no imitator. He
taught the truth first; it was his before it was given to man. When he
came to the earth he not only proclaimed new thought, but repeated some
of the everlasting principles which had been heretofore only partly
understood and enunciated by the wisest of men. And in so doing he
enlarged in every instance upon the wisdom which they had originally
received from him, because of his superior abilities and wisdom and his
association with the Father and the {39} Holy Ghost. He did not imitate
men. They made known in their imperfect way what the inspiration of
Jesus Christ had taught them, for they obtained their enlightenment
first from him.

Christ taught the gospel to Adam, and made known his truths to Abraham
and the prophets. He was the inspirer of the ancient philosophers,
Pagan or Israelite, as well as of the great characters of modern times.
Columbus, in discovery; Washington, in the struggle for freedom;
Lincoln, in emancipation and union; Bacon, in philosophy; Franklin,
in statesmanship and diplomacy; Stephenson, in steam; Watts, in song;
Edison, in electricity, and Joseph Smith, in theology and religion,
found in Christ the source of their wisdom and the marvelous truths
which they advocated.

Calvin, Luther, Melanchthon, and all the reformers, were inspired in
thoughts, words, and actions, to accomplish what they did for the
amelioration, liberty and advancement of the human race. They paved the
way for the more perfect gospel of truth to come. Their inspiration,
as with that of the ancients, came from the Father, his Son Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the one true and living God. This may also
truthfully be said concerning the Revolutionary fathers of this nation,
and all who have in the ages past contributed to the progress of civil
and religious freedom. There is no light nor truth which did not come
to them first from him. Men are mere repeaters of what he has taught
them. He has voiced no thoughts originating with man. The teachings
of Jesus did not begin with his incarnation; for, like truth, he is
eternal. He not only inspired the ancients, from the beginning, but
when he came to earth he reiterated eternal, original truth, and added
gloriously to the revelations men had uttered. When he returned to the
Father he still took and does take an interest in his children and
people, by revealing to them new truths, and by inspiring their {40}
actions; and, as men grow in the knowledge of God, they shall become
more and more like him unto the perfect day, when his knowledge shall
cover the earth as the waters cover the deep.

It is folly, therefore, to discredit the Savior on the grounds that he
has uttered nothing new; for, with the Father and the Spirit, he is the
author of that which persists--the truth--that which has been, that
which is, and that which will continue forever.--_Improvement Era,_
Vol. 10, pp. 627-630, 1906-7.

ETERNITY OF THE SPIRIT OF MAN. Again, where are we going? We come here
and sojourn in the flesh a little season and then we pass away. Every
soul that is born into the world will die. There is not a soul that has
escaped death, except those upon whom God has passed, by the power of
his Spirit, that they should live in the flesh until the second coming
of the Son of Man; but they will eventually have to pass through the
ordeal called death; it may be in the twinkling of an eye, and without
pain or suffering; but they will pass through the change, because it
is an irrevocable edict of the Almighty. "In the day that thou eatest
thereof thou shalt surely die." This was the edict of the Almighty and
it pertains to Adam--that is, all the human race; for Adam is many,
and it means you and me and every soul that lives and that bears the
image of the Father. We shall all die. But is that the end of our
being? If we had an existence before we came here we certainly shall
continue that existence when we leave here. The spirit will continue
to exist as it did before, with the additional advantages derived from
having passed through this probation. It is absolutely necessary that
we should come to the earth and take upon us tabernacles; because if
we did not have tabernacles we could not be like God, or like Jesus
Christ. God has a tabernacle of flesh and bone. He is an organized
being just as we are who are now in the flesh. Jesus Christ {41} was
born of his mother, Mary. He had a fleshly tabernacle; he was crucified
on the cross, and his body was raised from the dead. He burst the bonds
of the grave and came forth to newness of life, a living soul, living
being, a man with a body, and with parts and with spirit--the spirit
and the body becoming a living and immortal soul. You and I have got
to do the same thing. We must go through the same ordeal in order
to attain to the glory and exaltation which God designed we should
enjoy with him in the eternal worlds. In other words, we must become
like him; peradventure to sit upon thrones, to have dominion, power
and eternal increase. God designed this in the beginning. We are the
children of God. He is an eternal being, without beginning of days or
end of years. He always was, he is, he always will be. We are precisely
in the same condition and under the same circumstances that God our
heavenly Father was when he was passing through this or a similar
ordeal. We are destined to come forth out of the grave as Jesus did,
and to obtain immortal bodies as he did--that is, that our tabernacles
are to become immortal as his became immortal, that the spirit and the
body may be joined together and become one living being, indivisible,
inseparable, eternal.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 33, pp. 130, 131.

PURPOSE OF THE ALMIGHTY UNCHANGEABLE. The purposes of the Almighty
are unchanged and unchangeable. His laws endure, and he is the
same yesterday, today and forever. His purposes will ripen and be
consummated and his designs be completed. Therefore, if we do not
conform to his will, obey his laws and yield to his requirements in
this world, we will be consigned to the "prison house," where we will
remain until we pay the debt to the uttermost farthing.--_Deseret
Weekly News,_ Vol. 24, 1875, p. 708.

{42}



CHAPTER III

REVELATION

VALUE OF THE SPIRIT OF REVELATION. The man who possesses the spirit of
revelation can realize whether he is a sinner, whether he is prone to
evil, whether he is magnifying his standing before the Lord, or not,
better than a man who has not the Spirit of the Lord in him, can he
not?--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, p. 7.

THE SPIRIT OF--INSPIRATION OF REVELATION--BY WHOM ENJOYED. And the
spirit of inspiration, the gift of revelation, does not belong to
one man solely; it is not a gift that pertains to the Presidency of
the Church and the Twelve apostles alone. It is not confined to the
presiding authorities of the Church, it belongs to every individual
member of the Church; and it is the right and privilege of every
man, every woman, and every child who has reached the years of
accountability, to enjoy the spirit of revelation, and to be possessed
of the spirit of inspiration in the discharge of their duties as
members of the Church. It is the privilege of every individual
member of the Church to have revelation for his own guidance, for
the direction of his life and conduct; and therefore I aver--and
I believe I may do so without any reasonable chance for it being
gainsaid or opposed that there is not another church in the world, or
an organization of religious people, who are so universally spiritual
in their lives, and who are so universally entitled to the gifts of
the Spirit of God as are the members of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. You are all entitled to revelation. It is your
privilege to have it revealed to you whether I am a servant of God or
a servant of men; whether I am in the discharge of my duty or not;
whether I, as a {43} presiding officer in the Church, am acting in
the discharge of my duty acceptable to you and the Lord. It is your
privilege to have revelation in regard to this, and to know the truth
yourselves. And it is my privilege to have revelation from God, as an
individual, for my own temporal guidance, and I repeat again that there
never was a time on the earth, since the Church was organized, when the
spirituality of the people of God was greater than it is today.--_Apr
C. R.,_ 1912, p. 5.

THE SPIRIT OF REVELATION ENJOYED BY ALL. I believe that every
individual in the Church has just as much right to enjoy the spirit
of revelation and the understanding from God which that spirit of
revelation gives him, for his own good, as the bishop has to enable
him to preside over his ward. Every man has the privilege to exercise
these gifts and these privileges in the conduct of his own affairs,
in bringing up his children in the way they should go, and in the
management of his farm, his flocks, his herds, and in the management of
his business, if he has business of other kinds to do; it is his right
to enjoy the spirit of revelation and of inspiration to do the right
thing, to be wise and prudent, just and good in everything that he
does. I know that this is a true principle, and I know that I know it,
too; and that is the thing that I would like the Latter-day Saints to
know.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 9, 10.

NEW REVELATION. So far as I know there is not an ordinance of the
Church now enjoyed or practiced that was not revealed to the Church
by the Prophet Joseph Smith. I know of no new doctrine that has been
revealed. Principles that were revealed to the Prophet Joseph have
grown and developed more fully and clearly to the understanding; but
we have received nothing new that I know of. Yet, if we should receive
something new, through the proper channels of the Church, we should be
as ready and willing to receive it as we were, or would be, to receive
the same at {44} the hands of the Prophet Joseph himself.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1900, p. 47.

WHEN TO EXPECT NEW REVELATION. We have nothing that is not in common
with the Latter-day Saints. We know nothing, and we will preach nothing
to the people except that which the Lord God has revealed, and we
advise and counsel those who are in authority, and whose duty and
business it is to teach and preach the principles of the gospel to the
world and to the Latter-day Saints, to confine their teachings and
their instructions to the word of God that has been revealed. There
is a great deal that has been revealed that has not yet been lived up
to, I assure you. There is a great deal yet remaining to be learned.
There is a great deal that is yet to be taught in the spirit of
instruction, and there is a great deal that has been revealed through
the Prophet Joseph and his associates that the people have not yet
received in their hearts, and have not yet become converted to as they
should. When we obey and are capable of observing the precepts of the
gospel and the laws of God and the requirements of heaven, which have
already been revealed, we will be far better off and nearer the goal
of perfection in wisdom, knowledge and power than we are today. When
that time comes, then there are other things still greater yet to be
revealed to the people of God. Until we do our duty, however, in that
which we have received, until we are faithful over the things that are
now committed into our hands, until we live our religion as we have it
now, as the Lord has given it to us, to add commandments, to add light
and intelligence to us over that which we have already received, which
we have not yet fully obeyed, would be to add condemnation upon our
heads. It is enough for us to live in the light of present inspiration
and present revelation and for each individual member of the Church
to keep the commandments of the Lord and labor in the Church as the
Spirit may give him and her guidance in the {45} performance of duty.
Every soul of us is entitled to inspiration from God to know what is
our duty and how we are to do it. We have not learned it yet, not all
of us, but we are in a fair way to learn. The Lord is still patient; he
is long-suffering; he is full of love and graciousness towards all, and
we are doing a little better all the time. I believe we are a little
more faithful in the performance of our duties than we have been in the
past; yet there is great room for improvement.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1917, p.
5.

HOW THE LORD REVEALS HIS PURPOSES CONCERNING THE CHURCH. And I know
this, that God has organized his Church in the earth, and I know
that when he designs or purposes to make any change in the matter of
governing or controlling or presiding over the affairs of his Church,
that he will make the change, and he will make it in such a way that
the whole people of the Church, who are doing right, will understand
and accept it. I know that the Lord will not raise up "Tom, Dick, or
Harry," here, there and everywhere, claiming to be Christ, or "one
mighty and strong," claiming to be inspired and called to do some
wonderful thing. The Lord will not deal with men in that way; that
while the organization of the Church exists, while quorums and councils
of the Priesthood are intact in the Church, the Lord will reveal his
purposes through them, and not through "Tom, Dick, or Harry." Put that
in your little note books now, and remember it; it is true.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1912, p. 10.

MODERN REVELATION IS NECESSARY. We are to understand, then, that God
does not, and will not further make known his will to men; that what he
has said suffices? His will to Moses and Isaiah and John is abundant
for modern followers of Christ? The Latter-day Saints take issue with
this doctrine, and pronounce it illogical inconsistent, and untrue, and
bear testimony to all the world that God lives and that he reveals his
will to men who believe in him and who obey his commandments, as much
in our day as at any {46} time in the history of nations. The canon of
scripture is not full. God has never revealed at any time that he would
cease to speak forever to men. If we are permitted to believe that he
has spoken, we must and do believe that he continues to speak, because
he is unchangeable.

His will to Abraham did not suffice for Moses, neither did his will
to Moses suffice for Isaiah. Why? Because their different missions
required different instructions; and logically, that is also true
of the prophets and people of today. A progressive world will never
discover all truth until its inhabitants become familiar with all the
knowledge of the Perfect One. How shall men become acquainted with the
knowledge of the Father? Only as he reveals it to them. Now if we are
permitted to believe that the Lord revealed himself to the ancients of
whose deeds we read in the Holy Scriptures, it seems to me that there
is no good reason for believing that it is not necessary that he should
reveal himself in this day to others who desire to be guided by his
Spirit and inspiration. Every new truth which grows into living action
in the lives of men is a revelation in itself from God, and without the
revelation of additional truth, men would not progress in this world,
but, left to themselves, would retrograde, being cut off from the light
and life of the great fountain of all intelligence, the Father of all.

What is revelation but the uncovering of new truths, by him who is the
Fountain of all Truth? To say that there is no need of new revelation,
is equivalent to saying that we have no need of new truths--a
ridiculous assertion.

Now, as to the usefulness of modern revelation, that has been referred
to above, in the brief treatment of its need, and it is no sign
that revelation is useless because it is not proper that it should
be accepted in the courts. "Render unto Caesar the things that are
Caesar's, and unto God the things that are God's." Revelation given
for the personal knowledge or guidance of any person should not be
given {47} to the public, either in a civil or religious capacity; but
because it might be (and in such cases is) considered improper for
public use, it is no sign that even such revelation is useless to the
person for whom it is intended. It might be said in passing, however,
that the revelation which the ministers were so troubled about, turned
out to be correct and in conformity with the evidence, and the decision
of the court and jury.

Our testimony is that God lives, and that he speaks by his power to men
who seek him and believe in him, thus making known his will to them in
matters that pertain, not only to his true Church, but in matters that
pertain to each individual who seeks him.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5,
p. 805.

THEORY AND DIVINE REVELATION. Our young people are diligent students.
They reach out after truth and knowledge with commendable zeal, and in
so doing they must necessarily adopt for temporary use, many theories
of men. As long, however, as they recognize them as scaffolding useful
for research purposes, there can be no special harm in them. It is when
these theories are settled upon as basic truth that trouble appears,
and the searcher then stands in grave danger of being led hopelessly
from the right way.

There are so many demonstrated, practical, material truths, so many
spiritual certainties, with which the youth of Zion should become
familiar, that it appears a waste of time and means, and detrimental
to faith and religion to enter too extensively into the undemonstrated
theories of men on philosophies relating to the origin of life, or
the methods adopted by an Allwise Creator in peopling the earth with
the bodies of men, birds and beasts. Let us rather turn our abilities
to the practical analysis of the soil, the study of the elements, the
productions of the earth, the invention of useful machinery, the social
welfare of the race, and its material amelioration; and for the rest
cultivate an abiding {48} faith in the revealed word of God and the
saving principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ, which give joy in this
world and in the world to come eternal life and salvation.

Philosophic theories of life have their place and use, but it is not
in the classes of the Church schools, and particularly are they out of
place here or anywhere else, when they seek to supplant the revelations
of God. The ordinary student cannot delve into these subjects deep
enough to make them of any practical use to him, and a smattering of
knowledge in this line only tends to upset his simple faith in the
gospel, which is of more value to him in life than all the learning of
the world without it.

The religion of the Latter-day Saints is not hostile to any truth, nor
to scientific search for truth. "That which is demonstrated, we accept
with joy," said the First Presidency in their Christmas greeting to
the Saints, "but vain philosophy, human theory and mere speculations
of men we do not accept, nor do we adopt anything contrary to divine
revelation or to good common sense, but everything that tends to right
conduct, that harmonizes with sound morality and increases faith in
Deity, finds favor with us, no matter where it may be found."

A good motto for young people to adopt, who are determined to delve
into philosophic theories, is to search all things, but be careful
to hold on only to that which is true. The truth persists, but the
theories of philosophers change and are overthrown. What men use today
as a scaffolding for scientific purposes from which to reach out into
the unknown for truth, may be torn down tomorrow, having served its
purpose; but faith is an eternal principle through which the humble
believer may secure everlasting solace. It is the only way to find God.

Science and philosophy through all the ages have undergone change
after change. Scarcely a century has passed but they have introduced
new theories of science and philosophy, {49} that supersede the old
traditions and the old faith and the old doctrines entertained by
philosophers and scientists. These things may undergo continuous
changes, but the word of God is always true, is always right. The
principles of the gospel are always true, the principles of faith
in God, repentance from sin, baptism for the remission of sins by
authority of God, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the Holy
Ghost--these principles are always true, and are always absolutely
necessary for the salvation of the children of men, no matter who
they are and where they are. No other name under heaven is given
but that of Jesus Christ, by which you can be saved or exalted in
the kingdom of God. Not only has God declared them, not only has
Christ declared these principles, by his voice to his disciples, from
generation to generation, in the old time, but in these latter days,
they have taken up the same testimony and declared these things to the
world. They are true today as they were then, and we must obey these
things.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14, p. 548.

REVELATION AND LEGAL EVIDENCE. Recently a man charged with the murder
of another man was examined before a committing magistrate in Salt Lake
City. The father-in-law of the murdered man, during the examination
on the part of the State, related a conversation had between himself
and the accused soon after the commission of the crime. During the
conversation, according to newspaper report, the father-in-law of
the murdered man laid the crime at the door of the accused. In the
cross-examination the attorney for the defendant pressed the witness as
to how he knew that the accused was guilty of the crime. The reply, as
given in the press, was, because God had revealed it to him. It does
not appear from the further proceedings in the case that the testimony
was excepted to or withdrawn, or that the magistrate informed the
witness that such evidence was incompetent and could not be received.
The statement {50} gave rise to comment in the press and has been the
subject of discourse from the pulpit. Of course, every person must know
that such evidence is not admissible in a court of law, and if it had
been in a trial before a jury it would have been the duty of the judge
to order the testimony stricken out, and in the charge to the jury,
they would have been warned to disregard it altogether. In view of the
probability that there are those who may persist in the association
of such evidence with the religious body of which the witness is a
member, it may be proper to say, without discrediting in the least the
witness' conviction of the revelation he had received, that no member
of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints should, for one
moment, regard such testimony as admissible in a court of law, and
to make the case perfectly clear it may be further stated that such
evidence would not be permissible even in a Church court, where rules
of evidence, though not so technical, are founded largely upon the same
principles that govern the rules of evidence in a court of law. Any
attempt, therefore, to make it appear that such evidence is in keeping
with the tenets of the "Mormon" faith is wholly unjustified.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ p. 114, Feb. 15, 1902, Vol. 37.

PROPER CHANNELS FOR REVELATION. It has sometimes been sorrowful to see
respected members of the Church, men who should know better, allow
themselves to become the tools of seductive spirits. Such men seem,
for the time at least, to lose sight of the fact that the Lord has
established on earth the Priesthood in its fulness; and that by direct
revelation and commandment from heaven; that he has instituted an
order or government that is beyond the capacity, and that is superior
to the wisdom and learning and understanding of man, so far, indeed,
that it seems impossible for the human mind, unaided by the Spirit of
God, to comprehend the beauties, powers, and character of the Holy
Priesthood. It seems difficult for men to comprehend the workings {51}
of the priesthood, its legitimate authority, its scope and power; and
yet by the light of the Spirit it is easily comprehended, but not
understanding it, men are easily deceived by seductive spirits that are
abroad in the world. They are led to believe that something is wrong,
and the next thing that transpires, they find themselves believing that
they are chosen specially to set things right. It is very unfortunate
for a man to be taken in this snare; for be it understood by the
Latter-day Saints that as long as the servants of God are living pure
lives, are honoring the priesthood conferred upon them, and endeavoring
to the best of their knowledge to magnify their offices and callings,
to which they have been duly chosen by the voice of the people and
the priesthood, and sanctioned by the approval of God, so long as the
Lord has any communication to make to the children of men, or any
instructions to impart to his Church, he will make such communication
through the legally appointed channel of the priesthood; he will never
go outside of it, as long, at least, as the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints exists in its present form on the earth.

It is not the business of any individual to rise up as a revelator,
as a prophet, as a seer, as an inspired man, to give revelation for
the guidance of the Church, or to assume to dictate to the presiding
authorities of the Church in any part of the world, much less in the
midst of Zion, where the organizations of the priesthood are about
perfect, where everything is complete, even to the organization
of a branch. It is the right of individuals to be inspired and
to receive manifestations of the Holy Spirit for their personal
guidance to strengthen their faith, and to encourage them in works
of righteousness, in being faithful and observing and keeping the
commandments which God has given unto them; it is the privilege of
every man and woman to receive revelation to this end, but not further.
The moment an individual rises up assuming the right to {52} control
and to dictate, or to sit in judgment on his brethren, especially upon
those who preside, he should be promptly checked, or discord, division
and confusion will be the result. Every man and woman in this Church
should know better than to yield to such a spirit; the moment that such
a feeling presents itself to them they should rebuke it, as it is in
direct antagonism to the order of the priesthood, and to the spirit and
genius of this work. We can accept nothing as authoritative but that
which comes directly through the appointed channel, the constituted
organizations of the priesthood, which is the channel that God has
appointed through which to make known his mind and will to the world.

Through Joseph, then, the Lord revealed himself to the world, and
through him he chose the first elders of the Church--men who were
honest in their hearts; men who he knew would receive the word, and
labor in connection with Joseph in this great, important undertaking;
and all that have been ordained to the priesthood, and all that have
been appointed to any position whatever in this Church have received
their authority and commission through this channel, appointed of
God, with Joseph at the head. This is the order, and it could not be
otherwise. God will not raise up another prophet and another people to
do the work that we have been appointed to do. He will never ignore
those who have stood firm and true from the commencement, as it were,
of this work, and who are still firm and faithful, inasmuch as they
continue faithful to their trust. There is no question in my mind of
their ever proving themselves unfaithful, as a body, for if any of
them were to become unworthy in his sight, he would remove them out of
their place and call others from the ranks to fill their positions.
And thus his priesthood will ever be found to be composed of the right
men for the place, of men whose backs will be fitted for the burden,
men through whom he can work and regulate {53} the affairs of his
Church according to the counsels of his own will. And the moment that
individuals look to any other source, that moment they throw themselves
open to the seductive influences of Satan, and render themselves liable
to become servants of the devil; they lose sight of the true order
through which the blessings of the priesthood are to be enjoyed; they
step outside of the pale of the kingdom of God, and are on dangerous
ground. Whenever you see a man rise up claiming to have received direct
revelation from the Lord to the Church, independent of the order and
channel of the priesthood, you may set him down as an impostor. God
has not called you to go out to the world to be taught, or to receive
revelations through apostates or strangers; but he has called and
ordained you and sent you forth to teach and lead people in the paths
of righteousness and salvation.

Now, how should it be? I will tell you. In the first place every person
should know that the gospel is true, as this is every one's privilege
who is baptized and receives the Holy Ghost. A man may be grieved in
his feelings because of some difficulty between himself and President
Taylor, or Cannon, or myself; he may have feelings in his heart which
lead him to think that he could not sustain us in his faith and
prayers; but if this should be the case, what is the course for him to
pursue? He should say in his heart, "God has established his kingdom,
and his priesthood is upon the earth; and notwithstanding my dislike
for certain men, I know that the gospel is true, and that God is with
his people; and that if I will do my duty and keep his commandments,
the clouds will roll by, and the mists will disappear, the Spirit of
the Lord will come more fully to my relief, and by and by I will be
able to see--if I am in error, wherein I erred, and then I will repent
of it, for I know that every wrong thing will yet be made right." I
think all men should feel that way.

Never is there but one appointed at a time to hold the {54} keys of
the kingdom of God pertaining to the earth. While Christ remained on
the earth he held them; but when he departed, he committed them to
Peter, he being the president or chief of the apostles; and it was
his right to direct and to receive revelation for the Church, and
to give counsel to all the brethren. After Satan and wicked men had
prevailed against the Church, crucified the Savior and killed the
apostles, the keys of the kingdom were taken from the earth. John the
Revelator describes it most clearly. And from that time until Joseph
Smith was called by the voice of the Almighty, and ordained to hold
those keys, no man held them upon the earth that we know of. It is
true the Lord did appoint other Twelve upon this continent, and his
Church flourished and prospered in this land for many years, but the
Lord declared that Peter, James and John, and the Twelve that walked
with him at Jerusalem, held the presidency over them. God may reveal
himself to different nations, and establish among them the same gospel
and ordinances as he did anciently, if necessity require, but if these
nations should be joined together there would be one head, and all the
rest would be subordinate. So that from the time that the keys of this
priesthood were taken from the earth until they were received by Joseph
Smith, no man ever possessed that priesthood, nor the keys thereof,
with authority to build up the Zion of God, and prepare a church or
people for the second coming of Christ, "as a bride is adorned for the
bridegroom," unless it may have been among the lost tribes, yet of this
we have no knowledge, but if so they would receive those keys necessary
to administer in the ordinances of the gospel for their salvation.
We know not of their existence or the condition in which they are
placed. The gospel that is given to them is suited to their needs and
conditions, and is for their salvation, not ours; and yet, it will be
the same gospel. And God will not call one from them to give to us the
priesthood, or to give to us the keys and {55} blessings, or to point
out the organizations of the kingdom of God, because he has established
that priesthood here, and we have it. If he has any communication to
make to us he will send his messengers to us. And in this way he will
deliver his law and give his mind and will to the people. He will do it
through the ordained channels of the priesthood which he acknowledges
and which he has established in the earth. He will go nowhere else to
do it, neither will he send us to them, unless they should be without
the priesthood and it becomes necessary to take the blessings of the
gospel to them, and I presume that will be the case.

When Joseph received the keys of the priesthood, he alone on the earth
held them; that is, he was the first, he stood at the head. It was
promised that he should not lose them nor be removed out of his place,
as long as he was faithful. And when he died, President Young was
chosen by the voice of the people, and sanctioned by the voice of God.
He held the priesthood which was after the order of the Son of God,
with the keys which pertain to the presidency of that priesthood upon
earth. He received it from the hands of Joseph, directly from him or
by his authority; and he held it until his death. When he died, that
mantle fell upon John Taylor, and while he lives he will hold that
authority, inasmuch as he is faithful. So it was with President Brigham
Young; he held it on condition of his faithfulness. If any man in that
position should become unfaithful, God would remove him out of his
place. I testify in the name of Israel's God that he will not suffer
the head of the Church, whom he has chosen to stand at the head, to
transgress his laws and apostatize; the moment he should take a course
that would in time lead to it, God would take him away. Why? Because
to suffer a wicked man to occupy that position would be to allow, as
it were, the fountain to become corrupted, which is something he will
never permit.

{56} The moment a man says he will not submit to the legally
constituted authority of the Church, whether it be the teachers, the
bishopric, the high council, his quorum, or the First Presidency,
and in his heart confirms it and carries it out, that moment he cuts
himself off from the privileges and blessings of the priesthood and
Church, and severs himself from the people of God, for he ignores the
authority that the Lord has instituted in his Church. These are the men
that generally get crotchets in their heads, that get inspiration (from
beneath), and that are often so desirous to guide the Church, and to
sit in judgment upon the priesthood. The only safe way for us to do,
as individuals, is to live so humbly, so righteously and so faithfully
before God that we may possess his Spirit to that extent that we shall
be able to judge righteously, and discern between truth and error,
between right and wrong; and then we shall know when a decision is
rendered against us that in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred, we
are in error, and that the decision is right; and although we may, at
the time, not be fully able to see and feel its justness, yet will be
constrained to say that "inasmuch as there are sixteen chances against
one for me to be wrong, I will gracefully and, humbly submit." The pith
of the matter is: the Lord has established his Church, organized his
priesthood, and conferred authority upon certain individuals, councils
and quorums, and it is the duty of the people of God to live so that
they shall know that these are acceptable unto him. If we begin to
cut off this one and that one, and set their authority aside, we may
just as well at once set God aside, and say that he has no right to
dictate.--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 24, pp. 187-194, 1884, Ogden,
June 21, 1883.

THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS. I say to my brethren that the book of
Doctrine and Covenants contains some of the most glorious principles
ever revealed to the world, some that have been revealed in greater
fulness than they were {57} ever revealed before to the world; and
this, in fulfilment of the promise of the ancient prophets that in the
latter times the Lord would reveal things to the world that had been
kept bidden from the foundation thereof; and the Lord has revealed them
through the Prophet Joseph Smith.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 9.

HOW TO READ THE BIBLE. That which characterizes above all else the
inspiration and divinity of the Scriptures is the spirit in which
they are written and the spiritual wealth they convey to those who
faithfully and conscientiously read them. Our attitude, therefore,
toward the Scriptures should be in harmony with the purposes for
which they were written. They are intended to enlarge man's spiritual
endowments and to reveal and intensify the bond of relationship between
him and his God. The Bible, as all other books of Holy Writ, to be
appreciated must be studied by those spiritually inclined and who are
in quest of spiritual truths.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 47, p. 204,
April, 1912.

PERSECUTION FOLLOWS REVELATION. I do not believe there ever was a
people who were guided by revelation, or acknowledged of the Lord as
his people, who were not hated and persecuted by the wicked and the
corrupt, and perhaps no people were ever more persecuted than this
people would be if it were in the power of the enemy today to persecute
us as it was in the power of Nero and the Romans to persecute the
Saints in their day. There never was a time when it was more fixed and
determined in the heart of the wicked to fight against and destroy the
kingdom from the earth than now, and their failure will be due only
to the impossibility of the task they have undertaken. And this is an
evidence to everyone that God's priesthood is here, that many of the
Saints are magnifying their calling and honoring the priesthood and
also the Lord, both with their lives and with their substance, which
are his.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 24, p. 708, 1875.

{58}



CHAPTER IV

FREE AGENCY

THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS A FREE PEOPLE. We will now present before the
conference the names of the general authorities of the Church, with
the earnest desire that all the members of the Church present, who
by reason of their good standing before the Lord are entitled to the
privilege, will express their will according to the God-given agency
that every man in the world enjoys, and which is not lessened, but
rather increased, in all those who have made covenant with God by
sacrifice and through obedience to the principles of the gospel. The
freedom of the Latter-day Saints has never been curtailed nor lessened
one whit by their becoming members of the Church of Christ. Rather
has it been enlarged. There are no freer people upon the face of the
earth today than the Latter-day Saints. They are bound to the Church
by no ties or strings, but by their own conviction of the truth. And
whenever a man makes up his mind that he has had enough of what is
called "Mormonism," all he has to do is to make it known, and we will
sever the bond that unites him with the body and let him go his own
way, only bearing toward him the feeling of sympathy and true brotherly
kindness, and wishing him still the mercies of God. We will cry,
"Father, have mercy upon him," because he knows not what he is doing.
For when a man denies the truth, when he departs from the right way,
when he rejects the right of God to counsel in the affairs of men, he
is either ignorant or wilfully wicked, and it only excites our pity
for him. As the Savior cried upon the cross, so we will cry in the
same spirit, Father, forgive him; have mercy upon him; for he knows
not what he does. {59} Therefore, we expect only those to vote at this
time who are members of the Church in good standing, but all such we do
expect to vote, according to their own free will, whether it be yea or
nay. However, we wish it distinctly understood that no question upon
these matters will be discussed in this conference; for this is not
the place to discuss questions of difference or of feeling that we may
possess one towards another. Still we can manifest our approval or our
disapproval by the uplifted hand; and if there are any disapprovals,
we will have them heard and adjusted later on, but not here.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1903, p. 84.

THE USE OF FREEDOM AND HUMAN JUDGMENT. I think that in the realms of
liberty, and the exercise of human judgment all men should exercise
extreme caution, that they do not change nor abolish those things
which God has willed and has inspired to be done. It has been in this
realm of freedom, and the exercise of human judgment that most of the
evils that have occurred in the world have been done--the martyrdom
of Saints, the crucifixion of the Son of God himself, and much of the
apostasy and departure from the work of righteousness, and from the
laws of God, have occurred in this realm of freedom and the exercise
of human judgment. God in his boundless wisdom and gracious mercy has
provided means, and has shown the way to the children of men whereby,
even in the realms of freedom and the exercise of their own judgment,
they may individually go unto God in faith and prayer, and find out
what should guide and direct their human judgment and wisdom; and I do
not want the Latter-day Saints to forget that this is their privilege.
I would rather that they should seek God for a counselor and guide,
than to follow the wild harangues of political leaders, or leaders of
any other cult.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 41-42.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS SHOULD EXERCISE FREE AGENCY. We desire that the
Latter-day Saints will exercise the liberty {60} wherewith they have
been made free by the gospel of Jesus Christ; for they are entitled
to know the right from the wrong, to see the truth and draw the
line between it and error; and it is their privilege to judge for
themselves and to act upon their own free agency with regard to their
choice as to sustaining or otherwise those who should exercise the
presiding functions among them. We desire the Latter-day Saints at this
conference to exercise their prerogative, which is, to vote as the
Spirit of the Lord prompts them on the measures and the men that may be
presented unto them.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 73.

HOW TO OBTAIN BLESSINGS OF GOD. There are blessings which pertain to
the gospel of Jesus Christ and to the world to come, which cannot be
secured by personal influence, nor be bought with money, and which
no man by his own intelligence or wisdom can obtain except through
compliance with certain ordinances, laws and commandments which
have been given. And it is well, in my judgment, for the Latter-day
Saints to continue to bear in mind that the inestimable blessings of
the gospel have been bestowed upon them through their faith, that a
remission of sins has been obtained by baptism and repentance, and that
it is only through continuing faithful that they can retain the gifts
and blessings which pertain to eternal life. There are many blessings,
however, which are common to the human family, which all enjoy, without
regard to their moral status or religious convictions. God has given
to all men an agency and has granted to us the privilege to serve him
or serve him not, to do that which is right or that which is wrong,
and this privilege is given to all men irrespective of creed, color or
condition. The wealthy have this agency, the poor have this agency,
and no man is deprived by any power of God from exercising it in the
fullest and in the freest manner. This agency has been given to all.
This is a blessing that God has bestowed upon the world of mankind,
upon all {61} his children alike. But he will hold us strictly to an
account for the use that we make of this agency, and as it was said
of Cain, so it will be said of us; "If thou doest well, shalt thou
not be accepted? and if thou doest not well, sin lieth at the door."
There are, however, certain blessings which God bestows upon the
children of men only upon the condition of the rightful exercise of
this agency. For instance, no man can obtain a remission of his sins
but by repentance, and baptism by one having authority. If we would
be free from sin, from its effects, from its power, we must obey this
law which God has revealed, or we never can obtain a remission of
sins. Therefore, while God has bestowed upon all men, irrespective
of condition, this agency to choose good or evil, he has not and
will not bestow upon the children of men a remission of sins but by
their obedience to law. Therefore, the whole world lies in sin and is
under condemnation, inasmuch as light has come unto the world and men
will not place themselves in a proper position before the Lord. And
this condemnation rests with tenfold force upon all who have yielded
obedience to this law, and have once received a remission of their
sins, but have returned unto sin, and have forgotten or disregarded the
covenants they made in the waters of baptism. All men are blessed with
the strength of their bodies, with the use of their minds, and with the
right to exercise the faculties with which they are endowed in a way
that seemeth good to their sight, without regard to religion. But God
has not and will not suffer the gift of the Holy Ghost to be bestowed
upon any man or woman, except through compliance with the laws of God.
Therefore, no man can obtain a remission of sins; no man can obtain the
gift of the Holy Ghost; no man can obtain the revelations of God; no
man can obtain the priesthood, and the rights, powers and privileges
thereof; no man can become an heir of God and a joint heir with Jesus
Christ, except through compliance with the requirements of heaven.
These are universal {62} blessings, they are great and inestimable
privileges which pertain to the gospel and to the plan of life and
salvation, which are open and free to all on certain conditions, but
which no persons beneath the heavens can enjoy, but through walking
in the channel that God has marked out by which they can obtain them.
And these privileges and blessings when obtained may be forfeited, and
perhaps lost for all eternity, unless we continue steadfast in the
course that is marked out for us to pursue. It is well, in my judgment,
that the Latter-day Saints do not lose sight of the great privilege
that has been bestowed upon them. No man can become a citizen of the
kingdom of God but by entering in at the door; there are thousands
and tens of thousands, aye, millions of people who will never become
citizens of the kingdom of God in this world, because they fail to
exercise the agency and the power that have been given to them, in the
right direction. Nevertheless, they enjoy many of the blessings that
are bestowed upon the world in common. The sun shines upon the evil
and the good; but the Holy Ghost descends only upon the righteous and
upon those who are forgiven of their sins. The rain descends upon the
evil and upon the good; but the rights of the priesthood are conferred,
and the doctrine of the Priesthood distils as the dews of heaven
upon the souls of those only who receive it in God's own appointed
way. The favor of heaven, the acknowledgment of the Almighty of his
children upon the earth as his sons and his daughters, can only be
secured through obedience to the laws which he has revealed. Riches,
or the wealth of the world, cannot purchase these things. Simon Magus
desired to purchase the power to bestow the Holy Ghost, but Peter said
unto him, "Thy money perish with thee." These blessings, powers and
privileges are not to be purchased except by the atonement of Christ;
they are not to be obtained by personal influence, wealth, position or
power, or in any other way except the {63} direct way in which God has
decreed that they should be obtained. Now, so long as the Latter-day
Saints are content to obey the commandments of God, to appreciate the
privileges and blessings which they enjoy in the Church, and will use
their time, their substance, in honor to the name of God, to build up
Zion, and to establish truth and righteousness in the earth, so long
our heavenly Father is bound by his oath and covenant to protect them
from every opposing foe, and to help them to overcome every obstacle
that can possibly be arrayed against them, or thrown in their pathway;
but the moment a community begin to be wrapt up in themselves, become
selfish, become engrossed in the temporalities of life, and put their
faith in riches, that moment the power of God begins to withdraw from
them, and if they repent not the Holy Spirit will depart from them
entirely, and they will be left to themselves. That which was given
them will be taken away, they will lose that which they had, for they
will not be worthy of it. God is just, as well as merciful, and we need
not expect favors at the hand of the Almighty except as we merit them,
at least in the honest desires of our hearts; and the desire and intent
will not always avail unless our acts correspond. For we are engaged
in a literal work, a reality; and we must practice as well as profess.
We must be what God requires us to be, or else we are not his people,
nor the Zion which he designs to gather together and to build up in the
latter days upon the earth.--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 24, 1884,
pp. 173-178.

{64}



CHAPTER V

GOD AND MAN

GOD HAS DIRECTED HIS LATTER-DAY WORK. It has not been by the wisdom
of man that this people have been directed in their course until the
present; it has been by the wisdom of him who is above man, whose
knowledge is greater than that of man, and whose power is above the
power of man; for it is unto God, our Father, we are indebted for the
mercies we have enjoyed and for the present prosperous condition of
the people of God throughout this intermountain region and throughout
the world. The hand of the Lord may not be visible to all. There may
be many who cannot discern the workings of God's will in the progress
and development of this great latter-day work, but there are those who
see in every hour and in every moment of the existence of the Church,
from its beginning until now, the overruling, almighty hand of him who
sent his Only Begotten Son to the world to become a sacrifice for the
sin of the world, that as he was lifted up so he, by reason of his
righteousness and power and the sacrifice which he has made, might lift
up unto God all the children of men who would hearken to his voice,
receive his message, and obey his law.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 2.

A PERSONAL KNOWLEDGE OF GOD. We are not dependent for this upon the
written word, nor upon the knowledge possessed by the ancient prophets
and apostles. We depend only upon God as he reveals himself today and
administers unto men by the power of his Holy Spirit. And all men in
the world, not only the Latter-day Saints, but those who have never
embraced the gospel, have the same privilege that we have, if they will
take the course which God {65} has marked out. It is their privilege to
come to the knowledge of this truth and to understand these things for
themselves. We have derived this knowledge from the Lord, not from man.
Man cannot give this knowledge. I may tell you what I know but that
is not knowledge to you. If I have learned something through prayer,
supplication, and perseverance in seeking to know the truth, and I tell
it to you, it will not be knowledge unto you. I can tell you how you
obtain it, but I cannot give it to you. If we receive this knowledge,
it must come from the Lord. He can touch your understanding and your
spirits, so that you shall comprehend perfectly and not be mistaken.
But I cannot do that. You can obtain this knowledge through repentance,
humility, and seeking the Lord with full purpose of heart until you
find him. He is not afar off. It is not difficult to approach him, if
we will only do it with a broken heart and a contrite spirit, as did
Nephi of old. This was the way in which Joseph Smith, in his boyhood,
approached him. He went into the woods, knelt down, and in humility
he sought earnestly to know which church was acceptable to God. He
received an answer to his prayer which he offered from the depths of
his heart, and he received it in a way that he did not expect.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1899, p. 71.

GOD SPEAKS TO THE HONEST IN HEART. Everywhere the Spirit of the Lord
whispers to the honest in heart who are faithful, and gives to them the
assurance that his hand is stretched out continually over his people;
that, as in the past, he has preserved them and delivered them out
of the hands of their enemies, so in the future he will continue to
preserve and deliver them, and he will make the wrath of the wicked to
praise him and to accomplish the more speedily his purposes. We have
every evidence to convince us that the work of the Lord is a reality, a
living, active, progressive work in the earth.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1905, p.
5.

GOD CONSTANTLY MINDFUL OF US. I desire to express {66} to you, my
brethren and sisters, who are here today, my firm and fixed conviction
that God, the eternal Father, is constantly mindful of you. He is
mindful of his people throughout all this land, and he will reward you
according to your faithfulness in observing the laws of righteousness
and of truth. No man need fear in his heart when he is conscious of
having lived up to the principles of truth and righteousness as God
has required it at his hands, according to his best knowledge and
understanding.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 2.

GOD'S WILL TO EXALT MEN. We believe that God's will is to exalt men;
that the liberty that comes through obedience to the gospel of Jesus
Christ is the greatest measure of liberty that can come to man. There
is no liberty that men enjoy or pretend to enjoy in the world that
is not founded in the will and in the law of God, and that does not
have truth for its underlying principle and foundation. It is error
that makes bondsmen. It is untruth that degrades mankind. It is error
and the lack of knowledge of God's laws and God's will that leaves
men in the world on a par with the brute creation; for they have no
higher instincts, no higher principle, no higher incentive, no higher
aspiration, than the brute world, if they have not some inspiration
that comes from a higher source than man himself.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904,
p. 4.

GOD'S RIGHT TO RULE IN THE WORLD. I believe in God's law. I believe
that it is his right to rule in the world. I believe that no man has
or should have any valid objection in his mind to the government of
God, and the rule of Jesus Christ, in the earth. Let us suppose, for
a moment, that Christ were here and that he was bearing rule in the
world. Who would come under his condemnation? Who would be subject
to his chastening word? Who would be in disharmony or unfellowship
with God? Would the righteous man? Would the virtuous man? The pure
and virtuous woman? The pure and honest in heart? The upright? {67}
The straightforward? Those who do the will of heaven? Would they be
in rebellion to Christ's rule, if he were to come here to rule? No.
They would welcome the rule and reign of Jesus Christ in the earth.
They would welcome his law and acknowledge his sovereignty, they would
hasten to rally to his standard and to uphold the purpose and the
perfection of his laws and of his righteousness. Who would, then, be
recreant to the rule of Christ? The whoremonger, the adulterer, the
liar, the sorcerer, he who bears false witness against his neighbor,
he who seeks to take advantage of his brother, and who would overcome
and destroy him for his own worldly gain or profit; the murderer, the
despiser of that which is good, the unbeliever in the eternities that
lie before us, the atheist, perhaps, although I think that he would
not be so far from Christ as some who profess to be teachers of his
doctrines and advocates of his laws. It would be the rebellious, the
wicked, those who would oppress their neighbors and enslave them if
they could. Such as these would be the people who would not welcome
the reign of Jesus Christ. Are there any who profess to be Latter-day
Saints in this class, and would fear to have Christ reign and
rule?--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 4.

THE LESSON IN NATURAL CALAMITIES. There are, in the great world
of mankind, much social and civil unrighteousness, religious
unfaithfulness, and great insensibility to the majesty, power, and
purpose of our eternal Father and God. In order, therefore, that he may
bring the sense of himself and his purposes home to the minds of men,
his intervention and interposition in nature and in men's affairs, are
demanded. His aims will be accomplished even if men must be overwhelmed
with the convulsions of nature to bring them to an understanding and
realization on of his designs. As long as conditions remain as they are
in the world, none is exempt from these visitations.

The Latter-day Saints, though they themselves tremble {68} because
of their own wickedness and sins, believe that great judgments are
coming upon the world because of iniquity; they firmly believe in the
statements of the Holy Scriptures, that calamities will befall the
nations as signs of the coming of Christ to judgment. They believe that
God rules in the fire, the earthquake, the tidal wave, the volcanic
eruption, and the storm. Him they recognize as the Master and Ruler of
nature and her laws, and freely acknowledge his hand in all things. We
believe that his judgments are poured out to bring mankind to a sense
of his power and his purposes, that they may repent of their sins
and prepare themselves for the second coming of Christ to reign in
righteousness upon the earth.

We firmly believe that Zion--which is the pure in heart--shall escape,
if she observes to do all things whatsoever God has commanded; but, in
the opposite event, even Zion shall be visited "with sore affliction,
with pestilence, with plague, with sword, with vengeance, and with
devouring fire" (Doctrine and Covenants 97:26). All this that her
people may be taught to walk in the light of truth and in the way of
the God of their salvation.

We believe that these severe, natural calamities are visited upon men
by the Lord for the good of his children, to quicken their devotion to
others, and to bring out their better natures, that they may love and
serve him. We believe, further, that they are the heralds and tokens
of his final judgment, and the schoolmasters to teach the people to
prepare themselves by righteous living for the coming of the Savior
to reign upon the earth, when every knee shall bow and every tongue
confess that Jesus is the Christ.

If these lessons are impressed upon us and upon the people of
our country, the anguish, and the loss of life and toil, sad,
great and horrifying as they were, will not have been endured in
vain.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 9, 1905-6, pp. 651-654.

{69} EXTENT OF GOD'S POWER. I do not believe in the doctrine held by
some that God is only a Spirit and that he is of such a nature that
he fills the immensity of space, and is everywhere present in person,
or without person, for I can not conceive it possible that God could
be a person, if he filled the immensity of space and was everywhere
present at the same time. It is unreasonable, a physical, a theological
inconsistency, to imagine that even God the eternal Father would be in
two places, as an individual, at the same moment. It is impossible. But
his power extends throughout the immensity of space. His power extends
to all his creations, and his knowledge comprehends them all, and he
governs them all and he knows all.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1916, p. 4.

BEWARE OF LIMITING GOD. Beware of men who come to you with heresies of
this kind, who would make you to think or feel that the Lord Almighty,
who made heaven and earth and created all things, is limited in his
dominion over earthly things to the capacities of mortal men.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1914, p. 4.

MISFORTUNE AND EVIL NOT ATTRIBUTABLE TO THE WILL OF GOD. We have it
enunciated in the revelations to Joseph the Prophet, in the Book of
Doctrine and Covenants, that the Lord is greatly displeased only with
those who do not confess or acknowledge "his hand in all things, and
obey not his commandments." Many things occur in the world in which
it seems very difficult for most of us to find a solid reason for the
acknowledgment of the hand of the Lord. I have come to the belief
that the only reason I have been able to discover by which we should
acknowledge the band of God in some occurrences is the fact that the
thing which has occurred has been permitted of the Lord. When two men
give way to their passions, their selfishness and anger, to contend
and quarrel with each other, and this quarrel and contention leads
to physical strife and violence between them, it has been difficult
for me to discover the hand of the Lord {70} in that transaction;
other than that the men who thus disagree, quarrel and contend with
each other, have received from God the freedom of their own agency to
exercise their own intelligence, to judge between the right and wrong
for themselves, and to act according to their own desire. The Lord
did not design or purpose that these two men should quarrel, or give
way to their anger to such an extent that it would lead to violence
between them, and, perhaps, to bloodshed. God has never designed such
a thing as that, nor can we charge such things to the Almighty. People
become sick, suffer pain, sorrow and anguish. They linger for months,
and perhaps for years, in feebleness of body and of mind. The question
arises in them: Why does the Lord suffer it? Is the hand of God in that
suffering? Has God designed persons to suffer? Has he touched them
with his hand of affliction? Has he caused the evil that has come to
them? Too many of us are inclined to think, or lean toward the feeble
thought, that the illness that comes to us, the afflictions that we
suffer, the accidents that we meet with in life, and the troubles that
beset us on our way in the journey of life, are attributable either
to the mercy or the displeasure of God. Sometimes we are prone to
charge God with causing our afflictions and our troubles; but if we
could see as God sees, if we could understand as he understands, if
we could trace the effects back to the cause, and that truly, by the
spirit of correct understanding, we would unquestionably discover that
our troubles, or suffering, or affliction are the result of our own
indiscretion or lack of knowledge, or of wisdom. It was not the band
of God that put affliction and trouble upon us. The agency that he has
given to us left us to act for ourselves--to do things if we will that
are not right, that are contrary to the laws of life and health, that
are not wise or prudent--and the results may be serious to us, because
of our ignorance or of our determination to persist in that which we
desire, rather than {71} to yield to the requirements which God makes
of us.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 20, p. 821, July, 1917.

GOD'S WARFARE. God is the greatest man of war of all, and his Son is
next to him, and their warfare is for the salvation of the souls of
men. It would not be necessary for them to use violence or force,
nor to permit their children to use violence nor force in order to
conquer if they would but humble themselves, and obey the truth. For,
after all, nothing will conquer, nothing will win but the truth; and
so far as the wars that are going on in the world are concerned, we
not only want to see peace established among the children of men, but
also justice, but above all things, truth, that justice, peace and
righteousness may be built upon this foundation and not depend upon
the covetousness, pride, vanity, evil desire, and just for power in
man.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 129.

WE ARE IN GOD'S IMAGE. When Brother Penrose shall pray, he will pray
unto the Father of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, in whose image
and likeness we are made, or were born into the world, and in whose
likeness and image we are, for we are God's children, and therefore
must resemble his Son in person, and also spiritually, so far as we
will obey the principles of the gospel of eternal truth. For, we were
foreordained and predestined to become conformed to his likeness
through the wise and proper use of our free agency.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1914, p. 8.

GOD'S REST. The ancient prophets speak of "entering into God's rest;"
what does it mean? To my mind, it means entering into the knowledge
and love of God, having faith in his purpose and in his plan, to such
an extent that we know we are right, and that we are not hunting for
something else, we are not disturbed by every wind of doctrine, or by
the cunning and craftiness of men who lie in wait to deceive. We know
of the doctrine that it is of God, and we do not ask any questions of
anybody about it; they are welcome to {72} their opinions, to their
ideas and to their vagaries. The man who has reached that degree of
faith in God that all doubt and fear have been cast from him, he has
entered into "God's rest," and he need not fear the vagaries of men,
nor their cunning and craftiness, by which they seek to deceive and
mislead him from the truth. I pray that we may all enter into God's
rest--rest from doubt, from fear, from apprehension of danger, rest
from the religious turmoil of the world; from the cry that is going
forth, here and there--lo, here is Christ; lo, there is Christ; lo, he
is in the desert, come ye out to meet him. The man who has found God's
rest will not be disturbed by these vagaries of men, for the Lord has
told him, and does tell us: Go not out to seek them: Go not out to hunt
them; for when Christ shall come, he will come with the army of heaven
with him in the clouds of glory, and all eyes shall see him. We do not
need to be hunting for Christ here or Christ there, or prophets here
and prophets there.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 8.

IMPORTANCE OF BEING UNDER THE INFLUENCE OF THE HOLY SPIRIT. The one
thing now that I desire to impress upon the minds of my brethren
bearing the Holy Priesthood is that we should live so near to the
Lord, be so humble in our spirits, so tractable and pliable, under the
influence of the Holy Spirit, that we will be able to know the mind
and will of the Father concerning us as individuals and as officers
in the Church of Christ under all circumstances. And when we live so
that we can hear and understand the whisperings of the still, small
voice of the Spirit of God, let us do whatsoever that Spirit directs
without fear of the consequences. It does not make any difference
whether it meet the minds of carpers or critics, or of the enemies of
the kingdom of God, or not. Is it agreeable to the will of the Lord? Is
it compatible with the spirit of the great latter-day work in which we
are engaged? Is the end aimed at likely to advance the Church and to
strengthen it in the earth? If its {73} trend is in that direction, let
us do it, no matter what men may say or think.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1903, p.
86.

HOLY GHOST, HOLY SPIRIT, COMFORTER. The Holy Ghost, who is a member of
the Trinity in the Godhead, has not a body of flesh and bones, like the
Father and the Son, but is a personage of Spirit. (Doc. and Cov., Sec.
130:22.)

The Holy Spirit, or Spirit of God, both of which terms are sometimes
used interchangeably with the Holy Ghost, is the influence of Deity,
the light of Christ, or of Truth, which proceeds forth from the
presence of God to fill the immensity of space, and to quicken the
understanding of men. (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 88:6-13.)

If a man is baptized and ordained to the Holy Priesthood, and is
called upon to perform duties which pertain to that priesthood, it
does not follow that he must always have the Holy Ghost in person
present with him when he performs his duty, but every righteous act
which he may perform legally will be in force and effect, and will be
acknowledged of God, and the more of the Spirit of God he possesses in
his ministrations, the better for himself, and those will not suffer
any loss unto whom he administers.

Therefore, the presentation or "gift" of the Holy Ghost simply confers
upon a man the right to receive at any time, when he is worthy of
it and desires it, the power and light of truth of the Holy Ghost,
although he may often be left to his own spirit and judgment.

The Holy Ghost as a personage of Spirit can no more be omnipresent
in person than can the Father or the Son, but by his intelligence,
his knowledge, his power and influence, over and through the laws of
nature, he is and can be omnipresent throughout all the works of God.
It is not the Holy Ghost who in person lighteth every man who is born
into the world, but it is the light of Christ, the Spirit of Truth,
which proceeds from the source of intelligence, which {74} permeates
all nature, which lighteth every man and fills the immensity of space.
You may call it the Spirit of God, you may call it the influence
of God's intelligence, you may call it the substance of his power,
no matter what it is called, it is the spirit of intelligence that
permeates the universe and gives to the spirits of men understanding,
just as job has said. (Job 32:8; Doc. and Cov. 88:3-13.)

Every elder of the Church who has received the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of hands, by one having authority, has power to confer that
gift upon another; it does not follow that a man who has received
the presentation or gift of the Holy Ghost shall always receive the
recognition and witness and presence of the Holy Ghost himself, or he
may receive all these, and yet the Holy Ghost not tarry with him, but
visit him from time to time (Doc. and Cov., Sec. 130:23); and neither
does it follow that a man must have the Holy Ghost present with him
when he confers the Holy Ghost upon another, but he possesses the gift
of the Holy Ghost, and it will depend upon the worthiness of him unto
whom the gift is bestowed whether he receive the Holy Ghost or not.

Now I repeat--the Holy Ghost is a personage of spirit, he constitutes
the third person in the Trinity, the Godhead. The gift or presentation
of the Holy Ghost is the authoritative act of conferring him upon man.
The Holy Ghost in person may visit men and will visit those who are
worthy and bear witness to their spirit of God and Christ, but may not
tarry with them. The Spirit of God which emanates from Deity may be
likened to electricity, or the universal ether, as explained in our
manual, which fills the earth and the air, and is everywhere present.
It is the power of God, the influence that he exerts throughout all
his works by which he can effect his purposes and execute his will, in
consonance with the laws of free agency which he has conferred upon
man. By means of this Spirit every man is enlightened, the {75} wicked
as well as the good, the intelligent and the ignorant, the high and
the low, each in accordance with his capacity to receive the light;
and this Spirit or influence which emanates from God may be said to
constitute man's consciousness, and will never cease to strive with
man, until man is brought to the possession of the higher intelligence
which can only come through faith, repentance, baptism for the
remission of sins, and the gift or the presentation of the Holy Ghost
by one having authority.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 12, p. 389, March,
1909.

GOD INSPIRES MAN TO KNOW AND TO DO. I am inclined to acknowledge the
hand of God in all things. If I see a man inspired with intelligence,
with extraordinary ability and wisdom, I say to myself he is indebted
to God for that wisdom and ability; and that, without the providence
or interposition of the Almighty, he would not have been what he is.
He is indebted to the Lord Almighty for his intelligence, and for all
that he has; for the earth is the Lord's and the fulness thereof. God
originated and designed all things, and all are his children. We are
born into the world as his offspring; endowed with the same attributes.
The children of men have sprung from the Almighty, whether the world is
willing to acknowledge it or not. He is the Father of our spirits. He
is the originator of our earthly tabernacles. We live and move and have
our being in God our heavenly Father. And having sprung from him with
our talents, our ability, our wisdom, we should at least be willing
to acknowledge his hand in all the prosperity that may attend us in
life, and give to him the honor and glory of all we accomplish in the
flesh. We are particularly dependent upon the Almighty for everything
we possess of a worldly character. There is not a man on the earth
possessed of the wisdom or power of himself to cause even a spear of
grass to grow, or to produce a kernel of wheat or of corn, or any
fruit, vegetable, or any material whatever which is essential for the
{76} sustenance, the happiness and the well-being of a human creature
in the world. It is true we can go to the earth, we find it prepared
to a certain extent, and we cultivate, plow and plant, and we reap the
harvest; but God has ordained that the fruits of our labor shall be in
subjection and in obedience to certain laws which he himself controls,
and which he has kept out of the power of man. Man may boast of having
a great deal of wisdom; of having accomplished a great deal in this
nineteenth century; but, if he did but know it, he derives the ability
by which he accomplishes these things from God his Father, who is in
heaven. He does not possess the power in and of himself.

I read a Scripture something like this: that "there is a spirit in
man." Now, if that should stop here, there would not be perhaps
anything very remarkable about man; for the spirit of man knoweth only
the things of man, and the things of God are discerned by the Spirit of
God. But while there is a spirit in man, it is further stated that "the
inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." There is not a
man born into the world, but has a portion of the Spirit of God, and it
is that Spirit of God which gives to his spirit understanding. Without
this, he would be but an animal like the rest of the brute creation,
without understanding, without judgment, without skill, without
ability, except to eat and to drink like the brute beast. But inasmuch
as the Spirit of God giveth all men understanding, he is enlightened
above the brute beast. He is made in the image of God himself, so that
he can reason, reflect, pray, exercise faith; he can use his energies
for the accomplishment of the desires of his heart, and inasmuch as he
puts forth his efforts in the proper direction, then he is entitled
to an increased portion of the Spirit of the Almighty to inspire him
to increased intelligence, to increased prosperity and happiness in
the world; but in proportion as he prostitutes his energies for evil,
the inspiration of the Almighty is withdrawn from {77} him, until he
becomes so dark and so benighted, that so far as his knowledge of God
is concerned, he is quite as ignorant as a dumb brute.

Again, where are we going? We come here and journey in the flesh a
little season, and then we pass away. Every soul that is born into the
world will die. There is not a soul that has escaped death, except
those upon whom God has passed, by the power of his Spirit, that they
should live in the flesh until the second coming of the Son of Man; but
they will eventually have to pass through the ordeal called death; it
may be in the twinkling of an eye, and without pain or suffering; but
they will pass through the change, because it is an irrevocable edict
of the Almighty. "In the day thou eatest thereof thou shalt surely
die." This was the edict of the Almighty, and it pertains to Adam--that
is, all the human race--for Adam is many, and it means you and me and
every soul that lives and that bears the image of the Father. We shall
all die. But is that the end of our being? If we had an existence
before we came here, we certainly shall continue that existence when
we leave here. The spirit will continue to exist as it did before,
with the additional advantages derived from having passed through this
probation. It is absolutely necessary that we should come to the earth
and take upon us tabernacles; because if we did not have tabernacles
we could not be like God, nor like Jesus Christ. God has a tabernacle
of flesh and bone. He is an organized being just as we are, who are
now in the flesh. Jesus Christ was born of his mother, Mary. He had a
fleshly tabernacle. He was crucified on the cross; and his body was
raised from the dead. He burst the bonds of the grave, and came forth
to newness of life, a living soul, a living being, a man with a body,
with parts and with spirit--the spirit and the body becoming a living
and immortal soul. You and I have to do the same thing. We must go
through the same ordeal in order to attain to the glory and exaltation
which God designed {78} we should enjoy with him in the eternal worlds.
In other words, we must become like him; peradventure to sit upon
thrones, to have dominion, power and eternal increase. God designed
this in the beginning. We are the children of God. He is an eternal
being, without beginning of days or end of years. He always was, he is,
he always will be. We are precisely in the same condition and under the
same circumstances that God our heavenly Father was when he was passing
through this, or a similar ordeal. We are destined to come forth out of
the grave as Jesus did, and to obtain immortal bodies as he did--that
is, that our tabernacles are to become immortal as his became immortal,
that the spirit and the body may be joined together and become one
living being, indivisible, inseparable, eternal. This is the object
of our existence in the world; and we can only attain to these things
through obedience to certain principles, through walking in certain
channels, through obtaining certain information, certain intelligence
from God, without which no man can accomplish his work or fulfill
the mission he has come upon the earth to fulfill. These principles
are the principles of the gospel of eternal truth, the principles of
faith, repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, the principle
of obedience to God the eternal Father; for obedience is one of the
first principles or laws of heaven. Without obedience, there can be no
order, no government, no union, no plan or purpose carried out. And
that obedience must be voluntary; it must not be forced, there must be
no coercion. Men must not be constrained against their will to obey
the will of God; they must obey it because they know it to be right,
because they desire to do it, and because it is their pleasure to do
it. God delights in the willing heart.

I am looking forward to the time when I shall have passed away from
this stage of existence, there I shall be permitted to enjoy more fully
every gift and blessing that has {79} contributed to my happiness in
this world; everything. I do not believe that there is one thing that
was designed or intended to give me joy or make me happy, that I shall
be denied here after, provided I continue faithful; otherwise my joy
cannot be full. I am not now speaking of that happiness or pleasure
that is derived from sin; I refer to the happiness experienced in
seeking to do the will of God on earth as it is done in heaven. We
expect to have our wives and husbands in eternity. We expect our
children will acknowledge us as their fathers and mothers in eternity.
I expect this; I look for nothing else. Without it, I could not be
happy. The thought or belief that I should be denied this privilege
hereafter would make me miserable from this moment. I never could be
happy again without the hope that I shall enjoy the society of my wives
and children in eternity. If I had not this hope, I should be of all
men most unhappy, for "if in this life only we have hope in Christ,
we are of all men most miserable." And all who have tasted of the
influence of the Spirit of God, and have had awakened within them a
hope of eternal life, cannot be happy unless they continue to drink of
that fountain until they are satisfied, and it is the only fountain at
which they can drink and be satisfied.--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol.
25, 1884, pp. 51-60.

TRUST IN GOD. The need of one's having a keen knowledge of the truth
is paramount. So also is it that every Latter-day Saint should have
a deep-rooted conviction of the justice of God, and an implicit
confidence and faith in his being and mercy. To rightfully understand
the gospel and to be able to keep his commandments such knowledge is
absolutely necessary. Let each person ask himself if in his soul there
is a sharp and immovable conviction of these facts. Could anything that
might occur to you, or that might take place in the Church, or with her
officers or authorities, change your faith in the purposes, and in the
{80} absolute justice and mercy, of the Lord, or in the saving power
of his gospel, the message of his salvation? If so, your faith is not
deep-rooted, and there is strong need of your becoming convinced. * * *

No person can realize the fulness of the blessings of God, unless he
can approach, in some degree, at least, the standard of faith in God's
justice, exemplified in the examples quoted. He must have founded in
his own soul belief and confidence in the justice and mercy of God. It
must be individual, no man can act for another. Lessons of this class
need be taught and held up before the youth of Zion, to bring forcibly
to their minds the truth which alone will make them free and able to
stand firm in the faith. Let them, as they are called together in their
assemblies, present themselves before God, and be reminded of his
gracious benefits, in bringing forth the Book of Mormon, in the scenes
of Kirtland, in Zion, in Nauvoo, in the trying days of the exodus, and
in the wilderness. This that they might count the mercies of God in
his promises, and behold how past affliction and sore trial have been
turned to the well-being of his people; and so renew their covenants,
filled with a deep-rooted, immovable conviction of the goodness and
mercy of the Lord. Each individual must learn this lesson, it must be
impressed upon his soul, so deep, and be so well-founded that nothing
can separate him from a knowledge of the love of God, though death and
hell stand in the way.

God is good; his promises never fail; to trust implicitly his goodness
and mercy is a correct principle. Let us, therefore, put our trust in
him.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 7, p. 53, Nov., 1904.

I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES. It is by the power of God that all
things are made that have been made. It is by the power of Christ that
all things are governed and kept in place that are governed and kept
in place in the universe. {81} It is the power which proceeds from
the presence of the Son of God throughout all the works of his hands,
that giveth light, energy, understanding, knowledge, and a degree
of intelligence to all the children of men, strictly in accordance
with the words in the Book of job: "There is a spirit in man; and the
inspiration of the Almighty giveth them understanding." It is this
inspiration from God, proceeding throughout all his creations, that
enlighteneth the children of men; and it is nothing more nor less than
the spirit of Christ that enlighteneth the mind, that quickeneth the
understanding, and that prompteth the children of men to do that which
is good and to eschew that which is evil; which quickens the conscience
of man and gives him intelligence to judge between good and evil, light
and darkness, right and wrong.

But the Holy Ghost, who bears record of the Father and the Son,
who takes of the things of the Father and shows them unto men, who
testifies of Jesus Christ, and of the everliving God, the Father of
Jesus Christ, and who bears witness of the truth--this Spirit, this
Intelligence, is not given unto all men until they repent of their
sins and come into a state of worthiness before the Lord. Then they
receive the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of the hands of
those who are authorized of God to bestow his blessings upon the heads
of the children of men. The Spirit spoken of in that which I have read
is that Spirit which will not cease to strive with the children of
men until they are brought to the possession of the greater light and
intelligence. Though a man may commit all manner of sin and blasphemy,
if he has not received the testimony of the Holy Ghost, he may be
forgiven by repenting of his sins, humbling himself before the Lord,
and obeying in sincerity the commandments of God. As it is stated,
"Every soul who forsaketh his sins and cometh unto me, and calleth on
my name, and obeyeth my voice, and keepeth my commandments {82} shall
see my face and know that I am." He shall be forgiven, and receive of
the greater light; he will enter into a solemn covenant with God, into
a compact with the Almighty, through the Only Begotten Son, whereby
he becomes a son of God, an heir of God, and a joint heir with Jesus
Christ. Then if he shall sin against the light and knowledge he has
received, the light that was within him shall become darkness, and oh,
how great will be that darkness! Then, and not till then, will this
Spirit of Christ that lighteth every man that cometh into the world
cease to strive with him, and he shall be left to his own destruction.

The question is often asked, Is there any difference between the
Spirit of the Lord and the Holy Ghost? The terms are frequently used
synonymously. We often say the Spirit of God when we mean the Holy
Ghost; we likewise say the Holy Ghost when we mean the Spirit of God.
The Holy Ghost is a personage in the Godhead, and is not that which
lighteth every man that cometh into the world. It is the Spirit of
God which proceeds through Christ to the world, that enlightens every
man that comes into the world, and that strives with the children of
men, and will continue to strive with them, until it brings them to
a knowledge of the truth and the possession of the greater light and
testimony of the Holy Ghost. If, however, he receive that greater
light, and then sin against it, the Spirit of God will cease to strive
with him, and the Holy Ghost will wholly depart from him. Then will he
persecute the truth; then will he seek the blood of the innocent; then
will he not scruple at the commission of any crime, except so far as
he may fear the penalties of the law, in consequence of the crime upon
himself.

"And that I am in the Father, and the Father in me, and the Father
and I are one." I do not apprehend that any intelligent person will
construe these words to mean that Jesus and his Father are one person,
but merely that they {83} are one in knowledge, in truth, in wisdom,
in understanding, and in purpose; just as the Lord Jesus himself
admonished his disciples to be one with him, and to be in him, that he
might be in them. It is in this sense that I understand this language,
and not as it is construed by some people, that Christ and his Father
are one person. I declare to you that they are not one person, but that
they are two persons, two bodies, separate and apart, and as distinct
as are any father and son within the sound of my voice. Yet, Jesus is
the Father of this world, because it was by him that the world was made.

Even Christ himself was not perfect at first; he received not a fulness
at first, but he received grace for grace, and he continued to receive
more and more until he received a fulness. Is not this to be so with
the children of men? Is any man perfect? Has any man received a fulness
at once? Have we reached a point wherein we may receive the fulness of
God, of his glory, and his intelligence? No; and yet, if Jesus, the Son
of God, and the Father of the heavens and the earth in which we dwell,
received not a fulness at the first, but increased in faith, knowledge,
understanding and grace until he received a fulness, is it not possible
for all men who are born of women to receive little by little, line
upon line, precept upon precept, until they shall receive a fulness, as
he has received a fulness, and be exalted with him in the presence of
the Father?

The spirit without the body is not perfect, and the body without the
spirit is dead. Man was ordained in the beginning to become like Jesus
Christ, to become conformed unto his image. As Jesus was born of woman,
lived and grew to manhood, was put to death and raised from the dead
to immortality and eternal life, so it was decreed in the beginning
that man should be, and will be, through the atonement of Jesus,
in spite of himself, resurrected from the dead. Death came upon us
without the exercise of our {84} agency; we had no hand in bringing it
originally upon ourselves; it came because of the transgression of our
first parents. Therefore, man, who had no hand in bringing death upon
himself, shall have no hand in bringing again life unto himself; for
as he dies in consequence of the sin of Adam, so shall he live again,
whether he will or not, by the righteousness of Jesus Christ, and the
power of his resurrection. Every man that dies shall live again, and
shall stand before the bar of God, to be judged according to his works,
whether they be good or evil. It is then that all will have to give an
account for their stewardship in this mortal life.

Now, my brethren and sisters, I know that my Redeemer lives. I feel
it in every fiber of my being. I am just as satisfied of it as I am
of my own existence. I cannot feel more sure of my own being than
I do that my Redeemer lives, and that my God lives, the Father of
my Savior. I feel it in my soul; I am converted to it in my whole
being. I bear testimony to you that this is the doctrine of Christ,
the gospel of Jesus, which is the power of God unto salvation. It is
"Mormonism."--_Sermon in Tabernacle,_ Salt Lake City, March 16, 1902.

OUR PERSONAL RESPONSIBILITY. If there is one principle of the gospel
of Jesus Christ that goes directly to the very foundation of justice
and righteousness, it is that great and glorious and God-like principle
that every man will have to render an account for that which he does,
and every man will be rewarded for his works, whether they be good or
evil.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 104.

THE CHURCH A DEMOCRATIC INSTITUTION. The Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints is the most democratic institution in the
world.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 100.

HOW TO SECURE GOD'S BLESSING. If we desire a continuation of the
blessings of the Lord, we must do his will {85} and obey the laws on
which his blessings are predicated. There is no other way to obtain his
blessings.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 99, December, 1917.

JESUS IS THE SON. Jesus Christ is not the Father of the spirits who
have taken or yet shall take bodies upon this earth, for he is one of
them. He is the Son, as they are sons or daughters of Elohim. So far as
the stages of eternal progression and attainment have been made known
through divine revelation, we are to understand that only resurrected
and glorified beings can become parents of spirit offspring. Only such
exalted souls have reached maturity in the appointed course of eternal
life; and the spirits born to them in the eternal worlds will pass
in due sequence through the several stages or estates by which the
glorified parents have attained exaltation.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
19, p. 942.

JEHOVAH, THE FIRSTBORN. Among the spirit children of Elohim, the
first-born was and is Jehovah, or Jesus Christ, to whom all others are
juniors.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 19, p. 940

NOTHING TEMPORAL WITH GOD. We ought to be united in all things temporal
as well as spiritual. With God all things are spiritual. There is
nothing temporal with him at all, and there ought to be no distinction
with us in regard to these matters. Our earthly or temporal existence
is merely a continuance of that which is spiritual. Every step we take
in the great journey of life, the great journey of eternity, is a step
in advance or in retrogression. We are here in mortality, it is true;
but we are ahead of that condition we occupied before we came here and
took upon us mortality. We are a step in advance of our former state.
What is the body without the spirit? It is lifeless clay. What is it
that affects this lifeless clay? It is the spirit, it is the immortal
part, the eternal being, that existed before it came here, that exists
within us, and that will continue to exist that by and by will redeem
these tabernacles and bring {86} them forth out of the graves. The
whole mission of ours is spiritual. The work we have to do here,
although we call it temporal, pertains alike to our spiritual and our
temporal salvation. And the Lord has just as much right to dictate, to
counsel, to direct and guide us in the manipulation and management of
our temporal affairs, as we call them, as he has to say one word in
relation to our spiritual affairs. So far as he is concerned there is
no difference in this regard. He looks upon us as immortal beings. Our
bodies are designed to become eternal and spiritual. God is spiritual
himself, although he has a body of flesh and bone as Christ has. Yet he
is spiritual, and those who worship him must do so in spirit and truth.
And when you come to separate the spiritual from the temporal, see that
you do not make a mistake.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 23, July 16,
1884, p. 466.

THE IMPORTANT CONSIDERATION. The important consideration is not how
long we can live, but how well we can learn the lessons of life,
and discharge our duties and obligations to God and to each other.
One of the main purposes of our existence is that we might conform
to the image and likeness of Him who sojourned in the flesh without
blemish--immaculate, pure, and spotless! Christ came not only to atone
for the sins of the world, but to set an example before all men, and
to establish the standard of God's perfection, of God's law, and of
obedience to the Father.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, 1917, p. 104.

{87}



CHAPTER VI

THE PURPOSE AND THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH

THE KINGDOM OF GOD DEFINED. What I mean by the kingdom of God is the
organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, over
which the son of God presides, and not man. That is what I mean. I mean
the kingdom of which Christ is the King and not man. If any man object
to Christ, the Son of God, being King of Israel, let him object, and go
to hell just as quick as he please.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1906, p. 9.

"MORMONISM" DEFINED. I desire to say that "Mormonism," as it is called,
is still, as always, nothing more and nothing less than the power of
God unto salvation, unto every soul that will receive it honestly and
will obey it. I say to you, my brethren, sisters and friends, that all
Latter-day Saints, wherever you find them, provided they are true to
their name, to their calling and to their understanding of the gospel,
are people who stand for truth and for honor, for virtue and for purity
of life, for honesty in business and in religion; people who stand for
God and for his righteousness, for God's truth and his work in the
earth, which aims, for the salvation of the children of men, for their
salvation from the evils of the world, from the pernicious habits of
wicked men and from all those things that degrade, dishonor or destroy;
or tend to lessen the vitality and life, the honor and godliness among
the people of the earth.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1910, p. 5.

THE MISSION OF THE CHURCH. Our mission has been to save men. We have
been laboring all these eighty-odd years of the Church to bring men to
a knowledge of the gospel of Jesus Christ, to bring them to repentance,
to obedience {88} to the requirements of God's law. We have been
striving to save men from error, to persuade them to turn away from
evil and to learn to do good. Now if our enemies will only charge us
with doing this, all right; and if they wish to oppose us for doing
this, that is their business; but when they charge us with doing
that which we have not done, believing that which we do not believe,
practicing that which we have never practiced, then I pity them. I
pity them because they are doing it in ignorance, or because they are
wilfully disposed to misrepresent the truth.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, pp.
3, 4.

THE PLAN OF LIFE RESTORED. It is the plan of life that the Almighty
has restored to man in the latter days for the salvation of the souls
of men, not only in the world to come, but in our present life,
for the Lord has instituted his work that his people may enjoy the
blessings of this life to the utmost; that they should be saved in
this present life, as well as in the life to come, that they should
lay the foundation here for immunity from sin and all its effects and
consequences, that they may obtain an inheritance in the kingdom of God
beyond this vale of tears. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the power of
God unto salvation, and it is absolutely necessary for every man and
woman in the Church of Christ to work righteousness, to observe the
laws of God, and keep the commandments that he has given, in order that
they may avail themselves of the power of God unto salvation in this
life.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 2.

OUR MISSION IS TO SAVE. Our mission is to save, to preserve from
evil, to exalt mankind, to bring light and truth into the world, to
prevail upon the people of the earth to walk righteously before God,
and to honor him in their lives and with the first fruits of all their
substance and increase, that their barns may be filled with plenty
and, figuratively speaking, that "their presses may burst out with new
wine."--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 118.

{89} THE GOSPEL MESSAGE. I rejoice exceedingly in the truth. I thank
God every day of my life for his mercy and kindness, and loving care
and protection that have been extended to all his people, and for the
many manifestations of his peculiar mercy and blessings that have been
extended unto us throughout all the length and breadth of the land and
through all the years since the organization of the Church, on the 6th
of April, 1830.

The Lord, about that time, or soon after, decreed a decree which he
said his people should realize, that they should begin from that very
hour to prevail over all their enemies, and, inasmuch as they continued
to be faithful in keeping his laws he had given unto them, it was
decreed that they should prevail until all enemies were subdued--not
subdued by violence, nor the spirit of contention nor of warfare, but
subdued by the power of eternal truth, by the majesty and power of
Almighty God, but by the increased power of the righteous and of the
upright covenanted people of God--should be magnified and increased,
until the world shall bow and acknowledge that Jesus is the Christ, and
that there is a people preparing for his coming in power and glory to
the earth again.

We carry to the world the olive branch of peace. We present to the
world the law of God, the word of the Lord, the truth, as it has been
revealed in the latter day for the redemption of the dead and for the
salvation of the living. We bear no malice nor evil toward the children
of men. The spirit of forgiveness pervades the hearts of the Saints
of God, and they do not cherish a desire or feeling of revenge toward
their enemies or those who hurt or molest them or seek to make them
afraid; but on the contrary, the Spirit of the Lord has possession of
their spirits, of their souls, and of their thoughts; they forgive all
men, and they carry no malice in their hearts toward any, no matter
what they have done. They say in their hearts, let God judge between
{90} us and our enemies, and as for us, we forgive them, and we bear no
malice toward any.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 2.

WE ARE AS LEAVEN. While it may be said, and it is in a measure
true, that we are but a handful in comparison with our fellowmen
in the world, yet we may be compared with the leaven of which the
Savior spoke, that will eventually leaven the whole world. We have
ample assurance of the fulfilment of this thought in the growth and
development of the cause from its incipiency until the present, for
it has steadily and increasingly progressed and developed in the
earth, from a mere half dozen of men, seventy-nine years ago, until
today the members of the Church may be numbered by the hundreds of
thousands.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 2.

MAN INSIGNIFICANT COMPARED TO CAUSE. We are learning the great truth
that man is insignificant in his individuality, in comparison to the
mighty cause which involves the salvation of the children of men,
living and dead, and those who will yet live in the earth. Men must
set aside their own prejudices, their own personal desires, wishes and
preferences, and pay deference to the great cause of truth that is
spreading abroad in the world.--_Apr C. R.,_ 1909, p. 2.

WHERE THE GOSPEL SPIRIT LEADS. The spirit of the gospel leads men to
righteousness; to love their fellowmen and to labor for their salvation
and exaltation; it inspires them to do good and not evil, to avoid even
the appearance of sin, much more to avoid sin itself. This is indeed
the spirit of the gospel, which is the spirit of this latter-day work,
and also the spirit that possesses those who have embraced it; and the
aim and purpose of this work is the salvation, the exaltation, and
the eternal happiness of man, both in this life and in the life to
come.--_Apr. C. R,_ 1909, p. 4.

THE FRUITS OF TRUE RELIGION. The fruits of the Spirit of God--the
fruits of the spirit of true religion--are {91} peace and love, virtue
and honesty, and integrity, and fidelity to every virtue known in
the law of God,--while the spirit of the world is vicious. Read the
5th chapter of Galatians, and there you will discover the difference
between the fruits of the Spirit of God and the fruits of the spirit
of the world. That is one of the great and chief differences between
"Mormonism," so-called, and the theology of the world. If "Mormonism"
is anything at all more than other religions, it is that it is
practical, that the results of obedience to it are practical, that it
makes good men better men, and that it takes even bad men and makes
good ones of them. That is what "Mormonism" will do, if we will only
permit it to do it, if we will bow to its mandates and adopt its
precepts in our lives, it will make us the sons and the daughters of
God, worthy eventually to dwell in the presence of the Almighty in the
heavens.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 86.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS POSSESS THE SPIRIT OF SALVATION. The Latter-day
Saints possess the spirit of salvation, and not the spirit of
destruction; the spirit of life, not the spirit of death; the spirit of
peace, not the spirit of disunion; the spirit of love for their fellow
beings, not the spirit of hate. And for the enjoyment of this spirit
by the Saints of the Most High, we all have great cause to render
praise and thanksgiving to him who has so ordered it, and has given to
us humility to receive that measure of his Spirit which inclines our
hearts to good and not to evil.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 2.

MAY ISRAEL FLOURISH. May Israel flourish upon the hills and rejoice
upon the mountains, and assemble together unto the place which God has
appointed, and there prosper, multiply and replenish the earth, and
thence spread abroad throughout the land; for the time will come when
we will find it necessary to fulfil the purposes of the Almighty by
occupying the land of Zion in all parts of it. We are not destined to
be confined to the valleys of the mountains. {92} Zion is destined to
grow, and the time will come when we will cry aloud, more than we do
today, "Give us room that we may dwell!"--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 118.

THE WORK OF THE LORD WILL GROW. The kingdom of God and the work of the
Lord will spread more and more; it will progress more rapidly in the
world in the future than it has done in the past. The Lord has said it,
and the Spirit beareth record; and I bear testimony to this, for I do
know that it is true.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 7.

THE KINGDOM OF GOD TO CONTINUE. The kingdom of God is here to grow, to
spread abroad, to take root in the earth, and to abide where the Lord
has planted it by his own power and by his own word in the earth, never
more to be destroyed nor to cease, but to continue until the purposes
of the Almighty shall be accomplished, every whit that has been spoken
of it by the mouths of the holy prophets since the world began._-Apr.
C. R.,_ 1902. p. 2.

ZION ESTABLISHED TO REMAIN. Zion is established in the midst of the
earth to remain. It is God Almighty's work, which he himself, by his
own wisdom, and not by the wisdom of man, has restored to the earth in
the latter days, and he has established it upon principles of truth
and righteousness, of purity of life and revelation from God, that it
can no more be thrown down or left to another people, so long as the
majority of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will abide
in their covenants with the Lord and keep themselves pure and unspotted
from the world, as all members of the Church should keep themselves.
Then it will be as God has decreed, perpetual and eternal, until his
will is accomplished and his purposes fulfilled among the children of
men. No people can ever prosper and flourish very long unless they
abide in God's truth. There is nothing, no individuality, no combined
influence among men, that can prevail over the truth. The truth is
mighty and it will prevail. It may be slow in the consummation of its
purpose, in the {93} accomplishment of the work that it has to do, but
it is and will be sure; for the truth cannot and will not fail, for the
Lord Almighty is behind it. It is his work, and he will see to it that
it is accomplished. The kingdom is the Lord's, and the Lord is capable
of taking care of it. He has always taken care of it. I want to say to
you that there never was a time since the organization of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, when a man led the Church, not for
one moment. It was not so in the days of Joseph; it was not so in the
days of Brigham Young; it has not been so since; it never will be so.
The direction of this work among the people of the world will never be
left to men. It is God's work, let me tell you, and I hope you will put
it down in your memoranda, and do not forget that it is the Almighty
that is going to do this work, and consummate it, and not man. No man
shall have the honor of doing it, nor has any man ever had the power
to do it of himself. It is God's work. If it had been the work of man,
we would have been like the rest of the world, and it would not have
been true of us that God has chosen us out of the world, but we would
be a part of it, and "Hail fellow, well met," with it; but it is true
that God has chosen us out of the world; therefore we are not of it;
therefore they hate us and they will fight us and say all manner of
evil against us falsely, as they have ever done from the beginning.
And they will continue to seek the destruction of the Latter-day
Saints, and to feel towards us in the future, as they have felt in the
past. Now, don't you forget it, my brothers and sisters. When you go
home, if you have not been in the habit of doing it, or if you have
neglected your duty, when you go home today or to your homes in distant
settlements, carry this injunction with you: Go into your secret
chambers--go into your prayer-rooms--and there by yourselves, or with
your family gathered around you, bow your knees before God Almighty
in praise and in thanksgiving to him for his merciful providence {94}
that has been over you and over all his people from the inception
of this work down to the present: Remember that it is the gift of
God to man, that it is his power and his guiding influence that have
accomplished what we see has been accomplished. It has not been done
by the wisdom of men. It is proper we should give honor to those who
have been instrumental in bringing to pass much righteousness. They are
instruments in God's hands, and we should not ignore that they are such
instruments, and we should honor them as such; but when we undertake
to give them the honor for accomplishing this work and take the honor
from God who qualified the men to do the work, we are doing injustice
to God. We are robbing him of the honor that rightfully belongs to him,
and giving it to men who are only instrumental in the hands of God in
accomplishing his purposes.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1905, pp. 5, 6.

THE PROGRESS OF GOD'S WORK CANNOT BE STOPPED. Now, we are thankful to
the Lord that we are counted worthy to be taken notice of by the devil.
I would fear very much for our safety if we had fallen into a condition
where the devil ceased to be concerned about us. So long as the Spirit
of the Lord is enjoyed by you, so long as you are living your religion,
and keeping the commandments of the Lord, walking uprightly before
him, I assure you that the adversary of souls will not rest easy; he
will be discontented with you, will find fault with you, and he will
arraign you before his bar; but that will not hurt you very much if
you will just keep on doing right. You do not need to worry in the
least, the Lord will take care of you and bless you, he will also take
care of his servants, and will bless them and help them to accomplish
his purposes; and all the powers of darkness combined on earth and in
hell cannot prevent it. They may take men's lives; they may slay and
destroy, if they will; but they cannot destroy the purposes of God nor
stop the progress of his work. He has stretched {95} forth his hand
to accomplish his purposes, and the arm of flesh cannot stay it. He
will cut his work short in righteousness, and will hasten his purposes
in his own time. It is only necessary to try with our might to keep
pace with the onward progress of the work of the Lord, then God will
preserve and protect us, and will prepare the way before us, that we
shall live and multiply and replenish the earth, and always do his
will; which may God grant.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1905, pp. 5, 6.

DIVINITY OF THE GOSPEL. Somewhat unexpectedly I am called to stand
before you, but I do so with pleasure, as I have a testimony to bear
to the work we are engaged in; and it gives me pleasure when an
opportunity is afforded to give expression to my feelings in relation
to that work. That we have the gospel and have enjoyed its blessings,
and that the ordinances of the gospel have been administered to us as
Latter-day Saints, there are thousands of witnesses in this territory
and in many places in the world can testify. The testimony of the
truth of this work is not confined to one or to a few; but there are
thousands who can declare that they know it is true, because it has
been revealed to them.

We as a people are increasing in numbers, and the Lord Almighty is
increasing his blessings upon us, and the people are expanding in their
understanding and in the knowledge of the truth. I feel grateful to my
heavenly Father that I have been permitted to live in this generation,
and have been permitted to become acquainted, somewhat, with the
principles of the gospel. I am thankful that I have had the privilege
of having a testimony of its truth, and that I am permitted to stand
here and elsewhere to bear my testimony to the truth that the gospel
has been restored to man.

I have traveled somewhat among the nations preaching the gospel, and
have seen something of the conditions of the world, and to a certain
extent have become acquainted with the feelings of men, and with the
religions of the world. I {96} am aware that the gospel, as revealed in
the Bible, cannot be found in the world; the ordinances of that gospel
are not administered in any church except the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. If we make ourselves acquainted with the tenets
of the religious world we shall find that they have not the gospel nor
its ordinances; they have a form of godliness, and I have no doubt, are
as sincere as we who have obeyed the gospel as revealed from heaven in
these days. But they are devoid of the knowledge which we possess,
and it is from the fact that they deny the source by which they might
receive this knowledge--namely, revelation from Jesus Christ. In their
minds they have closed up the heavens; they declare that God has
revealed all that is necessary, that the canon of scripture is full,
and that no more will be revealed. Believing thus, they close up the
avenue of light and intelligence from heaven; and this will continue so
long as they continue in their present course of unbelief. They will
not listen to the testimony of men who tell them that the Lord lives
and that he is able to reveal his will to man today, as ever. They will
not heed this testimony, consequently they close the door of light and
revelation. They cannot advance, nor learn the ways of God nor walk in
his paths.

We testify that the barriers which separated man from God have been
overcome, that the Lord has again communicated his will to man. "But,"
says one, "how shall we become acquainted with these things? How can
we know that you are not deceived?" To all such we say, repent of your
sins in all sincerity, then go forth and be baptized, and have hands
laid upon you for the gift of the Holy Ghost, and the Spirit will
bear record to you of the truth of our testimony, and you will become
witnesses of it as we are, and will be able to stand forth boldly and
testify to the world as we do. This was the path pointed out by Peter
and the apostles on the day of Pentecost, when the Spirit of the Lord
Almighty {97} rested upon them with great power to the convincing of
the hearts of the people who cried out, "Men and brethren, what shall
we do?" And Peter said unto them, "Repent, and be baptized, every one
of you, in the name of Jesus Christ, for the remission of sins, and
ye shall receive the gift of the Holy Ghost." This was the counsel
given them, and inasmuch as they obeyed it, they were entitled to the
testimony of the Holy Spirit which would bring peace and happiness,
reveal to them their duties, and enable them to understand their
relationship to God.

If we look at the condition of the world today, we must come to the
conclusion that peace is not likely soon to be established on the
earth. There is nothing among the nations that tends to peace. Even
among the religious societies the tendency is not to peace and union.
They do not bring men to a knowledge of God; they do not possess the
"one Lord, one faith, one baptism," and "one hope of their calling"
that are spoken of in the Scripture. Every man has gone according to
his own notions, independent of revelations, and hence, confusion and
division exist; their churches are broken up, and they are quarreling
and contending with one another. And as it is in the religious, so it
is in the political world; they are all divided, and the more energy
they put forth to make proselytes, the greater are their contentions,
and the further they go from the mark. This is the condition they have
been in, and the course they have been pursuing for almost eighteen
hundred years, until today they have become so divided that I think
it would puzzle anyone to tell how many religious denominations there
are in Christendom. There are thousands, too, who, in consequence
of the strife and contention among the religious sects, have become
entirely skeptical respecting religion of every kind, and they have
concluded that there is no God; at any rate, that there is no God among
"Christians"--that all religionists are fanatics and are deceived.
The sectarian systems {98} of religion are calculated to lead men of
reflection and intelligence into skepticism, to cause them to deny all
interference of God with men and their affairs, and to deny even his
right to interfere.

The Lord Almighty is the Creator of the earth, he is the Father of all
our spirits. He has the right to dictate what we should do, and it is
our duty to obey, and to walk according to his requirements. This is
natural, and perfectly easy to be comprehended. The gospel has been
restored to the earth, and the priesthood again established, and both
are enjoyed by this people; but those unacquainted with the working
of the gospel and the priesthood look upon us with wonder, and are
astonished at the union that exists in our midst. We move as a man,
almost; we hearken to the voice of our leader; we are united in our
faith and in our work. The world can not understand this, and they
behold it with wonder.

Let me tell my brethren and friends that this is one of the effects of
the gospel of Jesus Christ. We have become united in our faith by one
baptism; we know that Jesus Christ lives, we know that he is our Savior
and Redeemer; we have a testimony of this, independent of any written
books, and we testify of these things to the world. This unison in the
midst of the people called Latter-day Saints, and their prosperity, are
hard for a great many to understand. I have, however, heard it said,
that we boast that we are not so wealthy as our neighbors. But when our
circumstances, and the condition of our country when we came here, are
considered, I think this statement cannot be sustained. When we came
here we were penniless, and we have not had the advantages of wealth
or commerce to help to enrich us, but all we possess is the result of
our own physical labor and the blessing of God. We have labored under
great disadvantages in freighting our goods and machinery over these
vast plains, and besides this we have had a barren {99} soil and drouth
to contend with, and when all these things are considered, I think we
have been prospered more than any other people. And as it has been in
the past so will it be in the future--we will increase, and extend our
borders, for this is the work of God; we are his people, and he will
continue to bless us as he has done hitherto.

Our business is to learn our duties one towards another and towards
our leaders. This is a lesson that we seem rather slow to learn. But
it should be with us: when our leaders speak, it is for us to obey;
when they direct, we should go; when they call, we should follow. Not
as beings who are enslaved or in thraldom; we should not obey blindly,
as instruments or tools. No Latter-day Saint acts in this manner;
no man or woman who has embraced the gospel has ever acted in this
way; but on the contrary men and women have felt to listen cheerfully
to the counsels of the servants of God, as far as they were able to
comprehend them. The difficulty is not in getting the Latter-day Saints
to do right, but in getting them to comprehend what is right. We have
obeyed the counsels of our leaders because we have known they have been
inspired by the Holy Spirit and because we positively have known that
their counsels have been given for our good. We do know and have always
known that our leaders have been inspired with wisdom superior to that
which we possess. For this reason we take hold of everything they
present to us for the good of Zion.

We are engaged in the great latter-day work of preaching the gospel to
the nations, gathering the poor, and building up Zion upon the earth.
We are working for the triumph of righteousness, for the subjugation
of sin and the errors of the age in which we live. It is a great and
glorious work. We believe it is right to love God with all our hearts,
and to love our neighbors as ourselves. We believe it is wrong to
lie, steal, commit adultery, or do any act forbidden by the gospel of
Christ. We believe in all the teachings of the {100} Savior and in
everything that is good and moral, and calculated to exalt mankind or
to ameliorate their condition, to unite them in doing good. These are
among the principles of the gospel, and these principles have been
taught to us from the commencement of our career as members of this
Church. These principles are carried out among us to an extent not to
be found among any other people. We do not believe in worshiping God
or being religious on the Sabbath day only; but we believe it is as
necessary to be religious on Monday, Tuesday and every day in the week,
as it is on the Sabbath day; we believe that it is necessary to do to
our neighbors as we would they should do unto us, during the week as
it is on the Sabbath. In short, we believe it is necessary to live our
religion every day in the week every hour in the day, and every moment.
Believing and acting thus, we become strengthened in our faith, the
Spirit of God increases within us, we advance in knowledge, and we are
better able to defend the cause we are engaged in.

To be a true representative of this cause a man must live faithful to
the light that he has; he must be pure, virtuous and upright. If he
comes short of this he is not a fair representative of this work. The
gospel of Jesus Christ is the perfect law of liberty. It is calculated
to lead man to the highest state of glory, and to exalt him in the
presence of our heavenly Father, "with whom is no variableness, neither
shadow of turning." If there is any folly to be seen in the midst of
this people, it is the folly and weakness of man, and is not because
of any failing or lack in the plan of salvation. The gospel is perfect
in its organization. It is for us to learn the gospel, and to become
acquainted with the principles of truth, to humble ourselves before
God that we may bring ourselves into subjection to his laws, and be
continually willing to listen to the counsels of those whom the Lord
has appointed to guide us.

{101} We know that God has spoken; we testify of this. We stand as
witnesses to the world that this is true. We ask no odds of any man,
community or nation on the face of the earth in relation to these
things. We bear a fearless testimony that they are true. We also bear
testimony that Brigham Young is a prophet of the living God, and that
he has the revelations of Jesus Christ; that he has guided this people
by the power of revelation from the time he became their leader until
the present, and he has never failed in his duty or mission. He has
been faithful before God, and faithful to this people. We bear this
testimony to the world. We fear not, neither do we heed their scorn,
contempt, or sneers. We are used to it. We have seen it and heard it,
and have become inured to it. We know that the One in whom we trust is
God, for it has been revealed to us. We are not in the dark, neither
have we obtained our knowledge from any man, synod or collection of
men, but through the revelation of Jesus. If there be any who doubt us,
let them repent of their sins. Is there any harm in your forsaking your
follies and evils, and in bowing in humility before God for his Spirit,
and in obedience to the words of the Savior, being baptized for the
remission of sins, and having hands laid upon you for the gift of the
Holy Ghost, that you may have a witness for yourselves of the truth of
the words we speak to you? Do this humbly and honestly, and as sure as
the Lord lives, I promise you that you will receive the testimony of
this work for yourselves, and will know it as all the Latter-day Saints
know it. This is the promise; it is sure and steadfast. It is something
tangible; it is in the power of every man to prove for himself whether
we speak the truth or whether we lie. We do not come as deceivers
or impostors before the world; we do not come with the intention to
deceive, but we come with the plain simple truth, and leave it to the
world to test it and get a knowledge {102} for themselves. It is the
right of every soul that lives--the high, low, rich, poor, great and
small, to have this testimony for themselves inasmuch as they will obey
the gospel.

Jesus in ancient times sent his disciples forth to preach the gospel
to every creature, saying they that believed and were baptized should
be saved, but they that believed not should be damned. And said he,
"These signs shall follow them that believe: In my name shall they
cast out devils; they shall speak with new tongues; they shall take up
serpents; and if they drink any deadly thing, it shall not hurt them;
they shall lay hands on the sick, and they shall recover." These are
the promises made anciently, and there are thousands in this territory
and in this congregation who can bear testimony that they have realized
the fulfilment of these promises in this day. The healing of the sick
among us has become so common that it is apparently but little thought
of. We have also seen the lame made to walk, and the blind to receive
their sight, the deaf to hear, and the dumb to speak. These things we
have seen done by the power of God and not by the cunning or wisdom of
men; we know that these signs do follow the preaching of the gospel.
Yet these testimonies of its truth are but poor and weak when compared
with the whisperings of the still small voice of the Spirit of God. The
latter is a testimony that none who enjoy it can deny; it cannot be
overcome, for it brings conviction to the heart that cannot be reasoned
away or disproved, whether it can be accounted for on philosophical
principles or not. This testimony comes from God and convinces all
to whom it is given in spite of themselves, and is worth more to men
than any sign or gift beside, because it gives peace and happiness,
contentment and quiet to my soul. It assures me that God lives, and if
I am faithful I shall obtain the blessings of the celestial kingdom.

Is this unscriptural or contrary to reason or to any revealed truth?
No, it is in compliance with and in corroboration {103} of all revealed
truth known to man. The Lord Almighty lives, and he operates by the
power of his Spirit over the hearts of the children of men and holds
the nations of the earth in his hands. He created the earth upon which
we dwell, and its treasures are his; and he will do with us according
as we merit. As we are faithful or unfaithful, so will the Almighty
deal with us, for we are his children, and we are heirs of God and
joint heirs with Jesus Christ.

We have a glorious destiny before us; we are engaged in a glorious
work. It is worth all our attention, it is worth our lives and
everything the Lord has put into our possession, and then ten thousand
times more. Indeed, there is no comparison, it is all in all, it
is incomparable. It is all that is and all that ever will be. The
gospel is salvation, and without it there is nothing worth having.
We came naked into the world and shall go hence the same. If we were
to accumulate half the world, it would avail us nothing so far as
prolonging life here, or securing eternal life hereafter. But the
gospel teaches men to be humble, faithful, honest and righteous before
the Lord and with each other, and in proportion as its principles are
carried out so will peace and righteousness extend and be established
on the earth, and sin, contention, bloodshed and corruption of all
kinds cease to exist, and the earth become purified and be made a fit
abode for heavenly beings; and for the Lord our God to come and dwell
upon, which he will do during the Millennium.

The principles of the gospel which the Lord has revealed in these
days will lead us to eternal life. This is what we are after, what we
were created for, what the earth was created for. The reason that we
are here is that we may overcome every folly and prepare ourselves
for eternal life in the future. I do not think that a principle of
salvation is available only as it can be applied in our lives. For
instance, if there is a principle calculated in its nature to save me
from the penalty of any crime, it will avail me nothing {104} unless I
act upon it this moment. If I do this and continue to do so, I act upon
the principle of salvation, and I am secure from the penalty of that
crime and will be forever, so long as I abide by that principle or law.
It is just so with the principles of the gospel--they are a benefit or
not, just as they are or are not applied in our lives.

Then let us be faithful and humble; let us live the religion of Christ,
put away our follies and sins and the weaknesses of the flesh, and
cleave to God and his truth with undivided hearts, and with full
determination to fight the good fight of faith and continue steadfast
to the end, which may God grant us power to do is my prayer in the name
of Jesus. Amen.--Discourse, Nov. 15, 1868,_ Journal of Discourses,_
Vol. 12, pp. 326-332.

THE GOSPEL ALL COMPREHENSIVE. The gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ
embraces all the laws and ordinances necessary for the salvation
of man. Paul declared it to be the "power of God unto salvation to
everyone that believeth." No man can be saved in opposition to its
saving ordinances, but must receive each ordinance in the spirit of
humility and faith. Technically, the term "gospel" signifies "good
news," and is said to be taken from, or founded on, the annunciation
of the angel who appeared to the shepherds at the time of the Savior's
birth, declaring, "Behold, I bring you good tidings of great joy, which
shall be to all people."

In the theological sense, the gospel means more than just the tidings
of good news, with accompanying joy to the souls of men, for it
embraces every principle of eternal truth. There is no fundamental
principle, or truth, anywhere in the universe, that is not embraced in
the gospel of Jesus Christ, and it is not confined to the simple first
principles, such as faith in God, repentance from sin, baptism for
the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the gift of the
Holy Ghost, although these are absolutely essential to salvation and
exaltation in the kingdom of God.

{105} The laws known to man as the "laws of nature," through which
the earth and all things on it are governed, as well as the laws
which prevail throughout the entire universe, through which heavenly
bodies are controlled and to which they are obedient in all things,
are all circumscribed and included in the gospel. Every natural law
or scientific principle that man has truly discovered, but which was
always known to God, is a part of the gospel truth. There never was and
never will be any conflict between truth revealed by the Lord to his
servants, the prophets, and truth revealed by him to the scientist, who
makes his discoveries through his research and study.

There is a great deal that is taught in the religions of the world
as gospel truth that the Lord never did reveal, and which is not in
harmony with revealed religion. There is also much that is taught
in the world of science that the Lord never did reveal, which is
in conflict with the truth. A great deal that man has put forth as
scientific theory is founded in error and therefore cannot prevail. The
conflict between religion and science is founded in error and therefore
cannot prevail. The conflict between religion and science is due to the
fact that there are many ideas advanced in false forms of religion and
false conclusions reached by men of science. Truth and error can never
agree; but truth, no matter where it is found, is consistent and will
always harmonize with every other truth. The Lord stated it as follows:

"For intelligence cleaveth unto intelligence; wisdom receiveth wisdom;
truth embraceth truth; virtue loveth virtue; light cleaveth unto light;
mercy hath compassion on mercy, and claimeth her own."--Doctrine and
Covenants 88:40.

The Lord has revealed that man was formed in his image and that we
are his offspring. This is a glorious gospel truth. Anything that we
may be taught, whether in false forms of religion or in the field of
science in conflict {106} with this great truth cannot endure, for it
is error. It may be cherished for a season and seem to prevail, as
many falsehoods have done in the past when put forth as truth, but the
time will come when all theories, ideas and opinions which are not in
harmony with that which the Lord has declared, must come to an end;
for that which remains and will endure and abide forever, will be the
truth, even the gospel of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 51, pp. 164, 165, March, 1916.

LET YOUR LIGHT SHINE. Christ, teaching his disciples, called attention
to the importance of their position and place in the world. Though poor
and despised of men, yet he told them they were the salt of the earth,
the light of the world.

Then he encouraged them to effort and achievement by showing them that
their exalted position would avail them little, unless they made proper
use of their high callings.

These conditions and instructions apply admirably to the Latter-day
Saints, who are indeed the salt of the earth, and in whom is vested the
gospel light of the world; who, as the apostle said of the Former-day
Saints, are a chosen generation, a royal priesthood, an holy nation,
a peculiar people; that they should show forth the praises of him who
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light.

But all this availeth little or nothing, unless the Saints consider
themselves of some consequence, and let their light shine, collectively
and individually; unless they are model in their behavior, honest,
zealous in the spread of truth, tolerant of their neighbors, "having
your conversation honest among the Gentiles; that whereas they speak
against you as evil-doers, they may by your good works, which they
shall behold, glorify God in the day of visitation."

One fault to be avoided by the Saints, young and old, is the tendency
to live on borrowed light, with their own hidden under a bushel; to
permit the savor of their salt of knowledge {107} to be lost; and the
light within them to be reflected, rather than original.

Every Saint should not only have the light within himself, through the
inspiration of the Holy Spirit, but his light should so shine that it
may be clearly perceived by others.

Men and women should become settled in the truth, and founded in the
knowledge of the gospel, depending upon no person for borrowed or
reflected light, but trusting only upon the Holy Spirit, who is ever
the same, shining forever and testifying to the individual and the
priesthood, who live in harmony with the laws of the gospel, of the
glory and the will of the Father. They will then have light everlasting
which cannot be obscured. By its shining in their lives, they shall
cause others to glorify God; and by their well-doing put to silence the
ignorance of foolish men, and show forth the praises of him who hath
called them out of darkness into his marvelous light.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 8, pp. 60-62, 1904-5.

NO CAUSE FOR WORRY. The Saints and their leaders have redeemed
the waste places, founded Christian homes, churches, and schools;
established industries--because of the very nature of their
necessities. Why should they not be permitted to enjoy the fruits of
their toils, and why be sneered at and condemned for their energy and
enterprise, and especially by men who prove themselves to be hypocrites
and liars, who live on what others have produced? Are the Saints to
be condemned because they have appropriated the land, paid for it by
hard labor, cultivated and made the best out of it by their united
strength, under the inspired direction of wise leaders? It will be
noted that it is not the people who are complaining, for they have been
assisted in many ways to better themselves by such leaders; but it is
the ministers, who have no interest whatever, either in our material
or spiritual advancement. And then again, {108} are such leaders to be
condemned because they have directed and led the way in these things?
Had they not done so, whence would our enterprises, our temporal
salvation, have come? Never by the help of sectarian ministers, that
much is true, at least.

No; young man, you need not be troubled over ministerial accusations
against this people, nor over what the people of the world say against
us. I have no fears for the Church from these sources, but I confess
I have fears when our young men begin to weaken, and to take sides
against their fathers; to profess to think that the priesthood is
selfish and self-seeking; to follow lies and accusations rather than
plain truth; to join in derision against the leaders of the Saints,
and to laugh when unfriendly editors and ministers hold them up to
ridicule. I fear, when young men deny the truth and follow falsehood;
when they become self-sufficient, unvirtuous, worldly and proud; when
the sterling qualities of their fathers are derided by them; when they
seek the plaudits of men of the world rather than the kingdom of God
and his righteousness.

There is no genuine truth in the arraignment of the Church and her
officers by the ministers, but much to you, young men, in the way
you look upon it, and in your acts and decisions. Especially without
careful consideration, should you pay no attention to the accusation
of ministers, to whom with force the sentiment of Emerson applies: "We
want men and women who shall renovate life and our social state, but we
see that most natures are insolvent--cannot satisfy their own wants,
have an ambition out of all proportion to their practical force, and so
do learn and beg day and night continually."

I say that nothing can bring peace to our young men in this world save
the triumphs of the principles of truth which have been revealed of God
to the Latter-day Saints, for our doctrines are the practical precepts
of the gospel of {109} Jesus Christ, and to behold its triumph should
be the overpowering ambition and desire of every righteous soul. This
is spiritual salvation which includes the temporal. Seek to know the
worth thereof, and let these men's ravings be put under your feet.
Remember that "when a man lives with God his voice shall be as sweet
as the murmur of the brook and the rustle of the corn." The Saints and
their leaders strive diligently to this end.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
7, p. 303, February, 1904.

THE GOSPEL A SHIELD FROM TERROR. We hear about living in perilous
times. We are in perilous times, but I do not feel the pangs of that
terror. It is not upon me. I propose to live so that it will not rest
upon me. I propose to live so that I shall be immune from the perils
of the world, if it be possible for me to so live, by obedience to the
commandments of God and to his laws revealed for my guidance. No matter
what may come to me, if I am only in the line of my duty, if I am in
fellowship with God, if I am worthy of the fellowship of my brethren,
if I can stand spotless before the world, without blemish, without
transgression of the laws of God, what does it matter to me what may
happen to me? I am always ready, if I am in this frame of understanding
mind and conduct. It does not matter at all. Therefore I borrow no
trouble nor feel the pangs of fear.

The Lord's hand is over all, and therein I acknowledge his hand.
Not that men are at war, not that nations are trying to destroy
nations, not that men are plotting against the liberties of their
fellow creatures, not in those respects at all; but God's hand is not
shortened. He will control the results that will follow. The will
overrule them in a way that you and I, today, do not comprehend, or do
not foresee, for ultimate good. He foresees the end as he foresaw that
war should come upon all nations of the world, and as the Prophet has
declared it would. The Lord knew it would come. Why? Because he knew
what the world was doing. {110} He knew the trend of the spirits of men
and of nations. He knew what the results would be, in time. He knew
when the time would be, and the results that would be manifest, and
so he declared it by the voice of his servants, the prophets; and now
we see the fulfilment of the predictions made by the servants of God,
as they were inspired to utter them, when they declared that the time
would come to pass when war would be poured out upon all nations--not
to fulfil the purposes of God, but the purposes of the nations of the
earth in consequence of their wickedness. It may be a very difficult
thing for me, with the range of words that I possess, to express my
thoughts and to explain my full intent; but I repeat to you that the
Lord God Almighty is not pleased, nor was it his purpose or design, or
intent, to foreordain the condition that the world is in today; nor
did he do so. He foresaw what would come, by the conduct of men by
their departure from the truth, by their lack of the love of God, and
by the course that they should pursue, inimical to the well-being of
his children. He foresaw what would be, but he had given them their
agency, under which they are bringing it to pass. The results of it,
eventually, will be overruled for the good of those who shall live
after, not for the good of those who shall destroy themselves because
of their wicked propensities and crimes.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 20,
p. 827, July, 1917.

THE GOSPEL TRUMPET. If we are in the line of our duty, we are engaged
in a great and glorious cause. It is very essential to our individual
welfare that every man and every woman who has entered into the
covenants of the gospel, through repentance and baptism, should feel
that as individuals it is their bounden duty to use their intelligence,
and the agency which the Lord has given them, for the promotion of the
interests of Zion and the establishment of her cause in the earth.

It matters not how devout, honest, or sincere we might {111} be in
the profession of our faith in God, or in the system of religion we
might have adopted, and which we believe to be the everlasting gospel,
without repentance and baptism and the reception of the Holy Ghost,
which constitute the new birth, we are not of the family of Christ,
but are aliens, estranged from God and his laws, and in this fallen
condition we shall remain, whether in the body or in the spirit, for
time and for eternity, unless we render obedience to the plan devised
in the heavens for the redemption and salvation of the human family.

The Latter-day Saints may say, we were taught this doctrine by the
elders in our native lands, and we believed it and repented of our
sins, and were baptized, and we received the gift of the Holy Ghost,
which was a testimony to us that we had done the will of the Father,
and since then our testimonies have often been confirmed through the
manifestations of the power of God, and the renewal of his Spirit in
our hearts. Why, therefore, say they, is it necessary to refer to these
things now? We perhaps forget, in consequence of the things of time,
which so tempt our fallen nature, that having been born anew, which is
the putting away of the old man sin, and putting on of the man Christ
Jesus, we have become soldiers of the Cross, having enlisted under the
banner of Jehovah for time and for eternity, and that we have entered
into the most solemn covenants to serve God and to contend earnestly
for the establishment of the principles of truth and righteousness on
this earth continually while we live.

In referring to the subject of baptism as essential to salvation, it
may be asked by some, what would become of those who heard not the
gospel and who therefore had not the opportunity of being baptized,
claiming as we do that the gospel was taken from the earth in
consequence of its being rejected when proclaimed by Jesus and his
apostles? I would say to such, that God has made ample provision for
all his {112} children, both the ignorant and the learned; those who
have not had the gospel preached to them in the flesh, will hear it in
the spirit, for all must have the plan of salvation presented to them
for their acceptance or rejection before they can become amenable to
the law.

In connection with this work is that spoken of concerning Elijah the
prophet, namely, "The turning of the hearts of the children to the
fathers, and the hearts of the fathers to the children," which if not
done the whole earth will be smitten with a curse.

The kingdom of God must be erected upon the principles which Christ has
revealed, upon the foundation of eternal truth; Jesus himself being the
chief cornerstone. Those holy and sublime principles must be observed
and honored in our lives, in order that we may obtain an exaltation
with the sanctified in the kingdom of God.

The beauty of these principles is that they are true, and the
satisfaction derived from their adoption is the knowledge which we
receive convincing us of this fact. We have not believed a fable,
neither are we cherishing a cunningly devised scheme, but we have
been inducted into the truth, having Christ for our head, who is our
forerunner, our great High Priest and King.

The Holy Ghost is a personage who acts in Christ's stead. Just before
the risen Redeemer left the earth he commanded his disciples to tarry
in the city of Jerusalem until they should be endowed with power from
on high. They did so, and agreeable to promise, the Comforter came
whilst they were met together, filling their hearts with unspeakable
joy, insomuch that they spake in tongues and prophesied; and the
inspiring influence of this holy being accompanied them in all their
ministerial duties, enabling them to perform the great mission to which
they had been called by the Savior.

I know that God lives and that he has revealed himself. {113} I know
that the Holy Ghost has been conferred upon the children of men, and
that the gospel has been restored to the inhabitants of the earth in
its fulness. I know that the Holy Priesthood, which is the power of
God delegated to man, has been restored to the earth. I do know that
God has delivered his people and that he will continue to deliver us
and lead us on in his own peculiar way from conquest to conquest, from
victory to victory, until truth and righteousness gain the ascendency
in this his earth, inasmuch as we remain true to him and to one another.

It is the fool who has said in his heart, "There is no God," and it
would indeed be a weak and foolish mind that would rest satisfied
without knowing beyond a doubt the Author and Source of his religion,
when the opportunity of ascertaining the fact is extended to him.

I know the fruits of my religion are good, they are flavored with the
sweets of heaven, and they impart health and life to the soul, and I
know that God, the Creator of heaven and earth, is its author. No man
need wonder whether this be really true or not, for all may know for
themselves; all may partake of the fruits of the vine and eat and live;
all may drink of the eternal spring, and thirst no more. These things
I declare to you to be true and faithful. I have been acquainted with
them from my youth, and I have felt their influence from my childhood.
I have seen the effect of their opposite, and I know whereof I speak. I
cannot deny these things, neither can any man who has ever known them,
although he may apostatize from the Church, except he deny himself and
his God.

The man who embraces what is called "Mormonism," but which is really
the gospel of the Son of God, and lives according to its precepts,
will never lie nor steal; he will not dishonor his parents nor despise
his poorer brethren; he will never, no never, speak against the Lord's
anointed nor be ashamed to own his God, to whom he owes homage and
{114} gratitude now and forever; he will never do a dishonorable act,
nor fail to acknowledge God in all things, neither will he refuse
to render implicit obedience to the revelations of God which are
applicable to him. It is true, man may err in judgment, he may be
wanting in many things because of his fallen nature, but the system
of salvation is perfect. Jesus, the Only Begotten of the Father, in
whom there is no blemish, is its author; he is the standard to all the
world, and will be forever. He had power to lay down his life and take
it up again, and if we keep inviolate the covenants of the gospel,
remaining faithful and true to the end, we too, in his name and through
his redeeming blood, will have power in due time to resurrect these our
bodies after they shall have been committed to the earth.--April 8,
1876, _Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 18, pp. 271-277, 1877.

WHAT CHURCH LEADERS ADVOCATE. We wish to advocate the principle of
unity, the love of God and neighbor, the love of a purpose that is
great, ennobling, good in itself, and calculated to exalt man and bring
him nearer to the likeness of the Son of God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
21, p. 98, December, 1917.

OUR MESSAGE ONE OF LOVE. We bring a message of love. We wish to
show how much we love you, and to find out how much you love us in
return.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 98, December, 1917.

WHENCE? WHITHER? We want to know where we came from, and where we are
going. Where did we come from? From God. Our spirits existed before
they came to this world. They were in the councils of the heavens
before the foundations of the earth were laid. We were there. We sang
together with the heavenly hosts for joy when the foundations of the
earth were laid, and when the plan of our existence upon this earth and
redemption were mapped out. We were there; we were interested, and we
took a part in this great preparation. We were unquestionably present
in {115} those councils when that wonderful circumstance occurred
when Satan offered himself as a savior of the world if he could but
receive the honor and glory of the Father for doing it. But Jesus said,
"Father, thy will be done, and the glory be thine forever." Wherefore,
because Satan rebelled against God, and sought to destroy the agency
of man, the Father rejected him and he was cast out, but Jesus was
accepted. We were, no doubt, there, and took part in all those scenes,
we were vitally concerned in the carrying out of these great plans
and purposes, we understood them, and it was for our sakes they were
decreed, and are to be consummated. These spirits have been coming to
this earth to take upon them tabernacles, that they might become like
unto Jesus Christ, being "formed in his likeness and image," from the
morn of creation until now, and will continue until the winding up
scene, until the spirits who were destined to come to this world shall
have come and accomplished their mission in the flesh.--_Deseret Weekly
News,_ 1884, Vol. 33, p. 130.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS ARE LAW-ABIDING. I wish to enter here my avowal
that the people called Latter-day Saints, as has been often repeated
from this stand, are the most law-abiding, the most peaceable,
long-suffering and patient people that can today be found within the
confines of this republic, and perhaps anywhere else upon the face
of the earth; and we intend to continue to be law-abiding, so far as
the constitutional law of the land is concerned; and we expect to
meet the consequences of our obedience to the laws and commandments
of God like men. These are my sentiments briefly expressed, upon this
subject.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ 1882, Vol. 31, p. 226.

{116}



CHAPTER VII

THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF THE GOSPEL

HOW THE SINNER MAY BE CLEANSED. You cannot take a murderer, a suicide,
an adulterer, a liar, or one who was or is thoroughly abominable in his
life here, and simply by the performance of an ordinance of the gospel,
cleanse him from sin and usher him into the presence of God. God has
not instituted a plan of that kind, and it cannot be done. He has said
you shall repent of your sins. The wicked will have to repent of their
wickedness. Those who die without the knowledge of the gospel will have
to come to the knowledge of it, and those who sin against light will
have to pay the uttermost farthing for their transgression and their
departure from the gospel, before they can ever get back to it. Do not
forget that. Do not forget it, you elders in Israel, nor you, mothers
in Israel, either; and, when you seek to save either the living or the
dead, bear it in mind that you can only do it on the principle of their
repentance and acceptation of the plan of life. That is the only way in
which you can succeed.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, pp. 6, 7.

FALLACY OF DEATH-BED REPENTANCE. I do not believe in the ideas that
we hear sometimes advanced in the world, that it matters but little
what men do in this life, if they will but confess Christ at the end
of their journey in life, and that is all-sufficient, and that by so
doing they will receive their passport into heaven. I denounce this
doctrine. It is unscriptural, it is unreasonable, it is untrue, and it
will not avail any man, no matter by whom this idea may be advocated;
it will prove an utter failure unto men. As reasonable beings, as men
and women of intelligence, we cannot {117} help but admire and honor
the doctrine of Jesus Christ, which is the doctrine of God, and which
requires of every man and woman righteousness in their lives, purity
in their thoughts, uprightness in their daily walk and conversation,
devotion to the Lord, love of truth, love of their fellowman, and above
all things in the world the love of God. These were the precepts that
were inculcated by the Son of God when he walked among his brethren in
the meridian of time. He taught these precepts; he exemplified them in
his life, and advocated continually the doing of the will of him that
sent him.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 3.

THE CHANGE THAT COMES WITH REPENTANCE AND BAPTISM. That change comes
today to every son and daughter of God who repents of his or her sins,
who humble themselves before the Lord, and who seek forgiveness and
remission of sin by baptism by immersion, by one having authority to
administer this sacred ordinance of the gospel of Jesus Christ. For
it is this new birth that was spoken of by Christ to Nicodemus as
absolutely essential that men might see the kingdom of God, and without
which no man could enter into the kingdom. Each of us can remember,
perhaps, the change that came into our hearts when we were baptized
for the remission of our sins. Perhaps it is not proper for one to
speak of himself or of his own experiences, because there may be those
within the sound of my voice who object to a man speaking of himself,
and especially when he shall say any good of himself; yet I speak not
of myself, I speak of the influence and power of the Holy Spirit that
I experienced when I had been baptized for the remission of my sins.
The feeling that came upon me was that of pure peace, of love and of
light. I felt in my soul that if I had sinned--and surely I was not
without sin--that it had been forgiven me; that I was indeed cleansed
from sin; my heart was touched, and I felt that I would not injure
the smallest insect beneath my feet. I felt as if I wanted to do good
{118} everywhere to everybody and to everything. I felt a newness of
life, a newness of desire to do that which was right. There was not one
particle of desire for evil left in my soul. I was but a little boy, it
is true, when I was baptized; but this was the influence that came upon
me, and I know that it was from God, and was and ever has been a living
witness to me of my acceptance of the Lord.

Oh! that I could have kept that same spirit and that same earnest
desire in my heart every moment of my life from that day to this.
Yet many of us who have received that witness, that new birth, that
change of heart, while we may have erred in judgment or have made many
mistakes, and often perhaps come short of the true standard in our
lives, we have repented of the evil, and we have sought from time to
time forgiveness at the hand of the Lord; so that until this day the
same desire and purpose which pervaded our souls when we were baptized
and received a remission of our sins, still holds possession of our
hearts, and is still the ruling sentiment and passion of our souls.
Though at times we may be stirred to anger, and our wrath move us to
say and do things which are not pleasing in the sight of God, yet
instantly on regaining our sober senses and recovering from our lapse
into the power of darkness, we feel humble, repentant, and to ask
forgiveness for the wrong that we have done to ourselves, and perchance
to others. The great, earnest, overwhelming desire, which is born of
the truth and of the witness of the Holy Spirit in the hearts of the
people who obey the truth, assumes sway and again takes possession of
our souls, to lead us on in the path of duty. This is my testimony and
I know it is true.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, pp. 65, 66.

THE NECESSITY OF BAPTISM. "The Light has come to the world, and he who
will not see it shall be condemned." The truth is here, and shall men
living now be heard to complain hereafter that they have not the truth
in their hearts? {119} Certainly not. It is here for all who will seek
it, and it shall be to their undoing if they do not obtain it.

The Savior said to Nicodemus, "Except a man be born again, he cannot
see the kingdom of God," and that is true today. A man must be born
from ignorance into truth, today, before he can expect to see any
difference between a Latter-day Saint and another not of the faith. If
he is not so born, he is more blind than the one whom Christ healed,
for having eyes he sees not, and having ears, hears not.

Is there any difference between the baptized and the unbaptized man?
All the difference in the world, I tell you, but it is only discernible
through the Spirit. It is a vast difference too great for one not in
possession of the Spirit to comprehend. Take two men, they may be
equals in point of goodness, they may be equally moral, charitable,
honest and just, but one is baptized and the other is not. There is a
mighty difference between them, for one is the son of God redeemed by
compliance with his laws, and the other remains in darkness.

The Scriptures say that a rich man would hardly enter the kingdom of
heaven, but it does not mean that riches will condemn a man, not at
all. God is pleased to see us acquire riches, for he intends ultimately
to give to us the whole earth as an eternal inheritance, but it is the
love of riches that kills. A great gulf separates those who enter the
house of the Lord and take wives, and those who do not thus marry--a
tremendous gulf, but to the unspiritual eye no difference is apparent.

I thank God for "Mormonism," so-called; it is the power of God unto
salvation. It is the duty of every Latter-day Saint to know of its
truth and to exemplify it. Its destiny is to overwhelm error and
supplant it with righteousness and peace.--_From a sermon,_ given in
Logan, Feb. 2, 1909.

{120} WHEN TO BAPTIZE CHILDREN. We confess to having been considerably
surprised when attending one of our latest Sunday School conventions
on learning that in some wards in the Church only once or twice in
each year are opportunities given to the children of the Saints to be
baptized. We hold the opinion that in every stake of Zion there should
be opportunity for baptism every day of every month and every month
in every year, for we believe that it is an admirable practice where
parents, in conformity with the revelations of God, have taught their
children in the first principles of the gospel--faith, repentance
and baptism, to have them baptized on their birthdays, when they
arrive at the age of eight years. This practice has many advantages.
In the first place, when a child is baptized on his birthday, he has
no difficulty in remembering the day when that sacred ordinance was
performed in his case. Again, it prevents the tendency manifested
by some people to delay and postpone duties that are always best
performed in their proper time and season. When once a child has passed
the eight-year mark, there appears no particular necessity for the
immediate performance of the ordinance, and the parents are apt to put
it off from day to day and from week to week, until months have passed
over, and the matter is not attended to. Should it so happen that in
this interval the child is taken by the Lord, then this rite has to
be performed in his behalf after his departure from our midst. How
much better it is that the child have the opportunity of doing this
all-important work for himself or herself!--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol.
40, p. 337, June 1, 1905.

THROUGH ATONEMENT SINS ARE WASHED AWAY. When we commit sin, it is
necessary that we repent of it and make restitution as far as lies in
our power. When we cannot make restitution for the wrong we have done,
then we must apply for the grace and mercy of God to cleanse us from
that iniquity.

{121} Men cannot forgive their own sins; they cannot cleanse themselves
from the consequences of their sins. Men can stop sinning and can do
right in the future, and so far their acts are acceptable before the
Lord and worthy of consideration. But who shall repair the wrongs they
have done to themselves and to others, which it seems impossible for
them to repair themselves? By the atonement of Jesus Christ the sins of
the repentant shall be washed away; though they be crimson they shall
be made white as wool. This is the promise given to you. We who have
not paid our tithing in the past, and are therefore under obligations
to the Lord, which we are not in position to discharge, the Lord
requires that no longer at our hands, but will forgive us for the past
if we will observe this law honestly in the future. That is generous
and kind, and I feel grateful for it.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, p. 42.

CONDITIONS FOR BAPTISM. No person can be properly baptized unless he
has faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and has repented of his sins,
with a repentance that need not be repented of. But faith comes by
hearing the word of God. This implies that the candidate must be
taught. Efficient teaching and preparation must precede the ordinance,
so that the candidate may have a proper appreciation and conception
of its purposes. The call to baptism, in the mission of our Savior,
was always preceded by instructions in the doctrines which he
taught.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14, p. 266.

THE FIRST PRINCIPLES OF THE GOSPEL. As Latter-day Saints we have every
reason to rejoice in the gospel, and in the testimony we have received
concerning its truth. I repeat, we have reason to rejoice and to be
exceeding glad, for we possess the testimony of Jesus, the spirit of
prophecy, which the people of the world know nothing about, nor can
they, without obedience to the gospel.

Jesus thoroughly understood this matter, and fully explained {122} it
when he said, "Except a man be born again, he cannot see the kingdom
of God." On first reflection, it would seem that anything so clear,
reasonable and tangible could be easily made plain to the understanding
of all men. Hence the feeling that has prompted many of the Latter-day
Saints to believe, after their minds have been enlightened by the
Spirit of God--everything being made so plain and clear to them, that
they had only to tell their friends and kindred what they had learned
and they would gladly receive it. But how disappointed, after they had
presented to them the truths of heaven in simplicity and plainness,
to hear them say, "We cannot see it!" or, "We do not believe it!" or
perhaps bitterly oppose it, which is by far the most common practice
of the world. They cannot understand it. Why? Because, as Jesus has
said no man can see the kingdom except he is born again. You may preach
the gospel to the people but unless they humble themselves as little
children before the Lord, acknowledging their dependence upon him
for light and wisdom, they cannot see or sense it, although you may
preach to them in as great plainness as it is possible for the truth
to be conveyed from one person to another. And should any believe
your testimony it would only be belief. They would not see as you
see--nor comprehend it, as you do--until they yield obedience to the
requirements of the gospel, and through the remission of their sins
receive the Holy Ghost. Then they, too, can see as you see, for they
have the same spirit; then will they love the truth as you do, and may
wonder why they could not comprehend it before or why it is that there
can be anybody with common intelligence that cannot understand truth so
plain and forcible.

First, then, it is necessary to have faith in God, faith being the
first principle in revealed religion, and the foundation of all
righteousness.

Faith in God is to believe that he is, and "that he is the only
supreme Governor and independent Being, in whom all fulness {123} and
perfection and every good gift and principle dwell independently," and
in whom the faith of all other rational beings must centre for life and
salvation; and further, that he is the great Creator of all things,
that he is omnipotent, omniscient, and by his works and the power of
his Spirit omnipresent.

Not only is it necessary to have faith in God, but also in Jesus
Christ, his Son, the Savior of mankind and the Mediator of the New
Covenant; and in the Holy Ghost, who bears record of the Father and the
Son, "the same in all ages and forever."

Having this faith, it becomes necessary to repent. Repent of what? Of
every sin of which we may have been guilty. How shall we repent of
these sins? Does repentance consist of sorrow for wrong doing? Yes,
but is this all? By no means. True repentance only is acceptable to
God, nothing short of it will answer the purpose. Then what is true
repentance? True repentance is not only sorrow for sins, and humble
penitence and contrition before God, but it involves the necessity of
turning away from them, a discontinuance of all evil practices and
deeds, a thorough reformation of life, a vital change from evil to
good, from vice to virtue, from darkness to light. Not only so, but to
make restitution, so far as it is possible, for all the wrongs we have
done, to pay our debts, and restore to God and man their rights--that
which is due to them from us. This is true repentance, and the exercise
of the will and all the powers of body and mind is demanded, to
complete this glorious work of repentance; then God will accept it.

Having thus repented, the next thing requisite is baptism, which is an
essential principle of the gospel--no man can enter into the gospel
covenant without it. It is the door of the Church of Christ, we cannot
get in there in any other way, for Christ bath said it. "Sprinkling,"
or "pouring," is not baptism. Baptism means immersion in water, and
{124} is to be administered by one having authority, in the name of the
Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost. Baptism without divine
authority is not valid. It is a symbol of the burial and resurrection
of Jesus Christ, and must be done in the likeness thereof, by one
commissioned of God, in the manner prescribed, otherwise it is illegal
and will not be accepted by him, nor will it effect a remission of
sins, the object for which it is designed, but whosoever hath faith,
truly repents and is "buried with Christ in baptism," by one having
divine authority, shall receive a remission of sins, and is entitled to
the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands.

Only those who are commissioned of Jesus Christ have authority or
power to bestow this gift. The office of the Holy Ghost is to bear
record of Christ, or to testify of him, and confirm the believer in
the truth, by bringing to his recollection things that have passed,
and showing or revealing to the mind things present and to come. "But
the Comforter, which is the Holy Ghost, whom the Father will send in
my name, he shall teach you all things, and bring all things to your
remembrance, whatsoever I have said unto you." "He will guide you into
all truth." Thus, without the aid of the Holy Ghost no man can know the
will of God, or that Jesus is the Christ--the Redeemer of the world,
or that the course he pursues, the work he performs, or his faith, are
acceptable to God, and such as will secure to him the gift of eternal
life, the greatest of all gifts. (John 14:26; 6:13.)

"But," says an objector, "have we not the Bible, and are not the Holy
Scriptures able to make us wise unto salvation?" Yes, provided we obey
them. "All Scripture is given by inspiration of God, and is profitable
for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction in
righteousness; that the man of God may be perfect, thoroughly furnished
unto all good works." The "good works" are the great desideratum. The
Bible itself is but the dead letter, it is {125} the Spirit that giveth
life. The way to obtain the Spirit is that which is here marked out so
plainly in the Scriptures. There is no other. Obedience, therefore,
to these principles is absolutely necessary, in order to obtain the
salvation and exaltation brought to light through the gospel.

As to the question of authority, nearly everything depends upon it.
No ordinance can be performed to the acceptance of God without divine
authority. No matter how fervently men may believe or pray, unless
they are endowed with divine authority they can only act in their own
name, and not legally nor acceptably in the name of Jesus Christ, in
whose name all these things must be done. Some suppose this authority
may be derived from the Bible, but nothing could be more absurd.
The Bible is but a book containing the writings of inspired men,
"profitable for doctrine, for reproof, for correction, for instruction
in righteousness," as such we hold it is sacred; but the Spirit, power
and authority by which it is written cannot be found within its lids,
nor derived from it. "For prophecy came not in old time by the will of
man; but holy men of God spake as they were moved by the Holy Ghost."
If by reading and believing the Bible this authority could be obtained,
all who read the Bible and believed it would have it--one equally with
another. I have read the Bible, and I have as good reason for believing
it as any other man, and do believe it with all my heart; but this does
not give me authority to teach men in the name of the Lord, nor to
officiate in the sacred ordinances of the gospel. Were the Scriptures
the only source of knowledge, we would be without knowledge for
ourselves, and would have to rest our hopes of salvation upon a simple
belief in the testimonies and sayings of others. This will not do for
me; I must know for myself, and if I act as a teacher of these things,
I must be clothed with the same light, knowledge and authority as those
were who acted in a similar calling anciently. Else how could I declare
{126} the truth and bear testimony as they did? What right would I
have to say, "thus saith the Lord," and call upon man to repent and be
baptized in the name of the Lord? or, that "This Jesus hath God raised
up [from the dead], whereof we all [the apostles] are witnesses?" And,
therefore, let all men "know assuredly that God hath made that same
Jesus," who was crucified, "both Lord and Christ." No man, without the
Holy Ghost, as enjoyed by the ancient apostles can know these things,
therefore cannot declare them by authority, nor teach and prepare
mankind for the salvation of God. God Almighty is the only source from
whence this knowledge, power and authority can be obtained, and that
through the operations of the Holy Ghost. The Scriptures may serve as
a guide to lead us to God, and hence to the possession of all things
necessary to life and salvation, but they can do no more.

Having profited by this example, and done the works commanded by
both Christ and his apostles, ancient and modern, I am happy of the
privilege to declare to the inhabitants of the earth that I have
received this testimony and witness for myself. I do know that these
things are true. Jesus, my Redeemer, lives, and God hath made him both
Lord and Christ. To know and to worship the true God, in the name of
Jesus--in spirit and in truth--is the duty of man. To aid and qualify
him for this service is the duty and office of the Holy Ghost. Man may
fail through faltering and unfaithfulness, but the Spirit of God will
never fail, nor abandon the faithful disciple. I can say as one who
has tried the experiment--for it may be called an experiment to the
beginner--that all who will take the course and accept the doctrine
thus marked out will, through faithfulness, become acquainted with the
truth, and shall know of the doctrine, whether it be of God or of man,
and will rejoice in it as all good, faithful Latter-day Saints do.

Here is an ordinance which we are now administering, {127} the
Sacrament of the Lord's supper; it is a principle of the gospel, one as
necessary to be observed by all believers, as any other ordinance of
the gospel. What is the object of it? It is that we may keep in mind
continually the Son of God who has redeemed us from eternal death,
and brought us to life again through the power of the gospel. Before
the coming of Christ to the earth, this was borne in mind by the
inhabitants of the earth to whom the gospel was preached, by another
ordinance which was a type of the great sacrifice that should take
place in the meridian of time. Hence, Adam, after he was cast out of
the garden, was commanded to offer sacrifices to God; by this act, he
and all who participated in the offerings of sacrifices, were reminded
of the Savior who should come to redeem them from death which, were
it not for the atonement wrought out by him, would forever exclude
them from dwelling in the presence of God again. But in his coming and
death, this commandment was fulfilled; and he instituted the Supper
and commanded his followers to partake of this in all time to come, in
order that they may remember him, bearing in mind that he had redeemed
them, also that they had covenanted to keep his commandments and to
walk with him in the regeneration. Hence it is necessary to partake of
the Sacrament, as a witness to him that we do remember him, are willing
to keep the commandments he has given us, that we may have his Spirit
to be with us always--even to the end, and also that we may continue in
the forgiveness of sins.

In various dispensations there are various differences in regard
to certain requirements of the gospel. For instance, in the day of
Noah, when he preached the gospel to the antediluvian world, he was
given a special commandment to build an ark, that in case the people
would reject him and the message sent unto him, that himself and all
who believed on him might be saved from the destruction that awaited
them. In this dispensation there is a principle {128} or commandment
peculiar to it. What is that? It is the gathering of the people unto
one place. The gathering of this people is as necessary to be observed
by believers, as faith, repentance, baptism, or any other ordinance.
It is an essential part of the gospel of this dispensation, as much so
as the necessity of building an ark by Noah, for his deliverance, was
a part of the gospel of his dispensation. Then the world was destroyed
by a flood, now it is to be destroyed by war, pestilence, famine,
earthquake, storms and tempest, the sea rolling beyond its bounds,
malarious vapors, vermin, disease and by fire and the lightnings of
God's wrath poured out for destruction upon Babylon. The cry of the
angel unto the righteous of this dispensation is, "Come out of her, my
people, that ye be not partakers of her sins, and that ye receive not
of her plagues." (Revelation 18:4.)

We believe also in the principle of direct revelation from God to man.

This is a part of the gospel, but it is not peculiar to this
dispensation. It is common in all ages and dispensations of the gospel.
The gospel cannot be administered, nor the Church of God continue to
exist, without it. Christ is the head of his Church and not man, and
the connection can only be maintained upon the principle of direct and
continuous revelation. It is not a hereditary principle, it cannot be
banded down from father to son, nor from generation to generation,
but is a living, vital principle to be enjoyed on certain conditions
only, namely--through absolute faith in God and obedience to his laws
and commandments. The moment this principle is cut off, that moment
the Church is adrift, being severed from its ever-living head. In this
condition it cannot continue, but must cease to be the Church of God
and, like the ship at sea without captain, compass or rudder, is afloat
at the mercy of the storms and the waves of ever contending human
passions, and worldly interests, pride and folly, finally to be wrecked
upon the strand of priestcraft and superstition. The religious {129}
world is in this condition today, ripening for the great destruction
which awaits them, but there is an ark prepared for such as are worthy
of eternal life, in the gathering of the Saints to the chambers of the
Almighty, where they shall be preserved until the indignation of God is
passed.

Marriage is also a principle or ordinance of the gospel, most vital to
the happiness of mankind, however unimportant it may seem, or lightly
regarded by many. There is no superfluous or unnecessary principle in
the plan of life, but there is no principle of greater importance or
more essential to the happiness of man--not only here, but especially
hereafter, than that of marriage. Yet all are necessary. What good
would it be to one to be baptized and receive not the Holy Ghost? And
suppose he went a little further and received the Holy Ghost, thereby
obtaining the testimony of Jesus, and then stopped at that, what good
would it do him? None whatever, but would add to his condemnation, for
it would be as burying his talent in the earth. To secure the fulness
of the blessings we must receive the fulness of the gospel. Yet men
will be judged and rewarded according to their works. "To him that
knoweth to do good and doeth it not, to him it is sin." Those who
receive a part of the gospel with light and knowledge to comprehend
other principles, and yet do not obey them, will come under this law;
hence, condemnation will be added unto such, and that which they did
receive may be taken from them and added to those who are more worthy.

Obedience is a requirement of heaven, and is therefore a principle of
the gospel. Are all required to be obedient? Yes, all. What, against
their will? O, no, not by any means. There is no power given to man,
nor means lawful, to be used to compel men to obey the will of God,
against their wish, except persuasion and good advice, but there is a
penalty attached to disobedience, which all must suffer who will not
obey the obvious truths or laws of heaven. I believe in the sentiment
of the poet:

  {130} "Know this, that every soul is free
  To choose his life and what he'll be;
  For this eternal truth is given,
  That God will force no man to heaven.

  "He'll call, persuade, direct aright,
  And bless with wisdom, love and light,
  In nameless ways be good and kind,
  But never force the human mind."

Is it a difficult task to obey the gospel? No. It is an easy matter
to those who possess the spirit of it. Most of this congregation
can testify that the gospel "yoke is easy, and the burden light."
Those who have embraced it will be judged according to their works
therein, whether they be good or evil. To such as are untrue to their
covenants it may be said, by and by, "Depart from me!" In vain will
they plead their former good works and faith. Why? Because the race
is not to the swift nor the battle always to the strong, but to him
that endures faithful to the end. We must save ourselves from this
untoward generation. It is a continual labor, but the strength of
the righteous will be sufficient for their day. Jesus said, "In my
Father's house are many mansions." There is a glory, or mansion, of
which the sun is typical, another of which the moon is typical, and
still another like unto the stars, and in this latter the condition
of its occupants will differ as the stars differ in appearance. Every
man will receive according to his works and knowledge. "These are they
who are of Paul, and of Apollos, and of Cephas. These are they who say
they are some of one and some of another--some of Christ and some of
John, and some of Moses, and some of Elias, and some of Esaias, and
some of Isaiah, and some of Enoch; but received not the gospel, neither
the testimony of Jesus." (Doc. and Cov. 76:100-101.) Thus, impartial
justice will be meted out unto all, and none will be lost but the sons
of perdition.--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 14, p. 266.

{131}



CHAPTER VIII

THE CHURCH AND THE MAN

THE CHURCH IN ADVANCE OF ITS MEMBERS. "The modern 'Mormon' is far in
advance of 'Mormonism'." The very reverse of this statement is the
truth. "Mormonism" is far in advance of the modern or any other class
of "Mormons." For not one member of the Church in one hundred, and
perhaps not a single member in the whole Church is able to reach the
high standards of faith, virtue, honor and truth inculcated in the
gospel of Jesus Christ.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 41, p. 144, March
1, 1906.

THE GOSPEL THE MOST IMPORTANT THING. The religion which we have
espoused is not a Sunday religion; it is not a mere profession; it is
a most--I was going to say--a most terrible reality--and I believe
I would be justified in using that expression, because it savors of
life unto life or of death unto death. If it is, and pardon me for
using that expression, if it is what we profess it to be, what we have
embraced it for, what we believe it to be as members of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, it is the most important thing in
the world to us, and the results to us in this world and in the world
to come will depend upon our integrity to the truth and our consistency
in observing its precepts, in abiding by its principles, and its
requirements.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1916, p. 2.

PERSONAL ADVANCEMENT IS HELP TO THE CHURCH. Whoever will labor
for his own welfare, for his own salvation and upbuilding in the
knowledge of those principles which draw men nearer to God and make
them more like unto him, fitting them better for the performance of
the duties required at their hands, is in like manner building up the
Church.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 2.

{132} COVENANTS OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. Among the covenants are
these, that they will cease from sin and from all unrighteousness; that
they will work righteousness in their lives; that they will abstain
from the use of intoxicants, from the use of strong drinks of every
description, from the use of tobacco, from every vile thing, and from
extremes in every phase of life; that they will not take the name
of God in vain; that they will not bear false witness against their
neighbor; that they will seek to love their neighbors as themselves;
to carry out the golden rule of the Lord, do unto others as they would
that others should do unto them. These principles are involved in the
covenants that the people have made in the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, and it is expected that the officers and presiding
authorities in the Church shall see to it that the members of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will keep these covenants
that they have made with the Lord, and that they will observe these
principles and adapt them to their lives and carry them out, that they
may be indeed the salt of the earth; not salt that has lost its savor
and is good for nothing but to be cast out and trodden under the foot
of men, but salt that has its savor and that is wholesome; that the
people of God may be a light unto this generation and unto the world;
that men may see your good works and glorify your Father which is in
heaven; and that, notwithstanding enemies who are filled with the
spirit of persecution and who say all manner of evil things against
the Latter-day Saints, those who have entered into the covenant of the
gospel, will keep the commandments of the Lord, will obey the dictates
of the Spirit of the Lord unto them, will work righteousness in the
earth, and will go right on in the path that Almighty God has marked
out for them to pursue, fulfilling and accomplishing his will and his
purposes concerning them in the latter day.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, pp. 4,
5.

{133} A PRIVILEGE TO BE ASSOCIATED WITH THE CHURCH. I esteem it a great
privilege to be permitted to live and be associated with my brethren
and sisters in the great cause in which we are engaged. Personally,
I have nothing but this cause to live for, for the rest of my life.
It has been very much, almost entirely, the object of life with me,
ever since my childhood; and I am very thankful that I have had the
privilege of being connected with the missionary work of the Church,
and I hope and trust that I may be able to continue in this ministry
the remainder of my days. I feel in my heart that there is nothing
greater for me, or for any other man living than to be identified with
the cause of truth, and I verily believe that we are engaged in the
cause of truth, and not error.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, p. 2.

WORTH OF A STANDING IN THE CHURCH. My standing in the Church is worth
to me more than this life--ten thousand times. For in this I have life
everlasting. In this I have the glorious promise of the association
of my loved ones throughout all eternity. In obedience to this work,
in the gospel of Jesus Christ, I shall gather around me my family, my
children, my children's children, until they become as numerous as the
seed of Abraham, or as countless as the sands upon the seashore. For
this is my right and privilege, and the right and privilege of every
member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who holds the
priesthood and will magnify it in the sight of God. Without it, there
is death and desolation--disintegration and disinheritance; without
it there may be a chance to become a ministering spirit, a servant
unto servants throughout the endless ages, but in this gospel there
is a chance to become a son of God, in the image and likeness of the
Father and of his Only Begotten Son in the flesh. I would rather take
my boys and my girls to the grave, while they are innocent, than to see
them entrapped in the wickedness, the unbelief {134} and the spirit of
apostasy so prevalent in the world, and be led away from the gospel of
salvation.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 136, 137.

IMPORTANCE OF HAVING NAMES ON CHURCH RECORDS. Some people may not
care very much whether their names are recorded or not but this comes
from ignorance of the consequences. If their names are not recorded
they will not only be cut off from the assistance which they would be
entitled to from the Church, if they needed it, but they will be cut
off from the ordinances of the house of God; they will be cut asunder
from their dead and from their fathers who have been faithful, or from
those who shall come after them who shall be faithful, and they will be
appointed their portion with the unbelievers, where there is weeping
and gnashing of teeth. It means that you will be cut off from your
fathers and mothers, from your husbands, your wives, your children, and
that you shall have no portion or lot or inheritance in the kingdom
of God, both in time and in eternity. It has a very serious and
far-reaching effect.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, p. 47.

SECRET ORGANIZATIONS. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints
is good enough for me and my family, and I have no time nor means to
associate myself with organizations that are not of this Church and
which have simply for their objective the laying up of something for my
wife to have after I am dead. I cannot afford to do it for this reason:
the Lord has seen fit to give me from day to day just sufficient for
my needs, and if I were to join these associations for the purpose
of looking after the future of my family, I would be compelled to
neglect paying my tithing, and present duties, because I would not have
means enough to pay my tithing and my dues for these associations.
We have known members of the Church, who, when they were asked why
they did not pay their tithing, confessed that they were associated
with organizations of one kind and another, {135} wherein they were
compelled to pay weekly or monthly certain sums of money; they had
been associated with these institutions for a number of years, and had
put quite a lot of money in them; and now, if they did not continue
to pay their dues they would lose all they had put in, then in case
of death their families would lose the premium. From this you can see
they are in bondage to these secret organizations, and if they want
to pay tithing they cannot do it. Well, if they do not, they will be
among those whose names will not be found recorded in the books of the
law of the Lord and who will not have inheritance in the Zion of God.
Furthermore, we have called some of these men to go on missions, but
they could not go to preach the gospel to the nations of the earth.
Why? Because they belonged to certain secret associations, and they
were compelled to be at work all the time in order to pay their dues,
or they would lose what they had put in them.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, p.
40.

SECRET SOCIETIES. It is a well known truth that the counsel of the
First Presidency of the Church, in all cases, has been and is against
our brethren joining secret organizations for any purpose whatsoever,
and that wherever any of them have already joined, they have been and
are counseled to withdraw themselves from such organizations, as soon
as circumstances permit and wisdom dictates. In taking this position,
there has not been, neither is it intended that there shall be, any
controversy with the societies, and with their aims and objects. The
merits of the various orders are not considered at all; their aims may
be ever so worthy and their objects ever so commendable. That matter
does not enter into the discussion, so far as a member of our Church is
concerned.

The gospel of Jesus Christ is true, and is a power unto salvation,
temporal and spiritual. A man who complies in every respect therewith
has everything that any society can {136} offer, with countless truths
and consolations added: "But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and
his righteousness; and all these things shall be added unto you."
The Church is divinely organized, and in that organization there is
provision for the development and practice of every virtue known, every
charity revealed. For this reason and for its promise of eternal life
and glory, the gospel, and the Church divinely established for its
promulgation, should be nearer and dearer to a follower of Christ than
all other things. "No man can serve two masters; for either he will
hate the one, and love the other; or else he will hold to the one and
despise the other. Ye can not serve God and Mammon."

The members of our Church who have faith to heed the advice of the
authorities thereof, will not ally themselves, under any pretense,
with any organization not instituted by the Lord for the building up
of Zion. Neither will they, for any consideration, allow themselves
to imbibe the spirit of the world, or be tempted to lose their faith,
which will be the result with those who divide their interests,
devoting some to other organizations. This is the testimony of those
who have joined and who have later withdrawn. Nothing can be permitted
in the members that is calculated to bring division and weakness to
the Church, yet those who have been led to join other institutions
should not be dealt with harshly, but should be made to understand the
position of the Church, and where it is so understood, they should
shape their affairs for withdrawal, in humility and repentance, from
that which threatens their standing.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, p.
305, February, 1903.

GOSSIP. The "Mormon" creed: "Mind your own business," is a good motto
for young people to adopt who wish to succeed, and who wish to make
the best use of their time and lives. And when I say young people, it
includes as well aged and middle aged men and women.

{137} Let it be remembered that nothing is quite so contemptible as
idle gossip. Byron said a good thing when he put into the mouth of Don
Juan these words:

  "In fact there's nothing makes me so much grieve
  As that abominable tittle-tattle,
  Which is the cud eschewed by human cattle."

How idle to go about whispering mysterious words here and there--words
often without foundation in fact, but uttered with injurious intent,
and perhaps with the idea of creating for the whisperer some imaginary
respect, because of his supposed possession of special knowledge. But
such action seldom bodes good, or sets upon the round of human lips
sentiments of appreciation for the excellent, the beautiful, and the
true, in a brother, neighbor, or friend. Such gossip and meddling
constantly hold to view the defects of its subjects, and the scandals
that are born fly as upon the wings of eagles. To be thus engaged
is a positive injury, also, to the person so employed, because, by
constantly holding the defects of others in his own mind, he ruins his
own ability to see and appreciate the virtues of his fellows, thus
stifling his nobler self.

It is so very much better for a person to strive to develop himself by
observing all the good points he can find in others, than to strangle
the growth of his better self by cherishing a fault-finding, sullen,
and intermeddling spirit. The scriptures support this thought. The
great Psalmist says in substance in the fifteenth psalm: "He that
backbiteth not with his tongue, nor doeth evil to his neighbor,
nor taketh up a reproach against his neighbor, shall abide in the
tabernacle of the Lord, and never be moved." To abide in the tabernacle
of the Lord is to enjoy his Holy Spirit. Now, he that taketh up a
reproach against his neighbor is in great danger of losing the Spirit
of the Lord. {138} "But my neighbor has done this, that or the other
that is forbidden by the law of the Church, or good usage, why should
I not set him right?" says one. Let that one ask himself: "Is it my
business?" The answer will suggest itself: If it is not my business,
let me be wise enough to mind my own business. For "he that refraineth
his lips is wise, and he that uttereth a slander is a fool;" and,
further, the Lord declares through the Psalmist: "Whoso privily
slandereth his neighbor, him will I cut off."

Let it be the aim of the Saints to cultivate the spirit of generosity
and good-will, such as was exemplified in the life of Christ, and
proclaimed when the angels heralded abroad the message: "Peace on
earth, to men good will," and which has been reiterated in the modern
restoration of the gospel. Watch constantly for that which is worthy
and noble in your fellowman. It makes a person better to see and speak
of good in his neighbor; while there is unbounded delight in observing
the effect that a few words of appreciation and encouragement have upon
men, women, and children with whom we associate. Let those try it who
really wish to get the genuine sweets out of life.

The meddler, the gossip, the fault-finder, on the other hand, soon ruin
their own capacity for observing the better side of human nature; and,
not finding it in others, search in vain for its influence in their own
souls.

There is a wonderful field in the organizations of the Church for the
cultivation of all the virtues of the human heart. It is the business
of every officer and member of the Church, and of her associations and
organizations, to lead out in doing good; to stand first in serviceable
practices in the gospel's atmosphere of sunshine and peace; to lift up
and not cast down; to encourage and not to repress; to dispense joy,
and to drown sorrow; to refrain their lips from slander and backbiting,
and, by sweet temper and kind words, to unfold the better side of human
nature; to mind {139} their own business, and not to unduly criticise,
and not to find fault, nor to delight in tale-bearing, scandal, envy,
and gossip.

This advice heeded, our social ethics would soon show wonderful
improvement; happiness, beauty of disposition, love, and moral
cleanliness, would increase among the Saints; the Spirit of God
would delight to dwell in their midst, and the best qualities of the
people would unfold and develop like the rose in the warm sunshine of
June.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, p. 388, March, 1903.

WE WANT TO BE KNOWN AS WE ARE. We want to be known as we are. We want
to be seen in our true light. We want the world to become acquainted
with us. We want them to learn our doctrine, to understand our faith,
our purposes, and the organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints. We would like them to know something about the
origin of this work, but we desire that they shall see this work in the
true spirit of it, and the only way this can be brought about is by the
inquiring intelligent world coming in contact with us--those indeed who
are disposed to love truth and righteousness, and whose eyes are not
so blinded that they can not see the truth when it is presented before
them.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 3.

TREATMENT OF THOSE WILL NOT OBEY THE LAW OF THE CHURCH. It has occurred
to me somewhat in this way: that the body of the Church is likened to
the body of a man, and you know men do sometimes get their systems
a little deranged--that is to say, sometimes they are flea-bitten.
Fleas bite them and mosquitoes bite them and cause little swellings
to rise on their face and hands. Sometimes they have boils upon them,
and carbuncles, sebaceous tumors and other excrescences, that only
need the application of the lance to get out the humor from them or to
excise them from the body, or cut them off and let them go, so that
the body may be cleansed from their poisonous effect. {140} It is so
with the Church. From time to time there are characters who become a
law unto themselves and they follow the bent of their own "sweet will"
until they get themselves into a condition mentally and spiritually
that they become a menace to the body ecclesiastic. In other words,
they become like a boil, tumor, or carbuncle on the body, you have
to call in the surgeon to apply the knife to cut them out that the
body may be cleansed from them; and this has been the case from the
beginning.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 5.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS MUST BE THINKERS AND WORKERS. To be Latter-day Saints
men and women must be thinkers and workers; they must be men and women
who weigh matters in their minds; men and women who consider carefully
their course of life and the principles that they have espoused. Men
cannot be faithful Latter-day Saints unless they study and understand,
to some extent at least, the principles of the gospel that they have
received. When you hear people, who profess to be Latter-day Saints,
running off on tangents, on foolish notions and one-horse, cranky
ideas, things that are obviously opposed to reason and to good sense,
opposed to principles of righteousness and to the word of the Lord that
has been revealed to men, you should know at once that they have not
studied the principles of the gospel, and do not know very much about
the gospel. When people understand the gospel of Jesus Christ, you will
see them walking straightforward, according to the word of the Lord and
the law of God, strictly in accordance with that which is consistent,
just, righteous, and in every sense acceptable to the Lord who only
accepts of that which is right and pleasing in his sight; for only that
which is right is pleasing unto him.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14, 1910,
p. 72.

THE IDENTITY OF THE CHURCH UNCHANGED. We have a double guide and a
double assurance in reaching our correct conclusions concerning the
perfect identity of the {141} Church now and the Church in the days of
its first prophet. The spirit of loyalty and devotion, together with
love for the work of building up Zion, characterize the Saints, while
the devil rages now in the same manner that he did then. The spirit,
on both sides of the controversy, is so identical that it is hard to
imagine that any thoughtful Latter-day Saint can be deceived over the
situation as it exists today.

By their fruits ye shall know them. The devil caused men to rage over
the Nauvoo House, the building of the Nauvoo Temple, the Prophet's
Nauvoo brick store, and the material prosperity of the Saints in that
beautiful city on the banks of the Mississippi; he causes men to rave
over so-called "commercialism" today. Envy was rampant then. It is just
as deadly now.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 40, p. 497, August 15, 1905.

NO CLASSES OR NATIONALITIES IN THE CHURCH. The brotherhood and common
interests in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints are among
the great characteristics of our faith, and whatever, therefore, tends
to establish class distinction either in society or nationalities
should be discouraged in every way possible. God is no respecter of
persons, neither does he glorify one class to the disadvantage of
another.

A striking peculiarity of the Saints gathered from all parts of the
earth is that they are almost universally of the blood of Ephraim.
If they have received the Holy Ghost they are of one spirit, so that
whatever creates a discord in the spirit and unity of the Saints is of
evil origin. The Spirit of God never begets strife, nor does it set up
and insist on distinctions among those who have been its recipients.

There has been in some people's minds the thought that this or that
nationality was entitled to certain recognition because of its
large numbers or prominence in certain respects. The affairs of the
Church are not carried on with {142} respect to what is good or bad
policy--there is no policy in the Church, but that of wisdom and
truth, and everyone of its members should thoroughly understand that
distinctions both in classes and nationalities are odious and out of
harmony with the discipline and spirit of Church government. If a man
of one or another nationality is honored by any important call, it is
because of the spirit in the man, and not because of his nationality,
and the Saints may be certain that when any man makes a demand for
recognition it is an assumption on his part, and is not in harmony with
the life and spirit of our Master.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 37, p.
658, November 1, 1902.

NO NEUTRALS IN THE CHURCH. In Christ's Church we cannot be neutral or
inert. We must either progress or retrograde. It is necessary for the
Latter-day Saints to keep pushing on in order that they may keep their
faith alive and their spirits quickened to the performance of their
duties. Let us remember that we are engaged in God's work--and when
I say God's work, I mean that we are engaged in the work which the
Almighty has instituted in the earth for our salvation individually.
Every man should be laboring for his own good and as far as possible
for the good of others. There is no such thing in the science of life
as a man laboring exclusively for himself. We are not intended to
be alone in time nor in eternity. Each individual is a unit in the
household of faith, and each unit must feel his or her proportion of
the responsibility that devolves upon the whole. Each individual must
be diligent in performing his duty. By doing this, and keeping himself
pure and unspotted from the world, he assists others to keep themselves
pure and unspotted. For instance, a man who is faithful in observing
the Sabbath day and in attending to the duties of that day will at
least set an example unto all with whom he is associated. The man who
is prayerful before the {143} Lord will set an example before all
others who see and know his conduct. The man who is honest in dealing
with his neighbor will set an example for good. Those who do this are
genuine representatives of Zion; they are the children of God indeed
and of a truth, and there rests with them the spirit of light and the
love of God. They are in a saved condition, and will continue to be in
a saved condition so long as they continue to observe the principles
of the gospel. It is useless for us to mourn over the evils that we
ourselves have caused, unless by repentance we may make restitution for
the evils we have done. It is a terrible thing for men and women to
allow themselves to go so far in the neglect of duty that evils will
result from their misconduct which they will be powerless thereafter to
eradicate or to make restitution for.--_Sermon,_ Sunday, June 12, 1898.

DON'T HAVE RELIGIOUS HOBBIES. Brethren and sisters, don't have hobbies.
Hobbies are dangerous in the Church of Christ. They are dangerous
because they give undue prominence to certain principles or ideas
to the detriment and dwarfing of others just as important, just as
binding, just as saving as the favored doctrines or commandments.

Hobbies give to those who encourage them a false aspect of the gospel
of the Redeemer; they distort and place out of harmony its principles
and teachings. The point of view is unnatural. Every principle and
practice revealed from God is essential to man's salvation, and to
place any one of them unduly in front, hiding and dimming all others is
unwise and dangerous; it jeopardizes our salvation, for it darkens our
minds and beclouds our understandings. Such a view, no matter to what
point directed, narrows the vision, weakens the spiritual perception,
and darkens the mind, the result of which is that the person thus
afflicted with this perversity and contraction of mental vision places
himself in a position to be tempted of the evil {144} one, or through
dimness of sight or distortion of vision, to misjudge his brethren and
give way to the spirit of apostasy. He is not square before the Lord.

We have noticed this difficulty: that Saints with hobbies are prone to
judge and condemn their brethren and sisters who are not so zealous in
the one particular direction of their pet theory as they are. The man
with the Word of Wisdom only in his brain, is apt to find unmeasured
fault with every other member of the Church who entertains liberal
ideas as to the importance of other doctrines of the gospel.

There is another phase of this difficulty--the man with a hobby is
apt to assume an "I am holier than thou" position, to feel puffed up
and conceited, and to look with distrust, if with no severer feeling,
on his brethren and sisters who do not so perfectly live that one
particular law. This feeling hurts his fellow-servants and offends the
Lord. "Pride goeth before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a
fall."--(Prov. 16-18.)

There are some great truths in the plan of redemption that are
fundamental. They cannot be ignored; none others can be placed before
them. The fatherhood of God, the efficacy of the atonement of our Lord
and Savior, the restoration of the gospel in these latter days, must
be accepted with our whole hearts. We cannot compensate for a lack of
faith in these essential doctrines by the most absolute abstinence from
things unhealthful, by the rigid payment of tithing on our "anise and
cummin," or by the observance of any other outward ordinance. Baptism
itself without faith in God avails nothing.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 37, pp. 176-177, March, 1902.

WEALTH DOES NOT BRING CHURCH FAVORS. The idea should never gain ground
that the rich man in the Church is entitled to any more consideration
than the humblest {145} member. Men of superior virtues and powers,
whether those virtues and powers be represented in the ability to gain
wealth, to acquire education, or to display genius and wisdom, will
always occupy a commanding place in the social, the business, and
religious world.

It is one thing, however, to respect wealth and its powers, and quite
another to become mere sycophants to it. Neither the Church, nor its
blessings nor favors, have ever been, from its organization, submissive
to or purchasable by the mammon of this world. No man need to hope that
he can buy the gifts of God. Those who attempt to buy the treasures of
heaven will perish, and their wealth will perish with them. Wealth may
wield an undue influence and gain prestige in society, even though its
possessor may be greatly wanting in moral worthiness. And being a power
in itself, may be a danger through the opportunities for corruption
and seduction. Those, therefore, who have listened to the fallacious
arguments of the advantages of wealth and its power, independent of
virtue, have in store for them a great disappointment if they act upon
any such false theories.

The trouble is, that young men are very apt to mistake a friendly
and cordial greeting to those in possession of wealth for a genuine
friendship and sincere confidence. The unworthy rich should be as
much the object of our pity as the unworthy poor. Those who imagine
that wealth may be substituted for virtue are certainly doomed to
disappointment; and yet men sometimes foolishly and enviously suggest
that the highest social recommendation and religious standing as well
as the sincere friendship of the pure in heart are subject to the
command of the mammon of unrighteousness.

The money offered by Simon the sorcerer to the apostles for the
gifts they possessed was spurned by them, and a curse was pronounced
both upon him and his wealth. (See {146} Acts 8:14-23)_--Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 40, pp. 593, 594, October 1, 1905.

THE GOSPEL CAUSES DISTURBANCE. In truth the gospel is carrying us
against the stream of passing humanity. We get in the way of purely
human affairs and disturb the current of life in many ways and in many
places. People who are comfortably located and well provided for, do
not like to be disturbed. It angers them, and they would settle things
once for all in the most drastic manner. The effects of certain causes
are so unlike anything we have ever known that we are not safe in
making philosophy our guide; much less are we safe in making those our
guide who have some sort of selfish philosophy which they are anxious
that others should follow. Those who defend us, do so not infrequently
with an apologetic air. The Saints are never safe in following the
protests and counsels of those who would have us ever and always in
harmony with the world. We have our particular mission to perform;
and that we may perform it in consonance with divine purposes, we are
running counter to the ways of man. We are made unpopular. The contempt
of the world is on us, and we are the unloved child among the peoples
of the earth.

"HAVING DONE ALL, STAND."

There are people who are courageous in doing all they can to bring
about certain results. They will combat evils and resist the wrongs
that are inflicted upon them and upon others; but when they have been
defeated, when they see a just cause suffer, and evilly disposed
men triumphant, they give up. What is the use? That is the question
uppermost in their minds. They see wicked men apparently successful.
They see men of evil repute honored by their fellowmen until they are
almost persuaded that fate has her rewards for wrong doing. With them,
what appears to be a lost cause inspires no hope. It is lost, they say,
and we shall have to make the best of it, and {147} let it go. They are
at heart discouraged. Some almost question the purposes of Providence.
They have the courage of men who are brave at heart, but they have not
the courage of faith.

How different it was with Paul! He had labored fearlessly, he had
delivered a divine message, he had resisted the enemy, and they
apparently triumphed over him. He was taken prisoner and subjected
to humiliating treatment by the administrators of the law. He was in
bonds, and death awaited him, but he was still courageous. His was
the courage of faith. Read these stirring words of his sent to the
Ephesians, recorded in Ephesians 6:13, sent when most men would have
thought their cause lost: "Wherefore take unto you the whole armour of
God, that ye may be able to withstand in the evil day, and having done
all, to stand."

After we have done all we could do for the cause of truth, and
withstood the evil that men have brought upon us, and we have been
overwhelmed by their wrongs, it is still our duty to stand. We cannot
give up; we must not lie down. Great causes are not won in a single
generation. To stand firm in the face of overwhelming opposition, when
you have done all you can, is the courage of faith. The courage of
faith is the courage of progress. Men who possess that divine quality
go on; they are not permitted to stand still if they would. They are
not simply the creatures of their own power and wisdom; they are
instrumentalities of a higher law and a divine purpose.

Others would quit, they would avoid trouble. When it comes, it is to
them most unfortunate. It is really too bad. In their minds, it might
have been avoided. They want to square themselves with the World.
The decree of the world has gone forth, why withstand it? "We have
withstood evil," they say, "and it has overwhelmed us. Why stand
longer?" Such men read history, if at all, only as they make it;
they cannot see the hand of God in the affairs of {148} men, because
they see only with the eye of man and not with the eye of faith. All
resistance is gone out of them--they have left God out of the question.
They have not put on his whole armor. Without it they are loaded down
with fear and apprehension, and they sink. To such men everything that
brings trouble seems necessary. As Saints of God, it is our duty "to
stand," even when we are overwhelmed by evil.

"And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and
cleave unto all good, that ye shall live by every word which proceedeth
forth out of the mouth of God;

"For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon
precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith;

"And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake shall
find it again, even life eternal;

"Therefore be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my
heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether
you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found
worthy;

"For if ye will not abide in my covenant, ye are not worthy of me."
(Doc. and Cov. 98:11-15).--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Aug. 15, 1904, Vol.
39, pp. 496, 497.

NOT NATURALLY RELIGIOUS. Some people persist in saying on occasion that
they are not naturally religious. Do they mean by this that attending
meetings, taking part in ward worship, teaching and preaching, are
not congenial to them? Or, do they mean more? Perhaps the moral
restrictions governing an active worker in the Church are not congenial
to them. They reason that it is better to make no pretensions than to
make more than one can live up to; and so they excuse themselves by
declaring they are naturally not religious.

But religion is not outward show and pretense, and {149} being
religious does not altogether consist in compliance with outward forms,
even when these are the ordinances of the gospel. Neither is it an
unfailing sign that a person is conscientious who takes an active part
in organizations of the Church. Evil men may use these for selfish and
wicked purposes. I have known men who joined our organizations for such
ends, and men who have been baptized who never repented.

Then what is religion? James declares: "Pure religion and undefiled
before God and the Father is this: To visit the fatherless and widows
in their afflictions, and to keep himself unspotted from the world."
This may be interpreted as meaning that a person who is religious is
thoughtful to the unfortunate, and has an inner spirit that prompts to
deeds of kindness and to the leading of a blameless life; who is just,
truthful; who does not, as Paul says, think more highly of himself
than he ought to think; who is affectionate, patient in tribulation,
diligent, cheerful, fervent in spirit, hospitable, merciful; and who
abhors evil and cleaves to that which is good. The possession of such a
spirit and feeling is a true sign that a person is naturally religious.

The Church's outward ordinances and requirements are but necessary--yet
they are necessary--aids to the inner spiritual life. 'The Church
itself, the organization, meetings, ordinances, requirements, are only
helps, but very necessary helps, to the practice of true religion
--schoolmasters to direct us in the way of eternal light and truth.

Young men, do not say that you are not naturally religious, and so
make that an excuse for evil deeds and forbidden acts, and for not
identifying yourselves with the organizations of the Church, and by
such course perhaps smothering the Spirit of God within you, possessed
as a birthright, or received through the servants of the Lord by
the imposition of hands. Be rather religious both in appearance and
in reality, remembering what true religion means. {150} Even as the
testimony of Jesus is the spirit of prophecy, so is the possession of
the knowledge that you love purity, righteousness, honesty, justice and
well-doing, an indisputable evidence that you are naturally religious.
Search your hearts, and you will find deep down that you possess this
knowledge. Then encourage its growth and development to the gaining
of your own salvation. The Church and its quorums and organizations
will help you, and the living, loving God will add his bounteous
blessings.--_Improvement Era,_ 1905-6, Vol. 9, pp. 493-495.

STRIVE TO BE AS BROAD AS THE GOSPEL. The gospel of Jesus Christ,
properly taught and understood, inculcates broadness, force, and power.
It makes intellectually broad and valiant men. It gives to men good,
sound judgment in affairs temporal as well as spiritual. There are
reasons why it is worth a young man's while to embrace it. Outside of
the gospel of Jesus Christ, as taught by the Latter-day Saints, and
sometimes within the fold, we frequently look about us and see people
who incline to extremes, who are fanatical. We may be sure that this
class of people do not understand the gospel. They have forgotten, if
they ever knew, that it is very unwise to take a fragment of truth and
treat it as if it were the whole thing.

While the first principles of the gospel, faith in God, repentance,
baptism for the remission of sins, and the laying on of hands for the
reception of the Holy Ghost, the healing of the sick, the resurrection,
and for that matter, all the revealed principles of the gospel of
Christ are necessary and essential in the plan of salvation, it is
neither good policy nor sound doctrine to take any one of these, single
it out from the whole plan of gospel truth, make it a special hobby,
and depend upon it for our salvation and progress, either in this world
or in the world to come. They are all necessary.

It should be the desire of the Latter-day Saints to become {151} as
big and broad as the gospel which has been divinely revealed to them.
They should, therefore, hold themselves open to the acceptance of
all the truths of the gospel that have been revealed, that are now
being revealed, and that will be revealed hereafter, and adopt them
in the conduct of their daily lives. By honorable and upright living,
by obedience to the commandments of God, and by the aid of the Holy
Spirit, we shall place ourselves in a position to work out our own
salvation here and hereafter, "with fear and trembling," it may be, but
with absolute certainty.

This is a work that makes every soul who engages in it big and broad.
It is a life-work worth the while of every man in the world.--_
Improvement Era,_ 1911-12, Vol. 15, pp. 843-845.

SEARCH AND YE SHALL FIND. The fact is that every principle of healing,
every principle of the power of the Holy Ghost, and of God, which have
been manifested to the Saints in all ages, have been bestowed upon the
Latter-day Saints. There is no principle, there is no blessing, there
is no advantage, there is no truth in any other religious society or
organization, which is not included in the gospel of Jesus Christ as
taught by Joseph Smith, the Prophet, and after him by the leaders and
elders of this Church; but it requires some effort on our part, some
exertion, some devotion, to learn of and to enjoy these things. If we
neglect them, we are, of course, not the recipients of the blessings
that follow effort, and that come from a thorough understanding
of these principles. Hence it is that others may come in among us
and advocate their ideas which, though not comparing with ours in
plainness, instruction, and truth, are yet listened to by people who
are made to believe that all these things are new, and not contained in
the gospel of Jesus Christ as taught by the Latter-day Saints. This is
a fearful fallacy, and one that should be guarded against by everyone
who loves the gospel.

{152} In the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will be found
to a greater extent than in any other church, the principles of life
and salvation; and if we search them out of our literature and learn
them for ourselves, have them confirmed by the Spirit, by right living,
and make them a part of ourselves, we shall find greater comfort and
richer blessings greater treasures of everlasting life than in any
other teachings that may be given to us by any other organization upon
the earth.--_Improvement Era,_ May, 1909, Vol. 12, p. 561.

THE SPIRIT OF RELIGION. A serious time will come in every life. There
is a parting of the ways. What you indulge in will lead you up or down.
I have no hesitancy in declaring in the name of the Lord that the
spirit which leads you to complain that you are bored in attending the
worshiping assemblies of the Saints has led or will lead you astray;
and, on the other hand, that the young people who cultivate the true
spirit of worship, and find happiness and pleasure in the associations
of the Saints, and who care enough for God and religion to support
the Church and attend the meetings, are the people whose moral and
spiritual influence will control public sentiment and govern the state
and nation. In any conflict with indifference and the spirit of worldly
pleasure, moral influence and religious earnestness will always conquer
and rule.--_Improvement Era,_ October, 1903, Vol. 6, p. 944.

THE MEANING OF SUCCESS. There are daily evidences of a growing tendency
among the masses of the civilized world to regard success in life
purely from the standpoint of material advancement. The man who has
a beautiful home and a large income is looked upon as a successful
man. People are constantly talking about the winners of fortune in the
contest for wealth. Men who are successful in obtaining the honors
bestowed by their fellowmen are envied as among the most fortunate.
Everywhere men hear the word {153} success dwelt upon as if success
were defined in a word, and as if the highest ambition of men and women
was the advancement of some worldly ambition.

All this rage about success simply indicates the gross materialism
of the age in which we live. Here is what a State Commissioner of
Education says to a graduating class: "You need not expect that people
will stand aside because you have come. They are going to crowd you,
and you will have to crowd them. They will leave you behind unless you
leave them behind." The meaning of such talk is that to be successful
you must take advantage of your fellowmen; you must crowd them out and
leave them behind; and all because if you do not take advantage of them
they will take advantage of you.

After all, what is success, and who are competent to judge? The great
masses who lived in the days of Jesus would have said that his life was
a stupendous failure, that his life and teachings ended in inglorious
defeat. Even his disciples were disappointed in his death; and their
efforts to perpetuate his name and teachings were covered with ignominy
and contempt. It was centuries before the success of his life became
apparent to the world. We can easily comprehend, therefore, how it has
taken centuries to accomplish achievements that were set in motion by
some obscure or despised personage. The triumph, therefore, of Jesus
would have been looked upon by his generation as one of the paradoxes
of history.

When the Prophet Joseph Smith was slain, his enemies rejoiced in what
they considered the inglorious ending of his life. They were sure that
all he had done would end with him, and so they could pronounce his
life a burlesque and a failure. It will be seen from these instances
that the contemporaries of a man are not always competent to say
whether his life has been a success or a failure. A sound {154}
judgment must await future generations, perhaps future centuries.

If your neighbor today is a poor widow who rears, amid the greatest
struggles and in unbearable poverty, three or four or half a dozen
children, Perhaps no one would say of her life that it was a success,
and yet there may be in her offspring the embryo of future greatness,
future generations may cover her motherhood with glory.

After all, one's success must be determined more by the eternal (as
well as the present) needs of man, than by temporary standards which
men erect in pursuance of the spirit of the age in which they live.
Certainly nothing is more fatal to our well being than the notion that
our present and eternal welfare is founded upon the wealth and honors
of this world.

The great truth enunciated by the Savior seems very generally to be
lost sight of in this generation, that it will profit a man nothing
though he should gain the whole world, if he lose his own soul.

The standard of success as declared by the word of God, is the
salvation of the soul. The greatest gift of God is eternal
life.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Sept. 15, 1904, Vol. 39, pp. 561-562.

WHAT IS TO BECOME OF SUCH AS ME. That there are many good people in
the world who believe the principles of the gospel as taught by the
Latter-day Saints and yet, through circumstances and environment, are
not prepared publicly to accept the same, is evidenced by the following
extract from a letter written by a reverend gentleman:

"What is to become of such as I, who believe this about you, and yet
are tied and bound by circumstances such as mine? Here I have been a
minister for fifty-five years. I cannot change now if I would."

In answer to the question, "What is to become of such {155} as me?"
let it be said that every person will receive his just reward for the
good he may do and for his every act. But let it be remembered that
all blessings which we shall receive, either here or hereafter, must
come to us as a result of our obedience to the laws of God upon which
these blessings are predicated. Our friend will not be forgotten for
the kindness he has extended to the work and the servants of the Lord,
but will be remembered of him and rewarded for his faith and for every
good deed and word. But there are many blessings that result from
obeying the ordinances of the gospel, and acknowledging the priesthood
authorized of the Father and restored to the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, that cannot be obtained until the person is willing
to comply with the ordinances and keep the commandments revealed in
our day for the salvation of mankind. The true searcher will see and
understand this truth and act upon it, either in this world or in the
world to come, and not until then, of course, may he claim all the
blessings. The earlier he accepts, the earlier will he obtain the
blessings, and if he neglects to accept the laws in this world, knowing
them to be true, it is reasonable to suppose that disadvantages will
result that will cause him deep regret.--_Improvement Era,_ 1912-13,
Vol. 16, pp. 70-72.

REST FOR THE PEACEABLE FOLLOWERS OF CHRIST. I desire to call the
attention of the Latter-day Saints to the words of the Prophet Moroni,
who says, in speaking of his father's instructions to the ancient
saints upon this continent:

"Wherefore I would speak unto you that are of the Church, that are the
peaceable followers of Christ, and that have obtained a sufficient
hope, by which we can enter into the rest of the Lord, from this time
henceforth, until ye shall rest with him in heaven."

This is a very significant passage. The rest here referred {156} to
is not physical rest, for there is no such thing as physical rest in
the Church of Jesus Christ. Reference is made to the spiritual rest
and peace which are born from a settled conviction of the truth in the
minds of men. We may thus enter into the rest of the Lord today, by
coming to an understanding of the truths of the gospel. No people is
more entitled to this rest--this peace of the spirit--than are members
of the Church. It is true that not all are unsettled. Not all need to
seek this rest, for there are many who now possess it, whose minds
have become satisfied, and who have set their eyes upon the mark of
their high calling with an invincible determination in their hearts
to be steadfast in the truth, and who are treading in humility and
righteousness the path marked out for the Saints who are complacent
followers of Jesus Christ. But there are many who, not having reached
this point of determined conviction, are driven about by every wind
of doctrine, thus being ill at ease, unsettled, restless. These are
they who are discouraged over incidents that occur in the Church,
and in the nation, and in the turmoils of men and associations. They
harbor a feeling of suspicion, unrest, uncertainty. Their thoughts are
disturbed, and they become excited with the least change, like one at
sea who has lost his bearings.

Where would you have people go who are unsettled in the truth? The
answer is plain. They will not find satisfaction in the doctrines of
Men. Let them seek for it in the written word of God; let them pray
to him in their secret chambers, where no human ear can hear, and in
their closets petition for light; let them obey the doctrines of Jesus,
and they will immediately begin to grow in the knowledge of the truth.
This course will bring peace to their souls, joy to their hearts, and
a settled conviction which no change can disturb. They may be well
assured {157} that "he that heareth in secret will reward them openly."
Let them seek for strength from the Source of all strength, and he will
provide spiritual contentment, a rest which is incomparable with the
physical rest that cometh after toil. All who seek have a right to, and
may enter into, the rest of God, here upon the earth, from this time
forth, now, today; and when earth-life is finished, they shall also
enjoy his rest in heaven.

I know that Christ is the Only Begotten Son of God, that he is the
Redeemer of the world, that he was raised from the dead; and that as
he arose, so shall every soul bearing the image of God arise from the
dead and be judged according to his works, be they good or evil. In the
never-ending eternities of our Father in heaven, the righteous shall
rejoice, while the association and love of their families and friends
shall glorify them through the ages that are to come. Joy and rest
unspeakable will be their reward.

These are some of the doctrines of the gospel of Jesus Christ which
the Latter-day Saints believe. I don't wish for anything better; I
desire to be satisfied in these, and to possess that peace and joy
which spring from the contemplation of the opportunities and truths
that are embraced in this gospel. Were I to seek for other truths,
where would I go? Not to man. I must know for myself, from the source
which provides these blessings and gifts; but what more would I ask for
than a knowledge of the resurrection, that I shall be made whole of
my sins and become perfect in Christ Jesus, through obedience to his
gospel? Is any doctrine more reasonable and more compatible with free
agency than this? It is true that ancient philosophers taught us many
morals, but where, in all the philosophy of the world, have we better
teachings than in the gospel of Christ which has been revealed to us,
and which we hold and are {158} made partakers of? No doctrine was ever
as perfect as that of Jesus. Christ perfected every principle that had
hitherto been taught by the philosophers of the world; he has revealed
to us the way of salvation, from the beginning, and through all the
meanderings of this life to never-ending exaltation and glory in his
kingdom, and to a newness of life therein. He has taught us that man is
a dual being, the offspring of God, and that the body and the spirit,
blended in one immortal soul, is eventually to stand in the presence of
its Maker, and see as it is seen, and know as it is known. Whenever the
Lord speaks to man, he speaks to his immortal soul, and satisfaction
and unsurpassing peace and joy come to all who listen.

Happy is the man, indeed, who can receive this soul-satisfying
testimony, and be at rest, and seek for no other road to peace than
by the doctrines of Jesus Christ. His gospel teaches us to love our
fellowmen, to do to others as we would have others do to us, to be
just, to be merciful, to be forgiving, and to perform every good
act calculated to enlarge the soul of man. His perfected philosophy
teaches also that it is better to suffer wrong than to do wrong, and
to pray for our enemies and for those who despitefully use us. There
are no other gospels or systems of philosophy that bear these marks of
divinity and immortality. You may hunt the philosophies of the world in
vain for any code of ethics that insures the peace and rest that may be
found in his comprehensive, yet simple, gospel.

To the young man or the young woman who is at a loss to know what to
do, among all the various teachings that are extant in the world, I
would say: Search the Scriptures, seek God in prayer, and then read
the doctrines that have been proclaimed by Christ in his sermon on the
mount, as found in Matthew, and as reiterated to the ancient {159}
saints upon this continent (III Nephi). Having studied these splendid
standards, and searched deeply the significance of these matchless
sentiments, you may defy the philosophies of the world, or any of
its ethics to produce their equal. The wisdom of men is not to be
compared with them. They lead to the rest of the peaceable followers
of Christ, and enable mankind to become perfect as he is perfect. No
other philosopher has ever said as Jesus said, "Come unto me." From the
beginning of the world until the present time, no other philosopher
has ever cried unto the people such words of love, nor guaranteed and
declared power within himself to save. "Come unto me, all ye that labor
and are heavy laden, and I will give you rest," is his call to all the
sons and daughters of men.

The Latter-day Saints have answered the call, and thousands thereby
have found rest and peace surpassing all understanding; and this
notwithstanding the outward, fiery ordeals, the turmoil and the strife,
through which they have passed. They rest in the knowledge that no man
could declare or teach such doctrine; it is the truth of God.

I thank our Father that I have come to a knowledge of this truth,
that I know that Jesus is the Christ, in whom alone there is rest
and salvation. As God lives, they are deceived who follow men and
their philosophies; but happy are they who enter into the rest of the
peaceable followers of Christ, obtaining sufficient hope from this
time henceforth until they shall rest with him in heaven. They depend
completely upon the saving power of his gospel, and are therefore at
rest in all the tumult of mind and public agitation which besets their
way.--_Improvement Era,_ 1903-4, Vol. 7, pp. 714-18.

HARMONY. As to harmony, with special reference to the understanding
that the Latter-day Saints should have of it, as affecting the
membership of the Church, or as subsisting {160} in the quorums of
the priesthood, I would say that the harmony that is sought to be
established among the Saints, and in the membership of the respective
quorums is a harmony that comes from seeing eye to eye in all things;
from understanding things alike; a harmony that is born of perfect
knowledge, perfect honesty, perfect unselfishness, perfect love. This
is the harmony the Church would inculcate among its members, and such
the elements from which she would have it arise.

It is with harmony as it is with all the ideals of the gospel. The
Saints and elders of the Church may fail in perfect attainment of
them, in this life, but they may approximate them. While that is
true respecting all the details of the gospel, and as true of the
perfect harmony we seek to attain as of other ideal conditions, yet we
recognize the fact that a certain degree of harmony is essential in
the Church as a working principle. This degree of harmony, essential
in the Church, among the members and in the quorums of the priesthood,
is neither hard to understand nor difficult of attainment. Neither
is it a new principle, nor peculiar to the Church of the Latter-day
Saints. It is as old as the society of men. It is common to all men
working in community--to parliaments, congresses, conventions, boards,
bureaucracies, and conferences of all descriptions. In the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints this essential harmony consists
of such union or agreement as is necessary to the accomplishment of
the purposes of the organization. These purposes, in the main, are
accomplished through the several councils of the priesthood, and
through the conferences of the Church; hence, the work is done by the
combined actions of groups of individuals, and of necessity must be by
their agreement or consent. With men of varying intelligence, judgment,
and temperament, of course it follows that in the consideration of
a given matter there will be a variety of views entertained, and
discussion of the {161} subject will nearly always develop a variety
of opinions. All this, by the way, is not detrimental to the quality
of any purposed action, since the greater the variety in temperament
and training, of those in conference, the more varied will be the
viewpoints from which the subject in question is considered, until
it is likely to be presented in almost every conceivable light, and
its strength as well as its weakness developed, resulting in the best
possible judgment being formed of it. It is these considerations
which doubtless led to the aphorism, "In the midst of counsel there
is wisdom." It will sometimes happen, of course, in the experiences
of councils or conferences, that all present may not be brought to
perfect agreement, with reference to the proposed action; but upon
submission of the question to an expression of judgment, it is found
that a majority of those having the right to decide a given matter
determine it in a certain way. And now the question arises, what shall
be the course of those who are in the minority, those not in the
agreement perfectly with the decision? Shall they go from the council
or conference and contend for their views against the decision rendered
and be rebellious and stubborn in adhering to their own judgment, as
against the judgment of the majority of the council or conference who
had the right to determine what the action should be? The right answer,
I think, is obvious. The judgment of the majority must stand. If it
is the action of the council or conference having the final word upon
the subject, it becomes the decreed action, the rule or law, and must
be maintained as such until greater knowledge or changed circumstances
shall cause those who rightfully established such decision to modify or
abolish it.

Of course, if a member or members of the minority regard the action
of the majority as a violation of some fundamental principle, or
subversive of the inherent rights of men, against which they conceive
it to be a matter of conscience {162} to enter protest or absolute
repudiation, I understand it is their right to so proceed; but this,
let it be understood, would be revolutionary, it would be rebellion,
and if persisted in, could only end in such persons voluntarily
withdrawing, or being severed from the organization. They cannot hope
to be retained in a fellowship and enjoy the rights and privileges of
the Church, and at the same time be making war upon its decisions or
its rules and policy. But no power on earth, certainly no power in the
Church, can prevent men dissatisfied with the Church, from absolutely
withdrawing from it; and such is the disfavor with which the Church
is regarded by the world that such withdrawals would in most cases be
rewarded by the applause of the world. Or, if the dissatisfaction of
the member be only with the quorum or council of the priesthood with
which he is connected, he would be at liberty to withdraw from that
quorum or council, and still retain his membership in the Church. On
the other hand, the harmony which I spoke of as being essential to
the Church certainly demands that' the Church shall not tolerate, and
indeed, if the life of the organization persists, it cannot tolerate
such internal conflicts as those just alluded to, as they would lead
to confusion, anarchy, disruption, and final abolishment of the
organization.

There is one other element to be considered in this matter of harmony,
as a doctrine of the Church, which may not operate in other community
efforts of men; and that is, the living presence and effective force
of the Holy Spirit. That Spirit, it must be remembered, is, by way of
preeminence, called "The Spirit of Truth, which proceedeth from the
Father." He teaches all things; and brings to the remembrance of the
Saints all the instructions of the Master. He guides into all truth,
and as in all truth there is unity or harmony, so, it is believed
that if the Saints are in possession of this Spirit, the harmony in
the Church of Christ will {163} be superior to the harmony that can
be looked for or hoped for, in any other organization whatsoever. And
because the Saints have free access to the Holy Spirit, and may walk
within his light and fellowship and possess the intelligence which he
is able to impart, a stricter harmony among the Saints may be insisted
upon than in any other organization of men whatsoever. For the same
reason, lack of harmony may be more severely censured and persistent
opposition and rebellion more justly denounced and swiftly punished.

In all things, however, patience and charity must be exercised--and no
less in seeking the perfect harmony we hope for, than in other things.
The present state of imperfect knowledge, the struggle it is for all
men to live on those spiritual heights where they may be in communion
with God, must be taken into account and due allowance made for human
weakness and imperfection. So that, while the existence of that degree
of harmony essential as a working principle in the Church must always
be imperatively demanded, beyond that, the Church, in the manner of
harmony, may well afford to exercise forbearance and charity towards
all its members until the day of more perfect knowledge shall arise
upon the Saints; a day when, through a wider effusion and a deeper
penetration of the Holy Spirit they may be brought to stand in perfect
harmony with each other and with God.--_Improvement Era,_ 1904-5, Vol.
8, pp. 209-215.

CHARACTER, METTLE, AND MISSION OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS. We do not look
for absolute perfection in man. Mortal man is not capable of being
absolutely perfect. Nevertheless, it is given to us to be as perfect
in the sphere in which we are called to be and to act, as it is for
the Father in heaven to be pure and righteous in the more exalted
sphere in which he acts. We will find in the scriptures the words of
the Savior himself to his disciples, in which he required that they
should be perfect, even as their Father {164} in heaven is perfect;
that they should be righteous, even as he is righteous. I do not expect
that we can be as perfect as Christ, that we can be as righteous as
God. But I believe that we can strive for that perfection with the
intelligence that we possess, and the knowledge that we have of the
principles of life and salvation. The duty of the Latter-day Saints,
and the paramount duty of those who are leaders in this work of mutual
improvement in the Church, is to inculcate in the hearts of the young
people these principles of righteousness, of purity of life, of honor,
of uprightness and of humility withal, that we may be humble before God
and acknowledge his hand in all things. According to his revelations,
he is displeased with those who will not acknowledge his hand in all
things. When we look at the imperfections of our fellow beings, some of
the inclinations of those with whom we are intimately associated in the
various organizations of the Church, and discern in them their natural
proneness to evil, to sinfulness, to a disregard of sacred things, and
sometimes their inclination to disregard and treat lightly, if not with
contempt, those things which should be more sacred than life itself, it
makes the task seem almost discouraging, and it seems impossible for us
to accomplish that which we have in view, and to perform the mission
that we have undertaken to our own satisfaction and the acceptance of
the Lord.

But what shall we do? Shall we quit because there are those with whom
we come in contact who are not willing to rise to the standard to
which we seek to exalt them? No! Someone has said that the Lord hates
a quitter, and there should be no such thing as quitting when we put
our hands to the plow to save men, to save souls, to exalt mankind,
to inculcate principles of righteousness and establish them in the
hearts of those with whom we are associated, both by precept and by
example. There must be no such thing as being discouraged. We may fail
over and over again, {165} but if we do, it is in individual cases.
Under certain conditions and circumstances, we may fail to accomplish
the object we have in view with reference to this individual or the
other individual, or a number of individuals that we are seeking to
benefit, to uplift, to purify, to get into their hearts the principles
of justice, of righteousness, of virtue and of honor, that would fit
them to inherit the kingdom of God; to associate with angels, should
they come to visit the earth. If you fail, never mind. Go right on; try
it again; try it somewhere else. Never say quit. Do not say it cannot
be done. Failure is a word that should be unknown to all the workers
in the Sunday Schools, in the Mutual Improvement Associations, in our
Primary Associations, in the quorums of Priesthood, as well as in all
the organizations of the Church everywhere. The word "fail" ought to
be expunged from our language and our thoughts. We do not fail when we
seek to benefit the erring, and they will not listen to us. We will get
the reward for all the good we do. We will get the reward for all the
good we desire to do, and labor to do, though we fail to accomplish
it, for we will be judged according to our works and our intent and
purposes. The victim of evil, or sin, the one whom we seek to benefit,
but who will not yield to our endeavors to benefit him, may fail, but
we who try to uplift him will not fail, if we do not quit.

If we continue to try, failing, as it were, or missing one mark, should
not discourage us; but we should fly to another, keep on in the work,
keep on doing, patiently, determinedly doing our duty, seeking to
accomplish the purpose we have in view.

It is the duty of the Latter-day Saints, the duty of those auxiliary
organizations of the Church, all and each of them, to teach to the
children that are brought within our influence and care the divinity
of the mission of Joseph Smith, the prophet. Do not forget it. Do
not let him perish out of your thoughts and minds. Remember that the
Lord God {166} raised him to lay the foundations of this work, and
the Lord did what has been done through him, and we see the results
of it. Men may scoff at Joseph Smith and at his mission, just as they
scoffed at the Savior and his mission. They may ridicule and make
light of and condemn the mission of the Christ, and yet with all their
condemnation, their scoffing, their ridicule, their contempt and
murderous persecution of the Saints of former days, God's name, the
name of the lowly Nazarene--he that had not where to lay his head,
he that was scoffed at, abused, insulted, persecuted and driven into
concealment and into exile, time and again, because they sought his
life; he that was charged with doing good, by the power of Satan; he
that was charged with violating the Sabbath day, because he permitted
his disciples to gather ears of corn and eat them on the Sabbath; he
that was called a friend of publicans and sinners, he that was called
a friend of winebibbers, and all this sort of thing; and at last was
crucified, mocked, crowned with thorns, spat upon, smitten and abused
until he was lifted upon the cross, as they shouted: "Now, if thou be
the Son of God, come down!"--even the thieves crucified with him mocked
and ridiculed him, and asked him, if he were Christ to come down and
also deliver them--all this happened to Jesus, the Son of God; but what
is the result? Look at the so-called Christian world today. Never has
there been a name brought to the intelligence of the human race since
the foundations of the world that has accomplished so much, that has
been revered and honored so much as the name of Jesus Christ--once so
hated and persecuted and crucified. The day will come--and it is not
far distant, either--when the name of the Prophet Joseph Smith will
be coupled with the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, the Son of God,
as his representative, as his agent whom he chose, ordained and set
apart to lay anew the foundations of the Church of God in the world,
which is indeed the Church of Jesus Christ, possessing {167} all the
powers of the gospel, all the rites and privileges, the authority of
the Holy Priesthood, and every principle necessary to fit and qualify
both the living and the dead to inherit eternal life, and to attain
to exaltation in the kingdom of God. The day will come when you and I
will not be the only ones who will believe this, by a great deal; but
there will be millions of people, living and dead, who will proclaim
this truth. This gospel revealed by the Prophet Joseph is already being
preached to the spirits in prison, to those who have passed away from
this stage of action into the spirit world without the knowledge of
the gospel. Joseph Smith is preaching the gospel to them, so is Hyrum
Smith, so is Brigham Young, and so are all the faithful apostles who
lived in this dispensation, under the administration of the Prophet
Joseph. They are there, having carried with them from here the holy
Priesthood which they received under the hands and by the authority of
the Prophet Joseph Smith. With that authority, conferred upon them in
the flesh, they are preaching the gospel to the spirits in prison, as
Christ directed when his body lay in the tomb, and he went to proclaim
liberty to the captives, and to open the prison doors to them that
were bound. Not only are these engaged in that work, but hundreds and
thousands of others. The elders who have died in the mission field
have not finished their missions, but they are continuing them in the
spirit world. Possibly the Lord saw it necessary or proper to call them
hence, as he did. I am not going to question that thought, at least,
not dispute it. I leave it in the hands of God, for I believe that
all these things will be overruled for good, for the Lord will suffer
nothing to go to his people in the world that he will not overrule
eventually for their greater good.--_Improvement Era,_ October, 1910,
Vol. 13, pp. 1053-1061.

{168}



CHAPTER IX

PRIESTHOOD

GOD IS AT THE HELM. We are living in a momentous age. The Lord is
hastening his work. He is at the helm; there is no mortal man at the
helm of this work. It is true, the Lord uses such instruments as will
be obedient to his commandments and laws to assist in accomplishing
his purposes in the earth. He has chosen those who, at least, have
shown a willingness and a disposition to obey him and keep his laws,
and who seek to work righteousness and carry out the purposes of the
Lord.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1906, pp. 3, 4.

DISTINCTION BETWEEN KEYS OF THE PRIESTHOOD AND PRIESTHOOD. The
priesthood in general is the authority given to man to act for God.
Every man ordained to any degree of the priesthood, has this authority
delegated to him.

But it is necessary that every act performed under this authority shall
be done at the proper time and place, in the proper way, and after
the proper order. The power of directing these labors constitutes the
_keys_ of the priesthood. In their fulness, the keys are held by only
one person at a time, the prophet and president of the Church. He may
delegate any portion of this power to another, in which case that
person holds the keys of that particular labor. Thus, the president
of a temple, the president of a stake, the bishop of a ward, the
president of a mission, the president of a quorum, each holds the keys
of the {169} labors performed in that particular body or locality. His
priesthood is not increased by this special appointment, for a seventy
who presides over a mission has no more priesthood than a seventy who
labors under his direction; and the president of an elders' quorum,
for example, has no more priesthood than any member of that quorum.
But he holds the power of directing the official labors performed
in the mission or the quorum, or in other words, the _keys_ of that
division of that work. So it is throughout all the ramifications of
the priesthood--a distinction must be carefully made between the
general authority, and the directing of the labors performed by that
authority.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 4, p. 230, January, 1901.

CONFERRING THE PRIESTHOOD. The revelation in section 107, Doctrine and
Covenants, verses 1, 5, 6, 7, 21 clearly points out that the Priesthood
is a general authority or qualification, with certain offices or
authorities appended thereto. Consequently the conferring of the
priesthood should precede and accompany ordination to office, unless
it be possessed by previous bestowal and ordination. Surely a man
cannot possess an appendage to the Priesthood without possessing the
priesthood itself, which he cannot obtain unless it be authoritatively
conferred upon him.

Take, for instance, the office of a deacon: the person ordained should
have the Aaronic Priesthood conferred upon him in connection with his
ordination. He cannot receive a portion or fragment of the Aaronic
priesthood, because that would be acting on the idea that either or
both of the (Melchizedek and Aaronic) Priesthoods were subject to
subdivision, which is contrary to the revelation.

In ordaining those who have not yet received the Aaronic Priesthood, to
any office therein, the words of John the Baptist to Joseph Smith, Jr.,
and Oliver Cowdery, would be appropriate to immediately precede the act
of ordination. They are:

"Upon you my fellow servants [servant], in the name of Messiah, I
confer the Priesthood of Aaron."

Of course, it would not necessarily follow that these exact words
should be used, but the language should be consistent with the act of
conferring the Aaronic Priesthood.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 4, p. 394,
March, 1901.

AN AUTHORITATIVE DECLARATION. The Church of {170} Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is no partisan Church. It is not a sect. It is _The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints_. It is the only one today
existing in the world that can and does legitimately bear the name of
Jesus Christ and his divine authority. I make this declaration in all
simplicity and honesty before you and before all the world, bitter as
the truth may seem to those who are opposed and who have no reason for
that opposition. It is nevertheless true and will remain true until he
who has a right to rule among the nations of the earth and among the
individual children of God throughout the world shall come and take the
reins of government and receive the bride that shall be prepared for
the coming of the Bridegroom.

Many of our great writers have recently been querying and wondering
where the divine authority exists today to command in the name of
the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, so that it will be
in effect and acceptable at the throne of the Eternal Father. I will
announce here and now, presumptuous as it may seem to be to those who
know not the truth, that the divine authority of Almighty God, to
speak in the name of the Father and the Son, is here in the midst of
these everlasting hills, in the midst of this intermountain region,
and it will abide and will continue, for God is its source, and God
is the power by which it has been maintained against all opposition
in the world up to the present, and by which it will continue to
progress and grow and increase on the earth until it shall cover the
earth from sea to sea. This is my testimony to you, my brethren and
sisters, and I have a fulness of joy and satisfaction in being able
to declare this without regard to, or fear of, all the adversaries of
the truth.--This declaration was made on the 88th anniversary of the
organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, April
6, 1918.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 639.

{171} THE CHURCH NOT MAN-MADE. We believe in God, the Father of our
Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, the Maker of heaven and earth, the Father
of our spirits. We believe in him without reserve, we accept him in
our heart, in our religious faith, in our very being. We know that he
loves us, and we accept him as the Father of our spirits and the Father
of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. We believe in the Lord Jesus and
in his divine, saving mission into the world, and in the redemption,
the marvelous, glorious redemption, that he wrought for the salvation
of men. We believe in him, and this constitutes the foundation of our
faith. He is the foundation and chief cornerstone of our religion. We
are his by adoption, by being buried with Christ in baptism, by being
born of the water and of the spirit anew into the world, through the
ordinances of the gospel of Christ, and we are thereby God's children,
heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ through our adoption and
faith.

One of our brethren who spoke today gave out the idea that he knew who
was to lead the Church. I also know who will lead this Church, and
I tell you that it will be no man who will lead the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints; I don't care in what time nor in what
generation. No _man_ will lead God's people nor his work. God may
choose men and make them instruments in his hands for accomplishing
his purposes, but the glory and honor and power will be due to the
Father, in whom rests the wisdom and the might to lead his people and
take care of his Zion. I am not leading tile Church of Jesus Christ,
nor the Latter-day Saints, and I want this distinctly understood. No
man does. Joseph did not do it; Brigham did not do it; neither did John
Taylor. Neither did Wilford Woodruff, nor Lorenzo Snow; and Joseph F.
Smith, least of them all, is not leading the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, and will not lead it. They were instruments in
God's hands in accomplishing what they did. God did it through them.
{172} The honor and glory is due to the Lord and not to them. We are
only instruments whom God may choose and use to do his work. All that
we can do we should do to strengthen them in the midst of weaknesses,
in the great calling to which they are called. But remember that God
leads the work. It is his. It is not man's work. If it had been the
work of Joseph Smith, or of Brigham Young, or of John Taylor, Wilford
Woodruff, or Lorenzo Snow, it would not have endured the tests to which
it has been subjected; it would have been brought to naught long ago.
But if it had been merely the work of men, it never would have been
subjected to such tests, for the whole world has been arrayed against
it. If it had been the work of Brigham Young or Joseph Smith, with such
determined opposition as it has met with, it would have come to naught.
But it was not theirs; it was God's work. Thank God for that. It is the
power of God unto salvation, and I want my boys and girls to take my
testimony upon this point. And yet, while we give the honor and glory
unto the Lord God Almighty for the accomplishment of his purposes, let
us not altogether despise the instrument that he chooses to accomplish
the work by. We do not worship him; we worship God, and we call upon
his holy name, as we have been directed in the gospel, in the name of
his Son. We call for mercy in the name of Jesus; we ask for blessings
in the name of Jesus. We are baptized in the name of the Father and of
the Son and of the Holy Ghost. We are initiated into the Church and
Kingdom of God in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy
Ghost, and we worship the Father. We seek to obey the Son and follow in
his footsteps. He will lead--no man will ever lead--his Church. If the
time or condition should ever come to pass that a man, possessing human
weaknesses, shall lead the Church, woe be to the Church, for it will
then become like the churches of the world, man-made, and man-led, and
{173} have no power of God or of life eternal and salvation connected
with it, only the wisdom, the judgment and intelligence of man. I pity
the world, because this is their condition.

WHAT IS THE PRIESTHOOD? It is nothing more nor less than the power
of God delegated to man by which man can act in the earth for the
salvation of the human family, in the name of the Father and the Son
and the Holy Ghost, and act legitimately; not assuming that authority,
nor borrowing it from generations that are dead and gone, but authority
that has been given in this day in which we live by ministering angels
and spirits from above, direct from the presence of Almighty God, who
have come to the earth in our day and restored the Priesthood to the
children of men, by which they may baptize for the remission of sins
and lay on hands for the reception of the Holy Ghost, and by which they
can remit sin, with the sanction and blessing of Almighty God. It is
the same power and priesthood that was committed to the disciples of
Christ while he was upon the earth, that whatsoever they should bind
on earth should be bound in heaven, and that whatsoever they should
loose on earth should be loosed in heaven, and whosoever they blessed
should be blessed, and if they cursed, in the spirit of righteousness
and meekness before God, God would confirm that curse; but men are
not called upon to curse mankind; that is not our mission; it is our
mission to preach righteousness to them. It is our business to love and
to bless them, and to redeem them from the fall and from the wickedness
of the world. This is our mission and our special calling. God will
curse and will exercise his judgment in those matters. "Vengeance is
mine," saith the Lord, "and I will repay." We are perfectly willing to
leave vengeance in the hands of God and let him judge between us and
our enemies, and let him reward them according to his own wisdom and
mercy.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 5.

{174} THE PRIESTHOOD--DEFINITION, PURPOSE AND POWER. What I mean by
the Holy Priesthood is that authority which God has delegated to man,
by which he may speak the will of God as if the angels were here to
speak it themselves; by which men are empowered to bind on earth and
it shall be bound in heaven, and to loose on earth and it shall be
loosed in heaven; by which the words of man, spoken in the exercise
of that power, become the word of the Lord, and the law of God unto
the people, scripture, and divine commands. It is therefore not good
that the Latter-day Saints and the children of the Latter-day Saints
should treat lightly this sacred principle of authority which has been
revealed from the heavens in the dispensation in which we live. It is
the authority by which the Lord Almighty governs his people, and by
which, in time to come, he will govern the nations of the world. It is
sacred, and it must be held sacred by the people. It should be honored
and respected by them, in whomsoever it is held, and in whomsoever
responsibility is placed in the Church. The young men and women and
the people generally should hold this principle and recognize it as
something that is sacred, and that cannot be trifled with nor spoken
lightly of with impunity. Disregard of this authority leads to darkness
and to apostasy, and severance from all the rights and privileges
of the house of God; for it is by virtue of this authority that the
ordinances of the gospel are performed throughout the world and in
every sacred place, and without it they cannot be performed. Those also
who hold this authority should honor it in themselves. They should live
so as to be worthy of the authority vested in them and worthy of the
gifts that have been bestowed upon them.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 2.

MISSION OF THE PRIESTHOOD. We can make no advancement only upon the
principles of eternal truth. In proportion as we become established
upon the foundation of these principles which have been revealed from
the heavens {175} in the latter days, and determine to accomplish the
purposes of the Lord, will we progress, and the Lord will all the more
exalt and magnify us before the world and make us to assume our real
position and standing in the midst of the earth. We have been looked
upon as interlopers, as fanatics, as believers in a false religion;
we have been regarded with contempt, and treated despicably; we have
been driven from our homes, maligned and spoken evil of everywhere,
until the people of the world have come to believe that we are the
offscouring of the earth and scarcely fit to live. There are thousands
and thousands of innocent people in the world whose minds have become
so darkened by the slanderous reports that have gone forth concerning
us, that they would feel they were doing God's service to deprive
a member of this Church of life, or of liberty, or the pursuit of
happiness, if they could do it.

The Lord designs to change this condition of things, and to make us
known to the world in our true light--as true worshipers of God, as
those who have become the children of God by repentance; and by the law
of adoption have become heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ;
and that our mission in this world is to do good, to put down iniquity
under our feet, to exalt righteousness, purity, and holiness in the
hearts of the people, and to establish in the minds of our children,
above all other things, a love for God and his word, that shall be in
them as a fountain of light, strength, faith and power, leading them
on from childhood to old age, and making them firm believers in the
word of the Lord, in the restored gospel and priesthood, and in the
establishment of Zion, no more to be thrown down or given to another
people. If there is anything that I desire above another in this world,
it is that my children shall become established in this knowledge and
faith, so that they can never be turned aside from it.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1901, p. 70.

{176} WHAT ARE THE KEYS OF THE PRIESTHOOD? The priesthood that we hold
is of the greatest importance, because it is the authority and power of
God. It is authority from heaven that has been restored to men upon the
earth in the latter days, through the ministration of angels from God,
who came with authority to bestow this power and this priesthood upon
men.

I say that the priesthood which is the agency of our heavenly Father
holds the keys of the ministering of angels. What is a key? It is the
right or privilege which belongs to and comes with the priesthood, to
have communication with God. Is not that a key? Most decidedly. We
may not enjoy the blessings, or key, very much, but the key is in the
priesthood. It is the right to enjoy the blessing of communication
with the heavens, and the privilege and authority to administer in
the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ, to preach the gospel of
repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the remission of sins. That
is a key. You who hold the priesthood have the key or the authority,
the right, the power or privilege to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ,
which is the gospel of repentance and of baptism by immersion for the
remission of sins--a mighty important thing, I tell you. There isn't
a minister of any church upon all of God's footstool today, so far as
we know, except in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
who has the keys or the authority to enjoy the ministration of angels.
There isn't one of them that possesses that priesthood. But here we
ordain boys who are scarcely in their teens, some of them, to that
priesthood which holds the keys of the ministering of angels and of
the gospel of repentance and baptism by immersion for the remission of
sin. There is not a minister anywhere else in the world, I repeat, who
possesses these keys, or this priesthood or power, or that right. Why?
Because they have not received the gospel, nor have they received that
priesthood {177} by the laying on of hands by those having authority to
confer it.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14, December, 1910, p. 176.

SANCTITY OF THE ORDINANCES OF THE PRIESTHOOD. There appears to be,
among some of our people, an inadequate conception of the sanctity
attending certain of the ordinances of the Holy Priesthood. True, the
ministrations of those in authority among us are not attended with the
pomp and worldly ceremony that characterize the procedure in other
churches so-called, but the fact that the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is in possession of the priesthood is sufficient to
make any and every ordinance administered by due authority within the
Church an event of supreme importance. In performing any such ordinance
the one who officiates speaks and acts, not of himself and of his
personal authority, but by virtue of his ordination and appointment as
a representative of the powers of heaven. We do not set apart bishops
and other officers in the Church, with the show and ceremony of a gala
day, as do certain sectarians, nor do we make the ordinance of baptism
a spectacular display; but the simplicity of the order established in
the Church of Christ ought rather to add to than take from the sacred
character of the several ordinances.

An illustration of the fact that many do not understand the full
sanctity of certain ordinances is found in the desire some evince to
have them repeated. Until within a few years, it was a very general
custom in the Church to allow a repetition of the baptismal rite to
adults before they enter the temples. This custom, first established by
due authority, and for good cause (see _Articles of Faith,_ by Talmage,
144-148) finally came to be regarded by many members of the Church
as essential, and indeed, "re-baptism" was generally looked upon,
though wrongly, as separate and different from the first ordinance
of the gospel--by which alone one may gain entrance to the Church of
Christ. But the most hurtful feature of this misunderstanding was the
disposition {178} of some to look upon the repeated baptisms as a sure
means of securing forgiveness of sins from time to time, and this
might easily have led to the thought that one may sin with comparative
impunity if he were baptized at frequent intervals. This condition
has been changed in the Church, and at the present time only those
who, having been admitted to the fold of Christ by baptism, afterwards
stray therefrom, or are disfellowshiped or excommunicated by due
process of the Church courts, are considered as fit subjects to receive
a repetition of the initiatory ordinance. These remarks, it must be
understood, have no reference to the baptisms and other ordinances
performed in the temples.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, p. 18,
January, 1903.

ON CHURCH GOVERNMENT. We are governed by law, because we love one
another, and are actuated by long-suffering and charity, and good will;
and our whole organization is based upon the idea of self-control; the
principle of give and take, and of rather being willing to suffer wrong
than to do wrong. Our message is peace on earth and good will towards
men; love, charity and forgiveness, which should actuate all associated
with the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Ours is a Church
where law is dominant, but the law is the law of love. There are rules
which should be observed, and will be observed if we have the spirit
of the work in our hearts; and if we have not the spirit with us, we
have only the form of godliness which is without strength. It is the
Spirit which leads us to the performance of our duties. There are many
who know this gospel to be true, but have not the least particle of the
Spirit, and therefore are found arrayed against it, and take no part
with the people, simply because they have not the Spirit.

The priesthood after the order of the Son of God is the ruling,
presiding authority in the Church. It is divided into its various
parts--the Melchizedek and the Aaronic--and {179} all the quorums or
councils are organized in the Church, each with special duties and
special callings; not clashing with one another, but all harmonious and
united. In other words, there is no government in the Church of Jesus
Christ separate and apart, above, or outside of the holy priesthood
or its authority. We have our Relief Societies, Mutual Improvement
Associations, Primary Associations and Sunday Schools, and we may
organize, if we choose, associations for self-protection and self-help
among ourselves, not subject to our enemies, but for our good and the
good of our people, but these organizations are not quorums or councils
of the priesthood, but are auxiliary to, and under it; organized by
virtue of the holy priesthood. They are not outside of, nor above it,
nor beyond its reach. They acknowledge the principle of the priesthood.
Wherever they are they always exist with the view of accomplishing some
good; some soul's salvation, temporal or spiritual.

When we have a Relief Society, it is thus organized. It has
its president and other officers, for the complete and perfect
accomplishment of the purposes of its organization. When it meets it
proceeds as an independent organization, always mindful of the fact it
is such, by virtue of the authority of the holy priesthood which God
has instituted. If the president of the stake comes into a meeting of
the Relief Society, the sisters, through their president, would at once
pay deference to him, would consult and advise with him, and receive
directions from the presiding head. That head is the bishop of the
ward, the president in the stake, the presidency of the Church, in all
the Church. The Young Ladies' and Young Men's Associations, the Primary
Associations and the Sunday Schools are the same. All are under the
same head, and the same rules apply to each.

When the Young Men's and Young Ladies' Associations meet separately,
they each have presiding officers, and they take charge and conduct
the business. If the bishop {180} comes in to either the Young Men's
or Young Ladies' Association, due deference is paid him. But in joint
association of the Young Men's and Young Ladies' officers, there are
the two organizations; the two boards are represented. Who shall take
the initiative? Who shall exercise the presiding function? Is the
sister to take the initiative and exercise the presiding function?
Why, no! not so, because that is not in accordance with the order of
the priesthood. If the Young Men's officers are there, they hold the
priesthood, and it is their place to take the initiative. If I were the
president of a Young Ladies' Association, and we met in joint meeting,
I should expect the president of the Young Men's Association to take
the initial step, that he would call the meeting to order, etc.,
because he holds the priesthood, and should be the head; then he should
not forget that the young ladies have an organization, and are entitled
to perfect and complete representation in the conjoint meetings, and,
under the priesthood, should be given charge at least half the time. If
he is not in his place, then let the young lady preside as she would
in her own meeting. The ladies should not be discriminated against,
but should have equal chances. There should be no curtailment nor
abridgment of these rights, but every opportunity for their exercise
should be given. Gallantry would naturally prompt the young men to give
even more, maybe, than they take themselves, but they should direct in
all these matters, in the spirit of love and kindness.

There never can be and never will be, under God's direction, two equal
heads at the same time. That would not be consistent; it would be
irrational and unreasonable; contrary to God's will. There is one head,
and he is God, the head of all. Next to him stands the man he puts in
nomination to stand at the head on the earth, with his associates; and
all the other organizations and heads, from him to the {181} last, are
subordinate to the first, otherwise there would be discord, disunion
and disorganization.

I am tenacious that all should learn the right and power of the
Priesthood, and recognize it; and if they do it, they will not go far
astray. It is wrong to sit in judgment upon the presiding officers.
Suppose a bishop does wrong, are we to run away to everyone and
backbite and slander him, and tell all we know or think we know, in
relation to the matter, and spread it about? Is that the way for Saints
to do? If we do so we shall breed destruction to the faith of the
young, and others. If I have done wrong, you should come right to me
with your complaint, tell me what you know, and not say one word to
any other soul on earth; but let us sit down together as brethren and
make the matter right; confess, ask forgiveness, shake hands and be at
peace. Any other course than this will create a nest of evil, and stir
up strife among the Saints.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, July, 1903, pp.
704-708.

A BLESSING AND AN EXPLANATION OF THE PRIESTHOOD. The Lord bless you.
From the depths of my soul, I bless you; I hold the right, the keys
and the authority of the Patriarchal Priesthood in the Church. I have
a right to pronounce patriarchal blessings, because I bold the keys
and authority to do it. It is given to me and my associates to ordain
patriarchs and set them apart to give blessings to the people, to
comfort them by promises made in wisdom and the inspiration of the
Spirit of God, of the favor and mercies of the Lord that they may be
stronger in good works, and their hopes may be realized and their faith
increased. And I bless you, my brethren and sisters, in the cause of
Zion, with all my soul and by the authority of the priesthood that
I hold. I hold the priesthood of the apostleship, I hold the high
priesthood which is after the order of the Son of God, which is at the
foundation of all priesthood and is he greatest of all priesthoods,
because the apostle and the high priest {182} and the seventy derive
their authority and their privileges from the priesthood which is after
the Son of God. All authority comes out of that high priesthood.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1916, p. 7.

THE PRIVILEGE OF THE PRIESTHOOD TO BLESS. We have been told of an
incident which occurred a few weeks ago, when a bishop's counselor
(and therefore a high priest) from a remote settlement, while visiting
Salt Lake City, refused to administer to his sister's child who was
dangerously sick, for the reason that he was outside his own ward.

This brother must have had a misunderstanding of the authority of
his office, or he was over diffident. Whatever the cause, he was not
justified in his refusal. His authority to bless in the name of the
Lord was not confined to his ward; no elder's opportunity for doing a
purely good deed should be confined to a ward nor to any other limit,
and when he went into a house and the head of that household made such
a request of him it was clearly not only his privilege and right,
but his duty to comply. Indeed, we believe that every man holding
the priesthood, in good standing in the Church, who owns a home, is
supreme in his own household, and when another brother enters it, and
he requests the latter to perform any duty consistent with his calling,
the latter should accede to his wishes; and if there should be anything
wrong, he who makes the request as the head of the house into which the
brother has come, is responsible therefor. If that head of a household
asks anything to be done which for the sake of Church discipline, or to
fulfil the revelations of the Lord, should be placed on the records of
the Church, he should see to it that the necessary details are supplied
and recorded.

We further believe that the rights of fatherhood in all faithful,
worthy men are paramount, and should be recognized by all other men
holding positions or calling in the {183} priesthood. To make this idea
plainer we will say, as an example of our idea, we do not consider it
proper in a bishop or other officer to suggest that the son of such a
man (the son himself not being the head of a family, but living with
his father) be called upon a mission without first consulting the
father. The priesthood was originally exercised in the patriarchal
order; those who held it exercised their powers firstly by right of
their fatherhood. It is so with the great Elohim. This first and
strongest claim on our love, reverence and obedience is based on the
fact that he is the Father, the Creator, of all mankind. Without him we
are not, and consequently we owe to him existence and all that flows
therefrom--all we have and all that we are. Man possessing the holy
priesthood is typical of him. But as men on earth cannot act in God's
stead as his representatives without the authority, appointment and
ordination naturally follow. No man has the right to take this honor
to himself, except he be called of God through the channels that he
recognizes and has empowered.

Returning to the thought expressed in our opening paragraph, we
recognize that there is a side to the question that must not be lost
sight of, as to ignore that view would be to encourage a condition
in the midst of the Saints pregnant with confusion. We have found
occasionally that men blessed with some peculiar gift of the spirit
have exercised it in an unwise--shall we say, improper--manner. For
instance: brethren strongly gifted with the power of healing have
visited far and near amongst the Saints (to the neglect sometimes of
other duties), until it has almost become a business with them, and
their visits to the homes of the Saints have assumed somewhat the
character of those of a physician, and the people have come to regard
the power so manifested as if coming from man, and he himself has
sometimes grown to so feel, and not that he was simply an instrument
in the hands of God of bringing blessings to their {184} house. This
view is exceedingly unfortunate, when indulged in, and is apt to
result in the displeasure of the Lord. It has sometimes ended in the
brother possessing this gift, if he encouraged such a feeling, losing
his power to bless and heal. Departures from the recognized order
and discipline of the Church should therefore be discountenanced and
discouraged.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 37, pp. 50, 51, Jan. 15, 1902.

THE PRIESTHOOD GREATER THAN ANY OF ITS OFFICES. There is no office
growing out of this priesthood that is or can be greater than the
priesthood itself. It is from the priesthood that the office derives
its authority and power. No office gives authority to the priesthood.
No office adds to the power of the priesthood. But all offices in
the Church derive their power, their virtue, their authority, from
the Priesthood. If our brethren would get this principle thoroughly
established in their minds, there would be less misunderstanding in
relation to the functions of government in the Church than there is.
Today the question is, which is the greater--the high priest or the
seventy--the seventy or the high priest? I tell you that neither of
them is the greater, and neither of them is the lesser. Their callings
lie in different directions, but they are from the same Priesthood. If
it were necessary, the seventy, holding the Melchizedek Priesthood,
as he does, I say _if it were necessary,_ he could ordain a high
priest; and if it were necessary for a high priest to ordain a seventy,
he could do that? Why? Because both of them hold the Melchizedek
Priesthood. Then again, if it were necessary, though I do not expect
the necessity will ever arise, and there was no man left on earth
holding the Melchizedek Priesthood, except an elder--that elder, by
the inspiration of the Spirit of God and by the direction of the
Almighty, could proceed, and should proceed, to organize the Church of
Jesus Christ in all its perfection, because he holds the Melchizedek
Priesthood. {185} But the house of God is a house of order, and while
the other officers remain in the Church, we must observe the order of
the priesthood, and we must perform ordinances and ordinations strictly
in accordance with that order, as it has been established in the
Church through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith and his
successors.--_Oct. C. R_., 1903, p. 87.

NECESSITY OF ORGANIZATION. The house of God is a house of order, and
not a house of confusion; and it could not be thus, if there were
not those who had authority to preside, to direct, to counsel, to
lead in the affairs of the Church. No house would be a house of order
if it were not properly organized, as the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints is organized. Take away the organization of the
Church and its power would cease. Every part of its organization is
necessary and essential to its perfect existence. Disregard, ignore,
or omit any part, and you start imperfection in the Church; and if we
should continue in that way we would find ourselves like those of old,
being led by error, superstition, ignorance, and by the cunning and
craftiness of men. We would soon leave out here a little and there a
little, here a line and there a precept, until we would become like
the rest of the world, divided, disorganized, confused and without
knowledge; without revelation or inspiration, and without Divine
authority or power.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 5.

ACCEPTANCE OF THE PRIESTHOOD A SERIOUS MATTER. This makes a very
serious matter of receiving this covenant and this priesthood; for
those who receive it must, like God himself, abide in it, and must not
fail, and must not be moved out of the way; for those who receive this
oath and covenant and turn away from it, and cease to do righteously
and to honor this covenant, and will to abide in sin and repent not,
there is no forgiveness for them, either in this life or in the
world to come. That is the language of this {186} book, and this is
doctrine and truth which was revealed from God to men through the
instrumentality of Joseph Smith the prophet. And this word is reliable.
It is God's word, and God's word is truth; and it becomes necessary
for all those who enter into this covenant to understand this word,
that they may indeed abide in it, and may not be turned out of the
way_. Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, p. 65. See _Doc. and Cov._ 84:33-41;_ Book of
Mormon,_ Mosiah 5.

HOW AUTHORITY SHOULD BE ADMINISTERED. No man should be oppressed. No
authority of the priesthood can be administered or exerted in any
degree of unrighteousness, without offending God. Therefore, when
we deal with men we should not deal with them with prejudice in our
minds against them. We should dismiss prejudice, dispel anger from
our hearts, and when we try our brethren for membership or fellowship
in the Church we should do it dispassionately, charitably, lovingly,
kindly, with a view to save and not destroy. That is our business; our
business is to save the world, to save mankind; to bring them into
harmony with the laws of God and with principles of righteousness and
of justice and truth, that they may be saved in the kingdom of our God,
and become, eventually, through obedience to the ordinances of the
gospel, heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. That is our
mission.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 6.

AUTHORITY GIVES ENDURING POWER. The Church has two characteristics--the
temporal and the spiritual, and one is not without the other. We
maintain that both are essential and that one without the other
is incomplete and ineffectual. Hence, the Lord instituted in the
government of the Church two priesthoods--the lesser or Aaronic, having
special charge of the temporal, and the higher or Melchizedek, looking
to the spiritual welfare of the people. In all the history of the
Church, there has never been a time when considerable attention was not
given to temporal affairs, in {187} the gathering places of the Saints,
under all the leaders up to the present time as witness the building
of Kirtland, the settlement of Missouri, Nauvoo, and the founding of
cities and towns in the far west, our present home. The Saints have
lived and helped each other to live, have worked out their temporal
salvation with zeal and energy, but withal, have neither neglected nor
forgotten the spiritual essence of the great work inaugurated by divine
order, as witness their temples, and other houses of worship, that have
marked their every abiding place.

And so, while we have devoted much time to temporal affairs, it has
always been with a view to better our spiritual condition, it being
apparent that the temporal, rightly understood, is a great lever by
which spiritual progress may be achieved in this earthly sphere of
action. Besides, we have come to understand that all we do is indeed
spiritual, for before the Father there is no temporal. Hence, in our
labors of redeeming the waste places, a strong spiritual vein underlies
the outward temporal covering.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 8, pp. 620,
623, 1904-5.

MINISTRY SHOULD KNOW ITS DUTIES AND THE USE OF AUTHORITY. Of course it
is very necessary that those who preside in the Church should learn
thoroughly their duties. There is not a man holding any position of
authority in the Church who can perform his duty as he should in any
other spirit than in the spirit of fatherhood and brotherhood toward
those over whom he presides. Those who have authority should not be
rulers, nor dictators; they should not be arbitrary; they should gain
the hearts, the confidence and love of those over whom they preside, by
kindness and love unfeigned, by gentleness of spirit, by persuasion,
by an example that is above reproach and above the reach of unjust
criticism. In this way, in the kindness of their hearts, in their
love for their people, they lead them in the path of righteousness,
and teach them the way of salvation, {188} by saying to them, both by
precept and example: Follow me, as I follow our head. This is the duty
of those who preside.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 5.

HOW OFFICERS IN THE CHURCH ARE CHOSEN: A WORD TO BISHOPS. They are
faithful men chosen by inspiration. The Lord has given us the way to
do these things. He has revealed to us that it is the duty of the
presiding authorities to appoint and call; and then those whom they
choose for any official position in the Church shall be presented
to the body. If the body reject them, they are responsible for that
rejection. They have the right to reject, if they will, or to receive
them and sustain them by their faith and prayers. That is strictly in
accordance with the rule laid down of the Lord. If any officer in the
Church has my sympathy, it is the bishop. If any officer in the Church
deserves credit for patience, for long-suffering, kindness, charity,
and for love unfeigned, it is the bishop who does his duty. And we feel
to sustain in our faith and love, the bishops and counselors in Zion.
We say to the bishoprics of the various wards: Be united; see eye to
eye, even if you have to go down on your knees before the Lord and
humble yourselves until your spirits will mingle and your hearts will
be united one with the other. When you see the truth, you will see eye
to eye, and you will be united.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 4.

JURISDICTION OF QUORUMS OF PRIESTHOOD. Now then, we have our high
priests' quorums or councils, and we have our seventies' councils, and
our elders, and then we have the councils of the priests, teachers
and deacons of the lesser Priesthood. These councils each and all in
their organized capacity, have jurisdiction over the fellowship of the
members of these councils--if the member is an elder, or if a man has a
standing in the seventies' quorum, or in the high priests' quorum, and
he is misbehaving himself, shows a lack of faith, a lack of reverence
for the position he holds in his council, or quorum, his fellowship
in that quorum to which {189} he belongs, or his standing should be
looked after or inquired into, for he is amenable to his quorum for
his good standing and fellowship in it. So that we have the check that
the Lord has placed upon members of the Church, and when I say members
of the Church, I mean me, I mean the apostles, I mean the high priests
and the seventies and elders. I mean everybody who is a member of the
Church.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 6.

JURISDICTION IN STAKES AND WARDS. Now again, the bishoprics, and the
presidents of stakes, have exclusive jurisdiction over the membership
or the standing of men and women in their wards and in their stakes.
I want to state that pretty plain--that is to say, it is not my duty,
it is not the duty of the seven presidents of seventies, nor of
the council of the twelve apostles, to go into a stake of Zion and
try for membership, or for standing in the Church, any member of a
stake or ward. We have no business to do it; it belongs to the local
authorities, and they have ample authority to deal with the membership
in their wards and in their stakes. The bishops may try an elder
for misconduct, for un-Christian-like conduct, for apostasy, or for
wickedness of any kind that would disqualify him for membership in the
Church, and they may pass upon him their judgment that he is unworthy
of fellowship in the Church, and they may withdraw from him their
fellowship. Then they may refer his case to the presidency and high
council, and it will be the duty of the presidency and high council
of the stake to deal with him, even to the extent of excommunication
from the Church; and there is no remedy for this, only the right of
appeal to the Presidency of the Church. If there may be, perchance,
any injustice and partiality, lack of information or understanding on
the part of the bishopric, which may not be corrected and therefore
might be perpetuated by the decision of the high council, and the party
aggrieved does not feel that he has had justice dealt out to {190} him,
he then has a right, under the laws of the Church, to appeal to the
Presidency of the Church, but not otherwise.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 5.

DUTIES OF THOSE ENGAGED IN THE MINISTRY. I need not say to my brethren
engaged in the ministry that it is expected of them that one and all
will attend to the labors and be true to the responsibilities that rest
upon them in the discharge of their duties as officers in the Church.
We expect that the presidents of the stakes of Zion will be exemplars
to the people. We expect them of a truth to be fathers unto those
over whom they preside; men of wisdom, of sound judgment, impartial
and just, men who will indeed qualify themselves, or who are indeed
qualified by their natural endowments and by the inspiration from God
which it is their privilege to enjoy, to preside in righteousness
and to sit in righteous judgment over all matters brought to their
attention, or that may legitimately belong to their office and
calling. We anticipate the same fidelity, the same faithfulness, the
same intelligent administration of their duties from the bishops and
their counselors, and indeed upon these rests perhaps the greatest
possible responsibility, for the reason that they are expected by their
presidencies to attend to the various interests and needs of their
people. It is expected of a bishop to know all the people in his ward,
not only those who are faithful members of the Church, diligent in the
performance of their duties and prominent by their good acts, but to
know those who are cold and indifferent, those who are lukewarm, those
who are inclined to err and to make mistakes; and not only these, but
it is expected that the bishops, through their aides in their wards,
will become acquainted, not only with their members, male and female,
but that they will know also the stranger that is within their gates
and be prepared to minister solace, comfort, good counsel, wisdom and
every other aid possible to be rendered to those who are in need,
whether they are of the household of faith or are {191} strangers
to the truth. So that there is a great deal expected of the bishops
and their counselors and the elders and lesser priesthood in their
wards whom they call to their aid in administering to the people both
spiritually and temporally, and I want to remark in this connection
that it is the duty of these bishops and of the presidencies of the
stakes of Zion, together with their high councils, to administer
justice and right judgment to every member of their wards and of their
stakes. Included in this are the high priests and the seventies and the
elders and the apostles and the patriarchs and the presidency of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. No man who is a member of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, or who has a standing
in the Church as a member, is exempt from his responsibilities as a
member and his allegiance to the bishop of the ward in which he dwells.
I am as much bound to acknowledge my bishop as a member of the ward
in which I dwell, as the humblest and latest member of the Church. No
man, who claims to be a member of the Church in good standing, can rise
above or become independent of the authority that the Lord Almighty
has established in his Church. This watch-care of the people, of their
right living, of their fidelity to their covenants and to the gospel of
Jesus Christ, belongs to the presidents of stakes and their counselors
and the high councils, or members of the high councils, to the bishop
and his counselors and the teachers of his ward.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913,
p. 4.

THE PURPOSE AND THE DUTY OF THE CHURCH: QUALITIES OF LEADERS. The Lord
bless you. I see before me the leaders of the Church, the presiding
spirits in the capacity of presidents of stakes, counselors to
presidents of stakes, high councilors, bishops and their counselors,
and those who are engaged in our educational institutions and in other
responsible positions in the Church. I honor you all. I love you and
your integrity to the cause of Zion. It is the kingdom {192} of God or
nothing, so far as I am concerned. I cut no figure personally in this
work, and I am nothing except in the humble effort to do my duty as the
Lord gives me the ability to do it. But it is the kingdom of God. What
I mean by the kingdom of God is the organization of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, of which Jesus Christ is the king and
the head; not as an organization in any wise menacing or jeopardizing
the liberties or rights of the people throughout the world, but as an
organization calculated to lift up and ameliorate the condition of
mankind; to make bad men good, if it is possible for them to repent of
their sins, and to make good men better. That is the object and purpose
of the Church, that is what it is accomplishing in the world. And it
is very strict in regard to these matters. Drunkards, whoremongers,
liars, thieves, those who betray the confidence of their fellowmen,
those who are unworthy of credence--such, when their character becomes
known, are disfellowshiped from the Church, and are not permitted
to have a standing in it, if we know it. It is true that there are
none of us but have our imperfections and shortcomings. Perfection
dwells not with mortal man. We all have our weaknesses. But when a man
abandons the truth, virtue, his love for the gospel and for the people
of God, and becomes an open, avowed enemy, it becomes the duty of the
Church to sever him from the Church, and the Church would be recreant
to its duty if it did not sever him from communion, cut him off, and
let him go where he pleases. We would do wrong if we hung on to and
tried to nurture such evil creatures in our midst, no matter what the
relationship may be that exists between us and them. Therefore, I say
again, the Church of Jesus Christ stands for virtue, honor, truth,
purity of life, and good will to all mankind. It stands for God the
eternal Father, and for Jesus Christ, whom the Father sent into the
world, and whom to know is life eternal. This is what the Church {193}
stands for, and it cannot tolerate abomination, crime and wickedness,
on the part of those who may claim to have some connection with it. We
must sever ourselves from them, and let them go. Not that we want to
hurt them. We do not want to hurt anybody. We never have, and we do
not intend to, hurt anybody. But we do not intend to be hurt by those
who are seeking our destruction, if we can help it. It is our right to
protect ourselves.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1906, pp. 7, 8.

LEADERS MUST BE COURAGEOUS. One of the highest qualities of all true
leadership is a high standard of courage. When we speak of courage and
leadership we are using terms that stand for the quality of life by
which men determine consciously the proper course to pursue and stand
with fidelity to their convictions. There has never been a time in the
Church when its leaders were not required to be courageous men; not
alone courageous in the sense that they were able to meet physical
dangers, but also in the sense that they were steadfast and true to a
clear and upright conviction.

Leaders of the Church, then, should be men not easily discouraged,
not without hope, and not given to forebodings of all sorts of evils
to come. Above all things the leaders of the people should never
disseminate a spirit of gloom in the hearts of the people. If men
standing in high places sometimes feel the weight and anxiety of
momentous times, they should be all the firmer and all the more
resolute in those convictions which come from a God-fearing conscience
and pure lives. Men in their private lives should feel the necessity of
extending encouragement to the people by their own hopeful and cheerful
intercourse with them, as they do by their utterances in public places.
It is a matter of the greatest importance that the people be educated
to appreciate and cultivate the bright side of life rather than to
permit its darkness and shadows to hover over them.

In order to successfully overcome anxieties in reference {194} to
questions that require time for their solution, an absolute faith and
confidence in God and in the triumph of his work are essential.

The most momentous questions and the greatest dangers to personal
happiness are not always met and solved within oneself, and if men
cannot courageously meet the difficulties, and obstacles of their own
individual lives and natures, how are they to meet successfully those
public questions in which the welfare and happiness of the public are
concerned? Men, then, who are called to leadership should be alarmed at
the possession of a disposition filled with forebodings and misgivings
and doubts and constant wonderments. Clouds, threatening storms,
frequently rise in the horizon of life and pass by as speedily as they
came, so the problems and difficulties and dangers that beset us are
not always met and solved, nor overcome by our individual effort nor by
our efforts collectively.

It is not discreditable to a man to say, "I don't know," to questions
whose solution lies wholly within some divine purpose whose end it is
not given man clearly to foresee. It is, however, unfortunate when men
and women allow such questions, questions which time and patience alone
can solve, to discourage them and to defeat their own efforts in the
accomplishment of their chosen lives and professions. In leaders undue
impatience and a gloomy mind are almost unpardonable, and it sometimes
takes almost as much courage to wait as to act. It is to be hoped,
then, that the leaders of God's people, and the people themselves, will
not feel that they must have at once a solution of every question that
arises to disturb the even tenor of their way.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 38, p. 339, 1903.

DUTIES OF OFFICERS OF THE CHURCH. The Lord here especially demands of
the men who stand at the head of this Church, and who are responsible
for the guidance and direction of the people of God, that they shall
see to it that the {195} law of God is kept. It is our duty to do
this.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, p. 41.

TRUTH WILL UNITE US: WORDS TO CHURCH OFFICERS. The truth will never
divide councils of the priesthood. It will never divide presidents from
their counselors, nor counselors from their presidents, nor members
of the Church from one another, nor from the Church. The truth will
unite us and cement us together. It will make us strong, for it is
a foundation that cannot be destroyed. Therefore, when bishops and
their counselors do not see eye to eye, or when presidents and their
counselors have any difference whatever in their sentiments or in
their policy, it is their duty to get together, to go before the Lord
together and humble themselves before him until they get revelation
from the Lord and see the truth alike, that they may go before their
people unitedly. It is the duty of the presidents of stakes and high
councilors to meet often, to pray together, to counsel together,
to learn each other's spirit, to understand each other, and unite
together, that there may be no dissension nor division among them. The
same with the bishops and their counselors. The same may be said of the
councils of the priesthood from first to last. Let them get together
and become united in their understanding of what is right, just and
true, and then go as one man to the accomplishment of the purpose they
have in view.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, pp. 4, 5.

OFFICERS TO SET THE EXAMPLE. The Lord will make a record also and out
of that shall the whole world be judged. And you men bearing the holy
priesthood--you apostles, presidents, bishops, and high priests in
Zion--will be called upon to be the judges of the people. Therefore,
it is expected that you shall set the standard for them to attain to,
and see that they shall live according to the spirit of the gospel, do
their duty, and keep the commandments of the Lord. You shall make a
record of their acts. You shall {196} record when they are baptized,
when they are confirmed, and when they receive the Holy Ghost by the
laying on of hands. You shall record when they come to Zion, their
membership in the Church. You shall record whether they attend to their
duties as priests, teachers or deacons, as elders, seventies or high
priests. You shall write their works, as the Lord says here. You shall
record their tithings and give them credit for that which they do; and
the Lord will determine the difference between the credit which they
make for themselves and the credit which they should make. The Lord
will judge between us in that respect; but we shall judge the people,
first requiring them to do their duty. In order to do that, those who
stand at the head must set the example. They must walk in the right
path, and invite the people to follow them. They should not seek to
drive the people; they should not seek to become rulers; but they
should be brethren and leaders of the people.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1901, p.
72.

DUTY OF THE HOLY PRIESTHOOD. It is the duty of this vast body of men
holding the holy priesthood, which is after the order of the Son
of God, to exert their influence and exercise their power for good
among the people of Israel and the people of the world. It is their
bounden duty to preach and to work righteousness, both at home and
abroad.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 83.

HOW TO VOTE ON CHURCH PROPOSITIONS. We desire that the brethren and
sisters will all feel the responsibility of expressing their feelings
in relation to the propositions that may be put before you. We do not
want any man or woman who is a member of the Church to violate their
conscience. Of course, we are not asking apostates or non-members of
the Church to vote on the authorities of the Church. We only ask for
members of the Church in good standing to vote on the propositions that
shall be put before {197} you, and we would like all to vote as they
feel, whether for or against.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 83.

ORDER OF VOTING FOR OFFICERS OF THE CHURCH. The Presidency of the
Church will first express their mind, thus indicating, at least in
some degree, the mind of the Spirit and the suggestions from the head.
Then the proposition will be submitted to the apostles, for them to
show their willingness or otherwise to sustain the action of the First
Presidency. It will then go to the patriarchs, and they will have the
privilege of showing whether they will sustain the action that has been
taken; then to the presidents of stakes and counselors and the high
councilors; then to the high priests (that office in the Melchizedek
Priesthood which holds the keys of presidency); next the traveling
elders--the seventies--will be called to express their feelings; and
then the elders; then the bishoprics of the Church and the lesser
priesthood, and after them the whole congregation. All the members of
the Church present will have the privilege of expressing their views in
relation to the matters which shall be proposed, by a rising vote and
by the uplifted band.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 73.

OFFICERS DEPENDENT ON VOICE OF PEOPLE. It is well understood that
we meet together in general conference twice a year for the purpose
of presenting the names of those who have been chosen as presiding
officers in the Church, and it is understood that those who occupy
these positions are dependent upon the voice of the people for the
continuance of the authority, the rights and privileges they exercise.
The female members of this Church have the same privilege of voting to
sustain their presiding officers as the male members of the Church, and
the vote of a sister in good standing counts in every way equal with
the vote of a brother.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 73.

NEARLY ALL MALE MEMBERS HOLD THE PRIESTHOOD; RESPONSIBILITY. We
want the people to understand, and {198} we would like the world to
understand, the great fact that it is not the prominent leaders of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, that wield all the
influence among the people of this Church. We want it understood that
we have fewer lay members in this Church, in proportion to the number
of our membership, than you will find in any other church upon the
globe. Nearly every man in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints holds the Melchizedek or the Aaronic Priesthood, and may act
in an official capacity by authority of that priesthood whenever
called upon to do so. They are priests and kings, if you please, unto
God in righteousness. Out of this vast body of priests we call and
ordain or set apart our presidents of stakes, our counselors, our
high councilors, our bishops and their counselors, our seventies, our
high priests, and our elders, upon whom rests the responsibility of
proclaiming the gospel of eternal truth to all the world, and upon whom
also rests the great and glorious responsibility of maintaining the
dignity, the honor and the sacredness of that calling and priesthood.
So that nearly every male person in the Church, who has reached the
years of accountability, is supposed to be, in his sphere, a pillar in
Zion, a defender of the faith, an exemplar, a man of righteousness,
truth and soberness, a man of virtue and of honor, a good citizen of
the state in which he lives, and a staunch and loyal citizen of the
great country that we are proud to call our home.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1903,
p. 73.

MANY HOLD THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD. Although we may enjoy a little
advantage over the rest of the congregation, for my part I could stay
here a week longer to hear the testimonies of my brethren, and to give
to the world an opportunity to see and know that the priesthood in the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is not confined to one man,
nor to three men, nor to fifteen men, but that there are thousands of
men in Zion who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, which is after the
order of the Son of God, {199} and who possess keys of authority and
power to minister for life and salvation among the people of the world.
I would like to give the world an opportunity to see what we are, to
hear what we know, and to understand what our business is, and what we
intend to do, by the help of the Lord._--Oct. C. R.,_ 1903, p. 73.

PRIESTHOOD QUORUMS' RESPONSIBILITIES. We expect to see the day, if we
live long enough (and if some of us do not live long enough to see it,
there are others who will), when every council of the Priesthood in
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will understand its
duty; will assume its own responsibility, will magnify its calling,
and fill its place in the Church, to the uttermost, according to the
intelligence and ability possessed by it. When that day shall come,
there will not be so much necessity for work that is now being done by
the auxiliary organizations, because it will be done by the regular
quorums of the priesthood. The Lord designed and comprehended it from
the beginning, and he has made provision in the Church whereby every
need may be met and satisfied through the regular organizations of
the priesthood. It has truly been said that the Church is perfectly
organized. The only trouble is that these organizations are not
fully alive to the obligations that rest upon them. When they become
thoroughly awakened to the requirements made of them, they will fulfil
their duties more faithfully, and the work of the Lord will be all the
stronger and more powerful and influential in the world.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1906, p. 3.

WHAT IS PRIESTHOOD? Honor that power and authority which we call the
Holy Priesthood, which is after the order of the Son of God, and which
has been conferred upon man by God himself. Honor that priesthood. What
is that priesthood? It is nothing more and nothing less than divine
authority committed unto man from God. That is the principle that we
should honor. We hold the keys of {200} that authority and priesthood
ourselves; it has been conferred upon the great masses of the
Latter-day Saints. It has, indeed, I may say, been bestowed upon many
who were not worthy to receive it and who have not magnified it, and
who have brought disgrace upon themselves and upon the priesthood which
was conferred upon them. The priesthood of the Son of God cannot be
exercised in any degree of unrighteousness; neither will its power, its
virtue and authority abide with him who is corrupt, who is treacherous
in his soul toward God and toward his fellowmen. It will not abide in
force and power with him who does not honor it in his life by complying
with the requirements of heaven.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 3.

WHERE AND HOW COUNSEL SHOULD BE SOUGHT. The attention of the young men
in the Church is called to the need of conforming to the order of the
Church in matters of difficulty that may arise between brethren, and
members and officers, and also in other things where counsel is sought.

The youth of Zion should remember that the foundation principle in
settling difficulties lies in the persons themselves who are in
difficulty making the adjustments and settlements. If those who vary
cannot adjust their differences, it is infinitely more difficult, if
not impossible, for a third or fourth party to create harmony between
them. In any event, such outside parties can only aid the contending
persons to come to an understanding.

But, in case it is necessary to call in the priesthood as a third
party, there is a proper order in which this should be done. If no
conclusion can be arrived at, in a difficulty or difference between
two members of the Church, the ward teachers should be called to
assist; failing then, appeal may be made to the bishop, then to the
high council of the stake, and only after the difficulty has been
tried before that body should the matter ever come before the general
presiding {201} quorum of the Church. It is wrong to disregard any of
these authorized steps, or authorities.

This matter is generally understood in cases of difficulty, but does
not seem to be so well understood in what may be termed smaller, but
nevertheless quite as weighty subjects. We often find instances where
the counsel and advice and judgment of the priesthood next in order is
entirely overlooked, or completely disregarded. Men go to the president
of the stake for counsel when in reality, they should consult their
teachers or bishop; and often come to the First Presidency, apostles
or seventies, when the president of their stake has never been spoken
to. This is wrong, and not at all in compliance with the order of
the Church. The priesthood of the ward should never be overlooked in
any case where the stake authorities are consulted; nor should the
stake authorities be disregarded, that the counsel of the general
authorities may be obtained. Such a course of disregarding the proper
local officers is neither in conformity with the Church instructions
and organization, nor conducive to good order. It creates confusion.
Every officer in the Church has been placed in his position to magnify
the same, to be a guardian and counselor of the people. All should be
consulted and respected in their positions, and never overlooked in
their places.

In this way only can prevail that harmony and unity which are
characteristic of the Church of Christ. The responsibility also of
this great work is thus placed upon the laboring priesthood, who share
it with the general authorities; and thus likewise, the perfection,
strength and power of Church organization shine forth with clearer
lustre.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, p. 230; Jan. 1902.

PARENTS SHOULD BE CONSULTED. One of the first duties that a young man
owes in the world is his duty to his father and mother. The commandment
which God gave early in the history of the Israelites: "Honor thy
father and {202} thy mother," was accompanied with a promise that holds
good to this day; namely: "That thy days may be long upon the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

With obedience naturally comes that respect and consideration for his
parents that should characterize a noble youth. They stand as the head
of the family, the patriarch, the mother, the rulers; and no child
should fail to consult them and obtain counsel from them throughout his
whole career under the parental roof.

This feeling should be respected by the Church. Hence, officers who
desire to use the services of a young man in any capacity for the
business of the Church, should not fail to consult the father before
the call is made. We have instances where young men have even been
called to fulfil important missions; their names having been suggested
to the Church by bishops of wards, or by presidents of quorums,
without the father having been consulted whatever. The parents have
been entirely overlooked. This is neither desirable nor right, nor
is it in conformity with the order of the Church, or the laws that
God instituted from the early times. The Church is patriarchal in its
character and nature, and it is highly proper and right that the head
of the family, the father, should be consulted by officers in all
things that pertain to the calling of his children to any of the duties
in the Church. No one understands as well as the father, the conditions
that surround the family, and what is best for his children; his wishes
should therefore be consulted and respected.

Our elders would justly think it wrong to baptize a wife without
the consent of her husband, and children without the consent of the
parents. So also, it is improper for any officer in the Church to call
the children in any family, as long as they are under the care and
keeping of the parents, to receive any ordination, or to perform any
calling in the Church, without first consulting the parents.

{203} The family organization lies at the basis of all true government,
and too much stress cannot be placed upon the importance of the
government in the family being as perfect as possible, nor upon the
fact that in all instances respect therefore should be upheld.

Young men should be scrupulously careful to impress upon their minds
the necessity of consulting with father and mother in all that pertains
to their actions in life. Respect and veneration for parents should be
inculcated into the hearts of the young people of the Church--father
and mother to be respected, their wishes to be regarded--and in the
heart of every child should be implanted this thought of esteem and
consideration for parents which characterized the families of the
ancient patriarchs.

God is at the head of the human race; we look up to him as the Father
of all. We cannot please him more than by regarding and respecting
and honoring our fathers and our mothers, who are the means of our
existence here upon the earth.

I desire, therefore, to impress upon the officers of the Church the
necessity of consulting fathers in all things that pertain to the
calling of their sons to the priesthood, and to the labors of the
Church, that the respect and veneration which children should show
for parents may not be disturbed by the Church, nor overstepped by
its officers. In this way harmony and good will are made to prevail;
and the sanction of the families and the family life, on which the
government of the Church is based and perpetuated, will thus be added
to the calls of the holy priesthood, insuring unity, strength and power
in its every action.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, p. 307. Feb., 1902.

PROPER USE OF TITLES OF THE PRIESTHOOD. There is also another point
in this connection to which attention may profitably be drawn. It is
the too frequent use in the ordinary conversation of the Saints of the
titles "Prophet, Seer {204} and Revelator," "Apostles," etc. These
titles are too sacred to be used indiscriminately in our common talk.
There are occasions when they are quite proper and in place, but in
our every-day conversations it is sufficient honor to address any
brother holding the Melchizedek Priesthood as elder. The term elder is
a general one, applying to all those who hold the higher priesthood,
whether they be apostles, patriarchs, high priests or seventies; and
to address a brother as Apostle So-and-So, or Patriarch Such-a-One, in
the common talk of business, and the like, is using titles too sacred
to be in place on such occasions. It, in a lesser degree, partakes of
the character of that evil of which we are so often warned--the too
frequent use of the name of that Holy Being whom we worship, and of his
Son, our Redeemer. To avoid this evil the Saints in ancient days called
the holy priesthood after the great high priest Melchizedek, while the
royal and correct title is, "The priesthood after the order of the Son
of God." The use of all these titles continuously and indiscriminately
savors somewhat of blasphemy, and is not pleasing to our heavenly
Father.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, p. 20; Jan. 1, 1903.

ALL OFFICERS OF THE PRIESTHOOD NECESSARY AND SHOULD BE RESPECTED. I
believe it to be the duty of the Church to recognize and acknowledge
every man who holds an official position in it, in his sphere and in
his calling. I hold to the doctrine that the duty of a teacher is as
sacred as the duty of an apostle, in the sphere in which he is called
to act, and that every member of the Church is as much in duty bound
to honor the teacher who visits him in his home, as he is to honor the
office and counsel of the presiding quorum of the Church. They all have
the priesthood; they are all acting in their callings, and they are all
essential in their places, because the Lord has appointed them and set
them in his Church. We cannot ignore them; or, if we do, the sin will
be upon our heads.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 86.

{205} CHECKS UPON CHURCH MEMBERS. I say that when these members of
the Church are in error or doing wrong, we have the check on them in
the first place in the wards; bishops look after them; then their
quorums to which they belong have jurisdiction and they are required
to look after them, too, and then after the quorums look after them
the presidencies of the stakes look after them and see that they are
helped; that they are strengthened; that they are admonished; that
they are warned, and that they are applauded when they do their duties
and keep the commandments of the Lord. So the Lord has placed a great
many checks upon the members of the Church with a view to teaching
them right principles, to help them to do right, to live right and to
be pure and clean from the sins of the world, that the body of the
Church may be perfected, that it may be free from disease, from all
contagious evils, just as the body of the man Jesus Christ is free from
all taint, evil and sin. So God has placed these safeguards in the
Church, from the deacons to the apostles, and to the presidency of the
Church, with a view of persuading men and women to keep themselves pure
and unspotted from the world and to help them to be faithful to their
covenants entered into with one another and with their God.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1913, pp. 6, 7.

THE PRIESTHOOD SHOULD KNOW SECTION 107 OF THE DOCTRINE AND COVENANTS.
I now say to the brethren of the priesthood--the high priests, the
seventies, the elders and the lesser priesthood--magnify your callings;
study the scriptures; read the 107th section of the Doctrine and
Covenants on priesthood; learn that revelation, which was given through
the Prophet Joseph Smith, and live by its precepts and doctrine, and
you will gain power and intelligence to straighten out many kinks that
have heretofore existed in your minds, and to clear up many doubts and
uncertainties in relation to the rights of the priesthood. God gave
that word to us. It is in force today in the Church and in the {206}
world, and it contains instruction to the priesthood and the people in
relation to their duties, which every elder should know.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1902, p. 88.

WHO IS FIT TO PRESIDE? Every man should be willing to be presided
over; and he is not fit to preside over others until he can submit
sufficiently to the presidency of his brethren.--_Improvement Era,_
Vol. 21, p. 105.

OBLIGATIONS OF THE PRIESTHOOD. Think what it means to hold keys of
authority which--if exercised in wisdom and in righteousness--are
bound to be respected by the Father, the Son, and the Holy Ghost!
Do you honor this Priesthood? Do you respect the office and honor
the key of authority that you possess in the Melchizedek Priesthood,
which is after the order of the Son of God? Will you, who hold this
priesthood, profane the name of Deity? Would you be riotous, and eat
and drink with the drunken, with the unbelieving and with the profane?
Would you, holding that priesthood, forget your prayers, and fail to
remember the Giver of all good? Would you, holding that priesthood,
and possessing the right and authority from God to administer in the
name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, violate
the confidence and the love of God, the hope and desire of the Father
of all of us? For, in bestowing that key and blessing upon you, he
desires and expects you to magnify your calling. Would you, as an
elder in the Church of Jesus Christ, dishonor your wife or your
children? Would you desert the mother of your children, the wife of
your bosom, the gift of God to you, which is more precious than life
itself? For without the woman the man is not perfect in the Lord, no
more than the woman is perfect without the man. Will you honor the
Sabbath day and keep it holy? Will you observe the law of tithing and
all the other requirements of the gospel? Will you carry with you at
all times the spirit of prayer and the desire to do good? Will you
teach your children the principles of life and salvation {207} so that
when they are eight years old they will desire baptism, of their own
accord?--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, December, 1917, pp. 105-6.

HOW HONOR FOR THOSE WHO BEAR THE PRIESTHOOD IS BEGOTTEN. If you will
honor the holy priesthood in yourself first, you will honor it in those
who preside over you, and those who administer in the various callings,
throughout the Church.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21 December, 1917, p.
106.

PRIESTHOOD MEMBERSHIP ROLLS. First.--Each quorum should have one roll
only and every person holding the Priesthood should be enrolled in the
quorum having jurisdiction in the ward where his Church membership is
recorded. The practice of keeping a supplemental or inactive roll is
not approved.

Second.--Recommends from one quorum to another are not required. The
present arrangement for admitting members in the quorum is already
published as follows:

"The certificate of ordination should be carefully preserved by the
person ordained; and, whenever necessary, it should be presented to the
proper authority as an evidence of his ordination. Upon this evidence
he should be admitted to membership in the usual manner by the quorum
having jurisdiction in the ward or stake where he resides, provided he
has been accepted as a member of the ward. If he does not possess a
certificate of ordination, and the recommend upon which he is received
in the ward names his Priesthood and ordination, it should be accepted
as evidence that he holds that office, provided there is no evidence to
the contrary and provided he has been admitted as a member of the ward
in full fellowship."

Third.--When a person holding the Priesthood removes from one ward
to another, and is accepted as a member of the ward into which he
moves, it becomes the duty of the ward clerk to notify the president
of the quorum {208} of the arrival of this person. The new member
should present his certificate of ordination as evidence that he holds
the Priesthood, and upon that certificate he should be presented for
admission to membership in the quorum to which members of that ward
holding the same Priesthood belong. It is the duty of the ward clerk
to report at the next ward weekly Priesthood meeting the arrival of
any person holding the Priesthood, and every such newly arrived member
should be enrolled in the proper class, whether he has attended a class
meeting or not.

Fourth.--When a member holding the Priesthood becomes a member of the
ward, the proper quorum officer having jurisdiction should look after
him and see that he becomes enrolled in the quorum.

Fifth.--It is the duty of the secretary of a High Priests' or Elders'
quorum to prepare certificates of ordination, and to have them signed
by the proper officers, presented to the ward clerk to be entered upon
the ward record, and then delivered to the persons in whose favor they
are issued. Seventies' certificates of ordination are issued by the
First Council of Seventy. When a person is ordained a Seventy, by any
other person than a member of the First Council, the proper quorum
officers should immediately notify the First Council of Seventy,
requesting a certificate of ordination to be mailed or delivered to the
quorum officer, and after it has been entered on the quorum record and
the ward record it should be delivered to the person in whose favor it
is issued.

Sixth.--When a quorum withdraws its fellowship from one of its members,
a report of the action of the quorum should be sent to the bishop of
the ward.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 19, pp. 752-753.

ALL SHOULD EXERCISE THEIR AUTHORITY. A deacon in the Church should
exercise the authority of that calling in the priesthood, and honor
that position as sincerely and faithfully as a high priest or an
apostle should his calling, {209} feeling that he bears a portion of
the responsibility of the kingdom of God in the world, in common with
all his brethren. Every man should feel in his heart the necessity
of doing his part in the great latter-day work. All should seek to
be instrumental in rolling it forth. More especially is it the duty
of every one who possesses any portion of the authority of the holy
priesthood to magnify and honor that calling, and nowhere can we
begin to do so to better advantage than right here, within ourselves
and when we have cleaned the inside of the platter, cleansed our own
hearts, corrected our own lives, fixed our minds upon doing our whole
duty toward God and man, we will be prepared to wield an influence
for good in the family circle, in society, and in all the walks of
life.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 24, p. 708.

THE LEADERS OF ISRAEL. These mighty men who sit before this stand
clothed with power from Almighty God, are not self-called. They have
not been chosen by man. They have not chosen themselves, but they have
been called by the power of the Almighty to stand in high places in the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, as presidents, as fathers
to the people, as counselors, as judges, and as leaders, walking in
the way that the people of God should follow them into all truth and
into the possession of greater light, greater power and wisdom and
understanding. God bless you, my brethren. And while you stand united,
as you have stood in the past, and as you have manifested your union
here during this conference, so God will magnify you before your flocks
and in the midst of your people, and will increase your power and your
strength to do good and to accomplish his purposes, until you shall be
satisfied with your labors and have exceeding great joy therein; and
your people will rise up and call you blessed, they will pray for you
and sustain you by their faith and good works.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1905, p.
94.

{210} A TESTIMONY OF JOSEPH SMITH AND HIS SUCCESSORS. I bear my
testimony to you and to the world, that Joseph Smith was raised up by
the power of God to lay the foundations of this great latter-day work,
to reveal the fulness of the gospel to the world in this dispensation,
to restore the priesthood of God to the world, by which men may act
in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy Ghost, and
it will be accepted of God; it will be by his authority. I bear my
testimony to it; I know that it is true.

I bear my testimony to the divine authority of those who have succeeded
the Prophet Joseph Smith in the presidency of this Church. They were
men of God. I knew them; I was intimately associated with them, and
as one man may know another, through the intimate knowledge that he
possesses of him, so I can bear testimony to the integrity, to the
honor, to the purity of life, to the intelligence, and to the divinity
of the mission and calling of Brigham, of John, of Wilford, and of
Lorenzo. They were inspired of God to fill the mission to which they
were called, and I know it. I thank God for that testimony and for the
Spirit that prompts me and impels me towards these men, toward their
mission, toward this people, toward my God and my Redeemer. I thank
the Lord for it, and I pray earnestly that it may never depart from
me--worlds without end.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1910, pp. 4, 5.

GOODNESS OF THE LEADERS OF THE CHURCH. I have served from my youth
up along with such men as Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Willard
Richards, George A. Smith, Jedediah M. Grant, Daniel H. Wells, John
Taylor, George Q. Cannon, and Wilford Woodruff and his associates, and
Lorenzo Snow and his associates, the members of the twelve apostles,
the seventies, and the high priests in the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints for more than sixty years; and, that my word may be
heard by every stranger within the sound of my voice, I want to testify
to {211} you that better men than these have never lived within the
range of my acquaintance. I can so testify because I was familiar with
these men, grew up from babyhood with them, associated with them in
council, in prayer and supplication, and in travel from settlement to
settlement through our country here, and in crossing the plains. I have
heard them in private and in public, and I bear my testimony to you
that they were men of God, true men, pure men, God's noblemen; virtuous
men who never were either tempted to do evil or tempted others to do
wrong, men whose examples and whose lives were above reproach, except
in what corrupt, wicked or ignorant men supposed they saw and presumed
to denounce as wrong in them.--_April C. R.,_ 1917, p. 6.

DIVINE MISSIONS OF PRESIDENTS OF CHURCH. I testify to you, as I
know and feel that I live and move and have my being, that the Lord
raised up the boy prophet, Joseph Smith, and endowed him with divine
authority, and taught him those things which were necessary for him to
know that he might have power to lay the foundation of God's Church and
kingdom in the earth. Joseph Smith was true to the covenants that he
made with the Lord, true to his mission, and the Lord enabled him to
accomplish his work, even to the sealing of his testimony with his shed
blood. His testimony is now, and has been, in force among the children
of men as verily as the blood of Jesus Christ is in force and a binding
testimony upon all the world, and it has been from the day it was shed
until now, and will continue until the winding up scene.

I bear my testimony to you my brethren and sisters, of the divinity
of the mission and work that was accomplished by President Brigham
Young and his associates in fleeing from the wrath that threatened in
Illinois and Missouri and other places, into these peaceful vales,
which was done by the will of heaven and by the guiding power of the
Holy Spirit, President Young and the pioneers were enabled to lay the
{212} foundation of a commonwealth, the equal of which is scarcely to
be found within the borders of our glorious land; and it was done, not
by the wisdom of Brother Brigham, nor of Brother Heber C. Kimball, nor
of any of their associates, grand _men_ as they were, true servants of
the living God as they were, faithful and true to their callings, grand
as was their integrity to the cause of Zion--but back of them, behind
them, above them and below, and all around them, was the power of God,
leading and directing them, and thus consummating his purposes through
their instrumentality. We give the honor to our Father in heaven and
we also honor and bless the names of those great and good men whom
the Lord chose to accomplish his purposes, and through whom he did
accomplish his purpose without failure.

I bear my testimony to the integrity of John Taylor as one of the
purest men I ever knew in my life, a man clean from head to foot, clean
in body and clean in spirit, free from every vulgar thing, so common
among the children of men. I know whereof I speak, for I was with
him day and night, month after month, year after year, and I bear my
testimony of his integrity. He was a martyr with the Prophet Joseph
Smith. He suffered more than death with Joseph and Hyrum, and the Lord
preserved him and honored him by calling him to take charge of his work
for a season in the earth, thus exalting him to that most glorious and
most responsible position that any man could be called to occupy in the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

I bear my testimony to the faithfulness of Wilford Woodruff, a man in
whom there was no guile, a man honest to the core, a man susceptible to
the impressions of the Spirit of the Lord, a man guided by inspiration
in the performance of his duty, far more than by any gift of wisdom or
of judgment that he himself possessed.

I bear my testimony to the work that was accomplished by President
Lorenzo Snow, although it was brief, yet some {213} of the things which
were left for him to do were absolutely necessary in order to relieve
his successor and others that may arise in time to come, from mistakes
and errors that had crept in before.

As to the present administration of the gospel and of the work of the
Lord I have nothing to say. Let the work speak for itself, let the
people and the voice of the people of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints say what is being done by the Lord, let it not be
said by me nor by my counselors and my associates. The Lord forbid
that I should ever imagine for one moment that we are of any great
importance in this great work of the Lord. Others may be raised up,
and the Lord can shape their minds. He can qualify them and can humble
them, if need be, to fit them for the duties and responsibilities that
may be required at their hands. I believe that Zion is prospering, and
that as far as our spiritual life, our spiritual growth, and our faith
are concerned, as well as our temporal condition, we are prosperous,
and all is well in Zion today.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1917.

THE PRESIDENTS OF THE CHURCH HAVE BEEN INSPIRED. I knew President
Brigham Young, and I bear my testimony to the world that not only was
Joseph Smith inspired of God and raised up to lay the foundations
of this great latter-day work, but Brigham Young was raised up and
sustained by the power of Almighty God to continue the mission of
Joseph and to accomplish the work that he laid out during his lifetime.
I have been connected with President John Taylor, and I testify that
he also was a man of God. He was indeed God's mouthpiece. He was a
martyr with the Prophet Joseph, for his blood was shed with Joseph's
and Hyrum's, but the Lord preserved his life that he might fulfill
the mission unto which he was called to preside over the Church for a
season. I was intimately acquainted with President Wilford Woodruff,
and I bear testimony to the {214} mission of that gracious, good man.
I have also been more or less intimate with President Snow, and I bear
testimony that his work was of God.--_Oct. C. R.,_ (Special), 1901, p.
96.

WHEN TO ORGANIZE THE FIRST PRESIDENCY. After the death of the Prophet
Joseph Smith, the Twelve Apostles continued as the presiding quorum of
the Church for a number of years; but finally they were moved upon by
the Holy Spirit to reorganize the First Presidency of the Church, with
Brigham Young as president, and Heber C. Kimball and Willard Richards
as his counselors. In reality this organization might have been
effected within twenty-four hours after the death of the Prophet Joseph
Smith, but their action was delayed, until they found by experience
that the exercise of the functions of presidency and the government of
the Church by twelve men at the head, was not only cumbersome but was
not fully perfect in the order of the Holy Priesthood as established
by the Lord. On the death of President Brigham Young, President John
Taylor followed in some measure the example of his predecessor and
it was some time before the Presidency of the Church was organized.
The Presidency was finally organized, however, with John Taylor as
president, and George Q. Cannon and myself as counselors.

At the death of President Taylor, President Woodruff hesitated and
he allowed a little time to pass before the Presidency was again
organized. When at last he became convinced that it was his duty, and
necessary in order to carry out the purposes of the Lord, he organized
the Presidency of the Church. At that time he gave a solemn injunction
to his fellow servants in relation to this. He desired it understood
that in all future times, when the President of the Church should
die, and thereby the First Presidency become disorganized it would be
the duty of the proper authorities of the Church to proceed at once,
without any unnecessary delay, to reorganize the First Presidency.

{215} As soon as the news reached us of the death of President
Woodruff, who was in California at the time, President Lorenzo Snow
said to me, "it will be our duty to proceed as soon as possible to
reorganize the Presidency of the Church." As you are aware, after the
burial of the remains of President Woodruff, he proceeded at once to
do this. In this connection I may tell you another thing. President
Snow said to me, "you will live to be the President of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and when that time comes you should
proceed at once and reorganize the Presidency of the Church." This
was his counsel to me, and the same was given to the Twelve Apostles.
In accordance with the principle and with the injunction of President
Snow, within one week after his death the apostles proceeded to
designate the new Presidency of the Church and we did this strictly
in accordance with the pattern that the Lord has established in his
Church, unanimously.

I desire to read a little from the revelation in relation to the order
of the Holy Priesthood, that you may understand our views concerning
adhering as nearly as we can to the holy order of government that
has been established by revelation through the Prophet Joseph Smith
in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times. We cannot deny the fact
that the Lord has effected one of the most perfect organizations, in
this Church, that ever existed upon the earth. I do not know of any
more perfect organization than exists in the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints today. We have not always carried out strictly
the order of the Priesthood; we have varied from it to some extent;
but we hope in due time that, by the promptings of the Holy Spirit,
we will be led into the exact channel and course that the Lord has
marked out for us to pursue and adhere strictly to the order that he
has established. I will read from a revelation that was given to the
Prophet Joseph Smith, at Nauvoo, Hancock County, Illinois, January 19,
1841, which {216} stands as the law of the Church in relation to the
presentations of the authorities of the Holy Priesthood as they were
established in the Church, and from which I feel that we have no right
to depart.--_Oct. C. R.,_ (Special), 1901, pp. 70, 71. Doctrine and
Covenants 124:123-145.

FIRST PRESIDENCY NOT NECESSARILY APOSTLES. We have the council of the
first presidency consisting of three presiding high priests who are
called of God and appointed to preside over the Church and over the
Priesthood of God, and I want to say here that it does not follow
and never has followed that the members of the First Presidency of
the Church are necessarily to be ordained apostles. They hold by
virtue of their rights as Presidents of the Church all the keys and
all the authority that pertains to the Melchizedek Priesthood, which
comprehends and comprises all of the appendages to that priesthood, the
lesser priesthood, and all the offices in the priesthood from first to
last and from the least to the greatest.--_April C. R.,_ 1912.

THE PRIESTHOOD AND ITS OFFICES. In the _Era_ for February, it was
stated that several persons who had acted as counselors in the First
Presidency had never been ordained apostles. Several correspondents
have objected to the statement that Sidney Rigdon, Jedediah M. Grant,
Daniel H. Wells, John R. Winder, and others were not ordained apostles.
We still maintain, upon lack of convincing evidence to the contrary,
that none of these brethren was ever ordained an apostle. We do know
positively that John R. Winder, Sidney Rigdon, William Law and Hyrum
Smith, all of whom were members in the First Presidency of the Church,
were never ordained apostles. But, be that as it may, however, the
main point we wish to make is this, that it was not necessary that
they should be so ordained apostles in order to bold the position of
counselor in the First Presidency. The leading fact to be remembered
is that the Priesthood is greater than any of its offices; and that
any {217} man holding the Melchizedek Priesthood may, by virtue of its
possession, perform any ordinance pertaining thereto, or connected
therewith, when called upon to do so by one holding the proper
authority, which proper authority is vested in the President of the
Church, or in any whom he may designate. Every officer in the Church
is under his direction, and he is directed of God. He is also selected
of the Lord to be the head of the Church, and so becomes, when the
Priesthood of the Church (which includes its officers and its members),
shall have so accepted and upheld him. (Doctrine and Covenants, section
107:22.) No man can justly presume to have authority to preside, merely
by virtue of his priesthood as is the case with Joseph Smith of the
reorganized church, for in addition, he must be chosen and accepted
by the Church. The reverse was the case with him. Such action was
repudiated by the Twelve, the quorum in authority after the martyrdom,
and by the whole Church. An office in the priesthood is a calling, like
apostles, high priest, seventy, elder, and derives all its authority
from the priesthood; these officers hold different callings, but the
same priesthood.

The apostolic office in its very nature, is a proselyting office. When
an apostle presides, he, like the high priest, the seventy, the elder,
or the bishop, presides because of the high priesthood which has been
conferred upon him; and furthermore because he has been called upon so
to do by the acknowledged head of the Church. (Doctrine and Covenants,
section 107:23-33.) And so with the high priest who has been called
to officiate in the First Presidency, in which case he is "accounted
equal" with the President of the Church in holding the keys of the
Presidency (section 90:6) as long as the President remains. When he
dies, the calling of his counselors ends, and the responsibility of
Presidency falls upon the quorum of Twelve Apostles, because they
hold the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood and are {218} the next quorum in
authority. (Doctrine and Covenants, section 107:24.) It is not the
apostleship (Doctrine and Covenants section 107), but the priesthood
and the calling by proper authority which enables any person to
preside. Every man holding the Holy Melchizedek Priesthood may act in
any capacity and do all things that such priesthood holds, provided he
is called upon by proper authority to so officiate; but he would have
no right to depart from the limitations of his office, unless he is
specially called upon by one whose calling, from those over him up to
the head, would clearly authorize him to give such instructions. It
is always to be presumed, also, that order will be observed, and that
the servants of the Lord will not depart from that order, and call
upon men to do things which the law of the priesthood and the nature
of their office do not authorize, unless there is special occasion for
it. The Lord says that all things are governed by law. (See Doctrine
and Covenants, section 88:42.) It is not consistent, for instance, to
imagine that the Lord would call upon a deacon to baptize.

Witness the calling, on February 14, 1835, of David Whitmer and Martin
Harris, both high priests, by the Prophet Joseph, in conformity with
prior revelation from God (See Doctrine and Covenants, section 18)
to "search out the Twelve." They chose the Twelve, ordained and set
them apart for their exalted callings, because they were called upon
by the prophet of God who had been instructed of the Lord, and also
because these men held the necessary authority of the Priesthood,
which authority was exercised, in this case as it should be in all
cases, upon proper calling. The Doctrine and Covenants makes it very
clear that while each officer in the Church has a right to officiate
in his own standing, "the Melchizedek Priesthood holds the right of
presidency, and has power and authority over all the offices in the
Church in all ages of the world, to administer in spiritual {219}
things." (Doctrine and Covenants, section 107:8.)

Further, in the same revelation verses 65 and 66, we are told:

"Wherefore it must needs be that one be appointed of the high
priesthood to preside over the priesthood, and he shall be called
president of the high priesthood of the Church:

"Or in other words, the presiding high priest over the high priesthood
of the Church."

It is well to remember that the term "high priesthood," as frequently
used, has reference to the Melchizedek Priesthood, in contradistinction
to the "lesser," or Aaronic Priesthood.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, p.
549, May, 1902.

AUTHORITY OF THE PRESIDENT OF THE CHURCH. I have the right to bless.
I hold the keys of the Melchizedek Priesthood and of the office and
power of patriarch. It is my right to bless; for all the keys and
authority and power pertaining to the government of the Church and to
the Melchizedek and Aaronic Priesthood are centered in the presiding
officer of the Church. There is no business nor office, within the
Church, that the President of the Church may not fill, and may not do,
if it is necessary, or if it is required of him to do it. He holds the
office of patriarch; he holds the office of high priest and of apostle,
of seventy, of elder, of bishop and of priest, teacher and deacon in
the Church; all these belong to the Presidency of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, and they can officiate in any and in all
of these callings when occasion requires.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 7.

RELATION OF MEMBERS OF FIRST PRESIDENCY. I desire to make another
remark or two before we close our conference. I will call your
attention to the fact that the Lord in the beginning of this work
revealed that there should be three high priests to preside over the
high priesthood of his Church and over the whole Church. (Doctrine and
Covenants {220} 107:22, 64, 65, 66, 67, 91 and 92.) He conferred upon
them all the authority necessary to preside over all the affairs of the
Church. They hold the keys of the house of God and of the ordinances
of the gospel, and of every blessing which has been restored to the
earth in this dispensation. This authority is vested in a presidency
of three high priests. They are three presidents. The Lord himself so
calls them. (Doctrine and Covenants section 107:29.) But there is one
presiding president, and his counselors are presidents also. I propose
that my counselors and fellow presidents in the First Presidency shall
share with me in the responsibility of every act which I shall perform
in this capacity. I do not propose to take the reins in my own hands
to do as I please; but I propose to do as my brethren and I agree
upon, and as the Spirit of the Lord manifests to us. I have always
held, and do hold, and trust I always shall hold, that it is wrong for
one man to exercise all the authority and power of presidency in the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I dare not assume such a
responsibility, and I will not, so long as I can have men like these
(pointing to Presidents Winder and Lund) to stand by and counsel with
me in the labors we have to perform, and in doing all those things
that shall tend to the peace, advancement and happiness of the people
of God and the building up of Zion. If at any time my brethren of
the apostleship shall see in me a disposition to depart from this
principle, or a forgetfulness on my part of this covenant that I make
today before this body of priesthood, I ask them in the name of my
Father, that they will come to me, as my brethren, as counselors in the
priesthood, as watchmen on the towers of Zion, and remind me of this
covenant and promise which I make to the body of the Church in general
conference assembled at this time. The Lord never did intend that one
man should have all power, and for that reason he has placed in his
Church, presidents, apostles, high priests, seventies, elders and the
various officers {221} of the lesser priesthood, all of which are
essential in their order and place according to the authority bestowed
on them. The Lord never did anything that was not essential or that was
superfluous. There is a use for every branch of the priesthood that he
has established in his Church. We want every man to learn his duty, and
we expect every man will do his duty as faithfully as he knows how, and
carry off his portion of the responsibility of building up Zion in the
latter days.

I felt like I wanted to say that much to these my brethren who bear
the holy priesthood--men who wield influence for the salvation of
souls, who set good examples before the people among whom they dwell,
who teach them the right way, admonish them from sin, lead them in the
path of duty, and enable them to stand firm and steadfast in the faith
of the gospel, wherewith they have been made free from sin and from
the grasp of Satan. God bless all Israel, is my prayer, in the name of
Jesus. Amen.--_Oct. C. R._ (Special), 1901, p. 82.

DUTIES OF APOSTLES. The duty of the twelve apostles of the Church is to
preach the gospel to the world, to send it to the inhabitants of the
earth and to bear testimony of Jesus Christ the Son of God, as living
witnesses of his divine mission. That is their special calling and they
are always under the direction of the Presidency of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints when that presidency is intact, and there
is never at the same time two equal heads in the Church--never. The
Lord never ordained any such thing, nor designed it. There is always a
head in the Church, and if the Presidency of the Church are removed by
death or other cause, then the next head of the Church is the Twelve
Apostles, until a presidency is again organized of three presiding
high priests who have the right to hold the office of First Presidency
over the Church; and, according to the doctrine laid down by President
Wilford Woodruff, who saw {222} the necessity for it, and that of
President Lorenzo Snow, if the president should die, his counselors are
then released from that presidency, and it is the duty of the Twelve
Apostles to proceed at once, in the manner that has been pointed out,
to see that the First Presidency is reorganized, so that there may
be no deficiency in the working and order of the priesthood in the
Church.--_Apr C. R.,_ 1913, pp. 4, 5.

TESTIMONY OF THE APOSTLES. For instance these twelve disciples of
Christ are supposed to be eye and ear witnesses of the divine mission
of Jesus Christ. It is not permissible for them to say, I believe,
simply; I have accepted it simply because I believe it. Read the
revelation; the Lord informs us they must _know,_ they must get the
knowledge for themselves. It must be with them as if they had seen with
their eyes and heard with their cars and they know the truth. That is
their mission, to testify of Jesus Christ and him crucified and risen
from the dead and clothed now with almighty power at the right hand of
God, the Savior of the world. That is their mission, and their duty,
and that is the doctrine and the truth that it is their duty to preach
to the world and see that it is preached to the world. Where they can
not go themselves they are to have the help of others called to their
assistance, the seventies first, also the elders and the high priests.
Those who hold the Melchizedek Priesthood, who are not otherwise
appointed, are under their direction to preach the gospel to the world
and to declare the truth--that Jesus is the Christ and that Joseph is a
prophet of God, and was authorized and qualified to lay the foundation
of the kingdom of God. And when I say kingdom of God I mean what I say.
Christ is the King--not man. No man is king of the kingdom of God; God
is the King of it, and we acknowledge him and him only as Sovereign
of his Kingdom_.--April C. R.,_ 1916, p. 6. (Doctrine and Covenants
18:26-33.)

THE PRESIDING BISHOPRIC. Before we get through with the conference, we
expect to bear some reports from {223} the Presiding Bishopric, who are
the temporal custodians of the means of the Church, and whose duty it
is to account for the receipt and disbursement of these funds; and you
will be surprised, perhaps, to learn how generally and universally,
in the Church, the means gathered from the tithes of the people are
disposed of for the benefit of all the people--and not a few.--_April
C. R.,_ 1912, p. 6.

WHEN TO SUBMIT QUESTIONS TO THE GENERAL AUTHORITIES. If you have a
question to ask, or some problem that you are not sure you are able
to solve, I would suggest to you that you figure it out yourselves
and reach the very best conclusion that you can of the matter; and
then, if you are still not quite satisfied with it, and you cannot get
sufficient of the Spirit of the Lord to reveal to you the absolute
truth, as to whether you are right or wrong, just submit to us your
conclusion, and we think we can answer that a good deal easier and
quicker than we can solve your questions in the way they are generally
put to us.--_April C. R.,_ 1910, p. 45.

NO NEED TO POINT OUT DEFECTS OF CHURCH LEADERS. I do not think it
is my right or prerogative to point out the supposed defects of the
Prophet Joseph Smith, or Brigham Young, or any other of the leaders
of the Church. Let the Lord God Almighty judge them and speak for or
against them as it may seem to him good--but not me; it is not for me,
my brethren, to do this. Our enemies may have taken advantage of us,
in times gone by, because of unwise things that may have been said.
Some of us may now give to the world the same opportunity to speak evil
against us, because of that which we say, which should not be spoken at
all.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, pp. 124-125.

HELP THE GENERAL AUTHORITIES. The general authorities of the Church
will be presented possibly tomorrow, and if not then, the next day.
We desire the brethren and sisters who come to the conference to come
with their hearts full of the spirit of wisdom and of truth, and if
you discern {224} in us any lack of wisdom or of judgment, any failure
in the performance of our duty, we desire that those who have superior
experience and knowledge, and greater intelligence, will do us the
honor and favor of coming to us individually and letting us know
wherein we come short. We will give a thousand errors, if we can find
them, or if they exist in us--any moment, for one truth.--_April C.
R.,_ 1908, p. 8.

TEMPORAL SUPPORT OF GENERAL AUTHORITIES. There is not one of the
general authorities in the Church who draws one dollar from the tithes
of the people for his own use. Well, you may say, how do they live?
I will give you the key: The Church helped to support in its infancy
the sugar industry in this country, and it has some means invested
in that enterprise. The Church helped to establish the Z. C. M. I.,
and it has a little interest in that, and in some other institutions
which pay dividends. In other words, tithing funds were invested in
these institutions, which give employment to many, for which the
Trustee-in-Trust holds stock certificates, which are worth more today
than what was given for them; and the dividends from these investments
more than pay for the support of the general authorities of the Church.
So we do not use one dollar of your tithing.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, pp.
7, 8.

A BLESSING UPON STAKE PRESIDENCIES AND OTHER OFFICERS. May God bless
the presidents of the stakes of Zion and their counselors, and all
the officers of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. May
he help them to be pure, holy, honest, upright men, after God's own
heart, free from the sins of the world, broadminded, full of the love
of truth, charity, the spirit of forgiveness, mercy and kindness, that
they may be as fathers indeed in the midst of the people, and not
tyrants. You, my brethren, are not called to be masters; you are called
to be servants. Let those who would be great among you be the servants
of all. Let us follow in the footsteps of our Master, the Lord Jesus
{225} Christ. He alone is the perfect example for mankind. He is the
only infallible rule and law, way and door into everlasting life. Let
us follow the Son of God. Make him our exemplar, and our guide. Imitate
him. Do his work. Become like unto him, as far as it lies within our
powers to become like him that was perfect and without sin.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1907, p. 118. (Doc. and Cov. 18:21-25.)

COUNSEL OF STAKE PRESIDENTS AND BISHOPS. Above all things let me say
to the presidents of stakes and counselors and presidents of missions,
and to the bishops and their counselors--let me say to you all, live
exemplary lives, so that you can each say to the people: "Come and
follow me, follow my example, obey my precepts; be in union with me,
and follow Christ."--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1906, p. 8.

DUTIES OF STAKE PRESIDENTS. I want to say to these presidents of
stakes who are present: you have my confidence, you have my love. I
pray for you every day of my life, and I trust that you remember me
and my brethren in your prayers. We understand the responsibilities
that rest upon you in the discharge of your duties. You are fathers to
the people; that great responsibility rests upon you; your labors are
manifold and sometimes very difficult. We realize the burdens that you
have to bear, the patience that you have to exercise and exhibit in the
discharge of your duty, in order that you may avoid giving offense, and
that you may reconcile the people, over whom you preside, to that which
is right without using drastic measures. We understand this, and you
have our sympathy, our fellowship, our love, and what strength you may
derive from our faith and prayers that you may preside in righteousness
over your different stakes of Zion, and that your brethren associated
with you may be united with you, and that you may pull together in that
which is right and proper for the upbuilding of Zion {226} and the
defense of the people of God.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 8.

DUTY OF HIGH COUNCILS. The duty of the high councils of the Church,
when they are called to act upon questions involving the membership or
standing of members of the Church, is to find out the truth, the facts,
and then judge according to the truth and the facts that are brought to
their understanding, always tempered with mercy, love, and kindness,
and with the spirit in their souls to save and not to destroy; our aim
should be to build up, and not to tear down. Our calling is to convey
the spirit of love, truth, peace and good will to mankind throughout
the world; that war may cease; that strife may come to an end, and that
peace may prevail._--Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 5.

DUTIES OF PATRIARCHS. We have a number of patriarchs in the Church
whose duty it is to bestow blessings upon the heads of those who
seek blessings at their hands. They are fathers. They hold the
evangelical office in the Church. It is their business and right to
bestow blessings upon the people, to make promises unto them in the
name of the Lord, as it may be given them by the inspiration of the
Holy Spirit, to comfort them in the hours of sorrow and trouble, to
strengthen their faith by the promises that shall be made to them
through the Spirit of God, and to be fathers indeed of the people,
leading them into all truth.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 4.

DUTIES OF HIGH PRIESTS. In addition to these organizations we have in
each stake of Zion an organization called the high priests quorum, to
which all high priests of the Church belong, including the presidency
and the high councilors of the stake, and also the bishops and their
counselors, all the patriarchs, and all others who have been ordained
to the office of high priest in the Church, which office is the office
of presidency in the Melchizedek Priesthood, not that every man who
holds the office of high priest is a president. {227} Only he who is
called, appointed and set apart to preside among the high priests holds
the presiding authority and office.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 3.

DUTIES OF HIGH PRIESTS' QUORUMS. The high priests' quorums should
have their regular meetings. They should meet together as often as
circumstances will permit or as necessity requires, and grow and unite
together. They should establish their schools of instruction and
enlightenment; for it is the duty of the high priests' quorums to teach
the principles of government, of union, of advancement and of growth in
the kingdom of God. They are indeed the fathers of the people at large.
In our high priests' quorum are numbered the presidents of stakes and
their counselors, bishops and counselors, patriarchs, and all that
have been ordained to the office of high priest in the Melchizedek
Priesthood. All such belong to the high priests' quorum. They come
under its supervision, and they should have a lively union with it, not
a dead connection. They should be united with the quorum in such a way
that they give it all the force that they can impart for good. They
should give it their individual influence, their hearty support, their
confidence, and the benefit of their advice and counsel. They should
not pull apart, nor be disinterested in these matters.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1907, p. 5.

DUTY OF HIGH PRIESTS. Every man who holds the office of high priest in
the Church, or has been ordained a high priest, whether he is called to
active position in the Church or not--inasmuch as he has been ordained
a high priest, should feel that he is obliged--that it is his bounden
duty, to set an example before the old and young worthy of emulation,
and to place himself in a position to be a teacher of righteousness,
not only by precept but more particularly by example--giving to the
younger ones the benefit of the experience of age, and thus becoming
individually a power in the midst of the community in which he dwells.
Every {228} man who has light should let that light shine, that those
who see it may glorify their Father which is in heaven, and honor
him who possesses the light and who causes it to shine forth for the
benefit of others. In a local capacity, there is no body of priesthood
in the Church who should excel, or who are expected to excel, those
who are called to bear the office of high priest in the Church. From
among those who hold this office are chosen the presidents of stakes
and their counselors, and the high councils of the stakes of Zion, and
from this office are chosen the bishops, and the bishops' counselors
in every ward in Zion; and heretofore, of this office are those who
have been called to take charge of our stake Mutual Improvement
organizations. Those holding this office are, as a rule, men of
advanced years, and varied experience, men who have filled missions
abroad, who have preached the gospel to the nations of the earth, and
who have had experience not only abroad but at home. Their experience
and wisdom is the ripened fruit of years of labor in the Church, and
they should exercise that wisdom for the benefit of all with whom they
are associated.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1908, pp. 5, 6.

PURPOSE AND DUTIES OF SEVENTIES. The seventies are called to be
assistants to the twelve apostles; indeed they are apostles of the Lord
Jesus Christ, subject to the direction of the Twelve, and it is their
duty to respond to the call of the Twelve, under the direction of the
First Presidency of the Church, to preach the gospel to every creature,
to every tongue and people under the heavens, to whom they may be
sent. Hence they should understand the gospel, and they should not be
wholly dependent upon our auxiliary organizations for instruction,
neither should they be wholly dependent upon the missionary classes
in our Church schools for their knowledge of the gospel, and for
their qualifications to preach that gospel to the world. They should
take up the study of the gospel, the study of the {229} scriptures
and the history of the dealings of God with the people of the earth,
in their own quorums, and make those quorums schools of learning and
instruction, wherein they may qualify themselves for every labor and
duty that may be required at their hands.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907, pp. 5, 6.

DUTY OF SEVENTIES. The seventies have no responsibility of presiding.
It is not the calling or duty of their office to preside. They are
traveling elders, and they are to preach the gospel to the world, under
the direction of the twelve apostles, who constitute the traveling high
council of the Church, and who are special witnesses of Jesus Christ to
all the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 72.

DUTIES OF SEVENTIES. We have also in the Church, today, I am informed,
146 quorums of seventy. These constitute a body of elders of somewhere
in the neighborhood of 10,000 men, whose special duty it is to respond
to the call of the apostles to preach the gospel, without purse or
scrip, to all the nations of the earth. They are minute men. It is
expected that they will be ready, whenever they are called, to go out
in the world, or to go out to the various organizations of the Church
to fulfil missions and to perform such duties as shall be required of
them, in order that the work of the Lord and the work of the ministry
may be upheld and sustained and carried on in the Church and throughout
the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 3.

SEVENTIES QUORUMS TO BE REPLENISHED FROM ELDERS' QUORUMS. Gather in
from the elders' quorums those who have proved themselves worthy, and
who have gained experience, and make seventies of them, so that the
quorum of the seventies may be replenished; and the aged ones, whose
physical condition will not permit them any longer to do missionary
duty in the world, let them be ordained high priests and patriarchs,
to bless the people and to minister at home. Gather in the strong, the
vigorous, the young, the able-bodied, who have the spirit of the gospel
in their hearts, to fill up the {230} ranks of the seventies, that we
may have ministers to preach the gospel to the world. They are needed.
We cannot now meet the demand.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 96.

ELDERS TO PROCLAIM GOSPEL. I believe that the elders of Israel, and the
officers of the Church, should devote themselves to the proclamation of
the gospel of life everlasting, and that they should not dwell or seek
to dwell upon trivial and nonsensical things, or upon personal conduct
or extraneous affairs. I think they should be dignified and sincere in
their spirit and utterances. I think they should be moved by the spirit
of truth and of the inspiration of the gospel, and consider that it is
their mission to bear record of Jesus Christ, of Joseph Smith, and of
the divinity of the great latter-day work, the foundations of which
Joseph Smith was instrumental in the hands of God in establishing in
the latter days. I believe if our brethren will devote their thought,
their minds and efforts in this direction, that they will please the
Lord, they will satisfy the Saints, and they will fulfil the object
of their mission better than they can possibly do by criticizing
themselves or others, or dwelling on the faults and failings of
men.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 124.

DUTIES OF ELDERS. I am not prepared to state how many elders we have
in the Church; but they are very numerous. It is the duty of this body
of men to be standing ministers at home; to be ready at the call of
the presiding officers of the Church and the stakes, to labor in the
ministry at home, and to officiate in any calling that may be required
of them, whether it be to work in the temples, or to labor in the
ministry at home, or whether it be to go out into the world, along with
the seventies, to preach the gospel to the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904,
p. 4.

AUTHORITY OF THE BISHOPS AND OTHER PRESIDING OFFICERS. A bishop is the
presiding officer of his ward, and where the bishop is in the ward,
his counselors and those who are members of his ward are subject to
his presidency. {231} He cannot yield it up. He cannot give it to
another; or, if he does, he violates one of the sacred principles
of the government of the priesthood. He may direct his counselors,
the first or the second, to do his will, to carry out his wishes, to
execute his desires, or his commands; but in so doing the counselor
does not act as the bishop, but he acts under the direction of the
presiding authority. He does not act independently of the bishop, but
subordinate to the bishop, and is subject entirely to the bishop's
direction. This principle prevails, or should prevail, in the Sunday
school organization of the Church. We can commission and appoint; that
is, those who preside can call upon their aids for assistance, they can
direct them to accomplish labors, but in every instance when they do,
it is by and with and under the consent of the presiding authority, and
by his advice, but not independently. Our missions have not always been
organized strictly according to the pattern that the Lord has given.
In a great many instances the presiding elder has been the presiding
officer of the mission.

But in recent years, in many instances, it has been deemed wise, not
only to have a presiding elder in the mission, but also assistants to
the president, or counselors, that they may render him such assistance
and counsel as he may need. In all these things the presiding officer
is the head, should be regarded in his place, and his place should be
held sacred in the minds of his associates. And no man possessing a
correct understanding of the spirit of the gospel and of the authority
and law of the Holy Priesthood will attempt for a moment to run before
his file leader or to do anything that is not strictly in harmony with
his wish and the authority that belongs to him. The moment a man in
a subordinate position begins to usurp the authority of his leader,
that moment he is out of his place, and proves by his conduct that he
does not comprehend his duty, that he is not acting in the line of his
calling, and is a dangerous character. {232} He will set bad examples,
he will mislead, he will lead others into error, having fallen into
error himself; indeed, he is in error the moment he acts contrary to
and independent of the direction of his presiding officer; and if he
continues in that course he will go astray entirely, and those who
follow him will follow him astray. We all understand that principle,
I think, and I would like to see my brethren and sisters who are
connected with the Sunday school work observe it strictly, but in the
true spirit; not with any kind of stiff formality or set ways, but in
the true spirit of presidency, lovingly subject to divine authority,
the authority that God has instituted that we may emulate, the example
of the Son himself, who came to earth, and while he possessed majestic
power to heal the sick, to restore sight to the blind, bearing to the
deaf, and bring the dead to life, and to accomplish wonderful things,
walking upon the waves, stilling the storms, casting out devils, and
multiplying the loaves and fishes, by which he fed the multitudes of
people, yet in accomplishing all this he declared, over and over again,
this great principle, that he came not to do his own will, but the will
of him that sent him, recognizing in every feature of his message and
ministry in the world that God was at the head, and that he did nothing
of himself, but only that which the Father sent him to do. Thus he was
acting under the authority of his president or file leader--of him who
sent him and commissioned him to accomplish the work he was sent to do.
Let us follow that spirit and example and adopt that principle in our
lives, then we shall never have presiding elders and officers in the
Church at logger-heads with each other, contending with each other, and
at cross purposes. They will always be one. They will see eye to eye,
they will understand better the principles of divine government, the
principles of the gospel and the promptings of the Holy Spirit.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1905 (Sunday School), pp. 109, 110.

{233} DUTIES OF BISHOPS. It is expected that the bishop of a ward with
his counselors will understand the necessities of every member of
his ward. Then they have as assistants and helpers a large corps of
elders, and priests, teachers and deacons of the lesser Priesthood,
who render assistance to them in the temporal as well as the spiritual
affairs of the Church. It devolves upon the bishopric of the ward to
look after the poor, to minister unto the sick and the afflicted,
and to see that there is no want nor suffering among the people in
these organized divisions of the Church. It is also the duty of these
presiding officers in the Church to look after the spiritual welfare of
the people, to see that they are living moral, pure and upright lives,
that they are faithful in the discharge of their duties as Latter-day
Saints, that they are honest in their dealings with one another, and
with all the world. It is their business to see that spiritual light
exists in their hearts, and that the people under their presidency and
direction are living the lives of Saints, as far as it is possible
for men and women, in the mortal body, beset by the weaknesses and
imperfections of mankind, to be Saints.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, pp. 2, 3.

BISHOPS AND LESSER PRIESTHOOD SHOULD BE ACTIVE. The bishops and the
lesser priesthood should be very active and energetic. We should look
after the boys who have been ordained deacons, teachers, and priests in
the Church. We should find something for them to do in their calling.
Let them be appointed to active labors in their several spheres. Put
forward those who have not had experience to accompany those who have,
and give them something to do. Let the deacons not only assist to keep
the meeting houses in repair and their grounds in proper condition,
but let them be set to work to look after the welfare of the widows
and fatherless, the aged and the poor. Many of our young men who are
idle, languishing for the want of something to do, could be made more
useful in helping the poor to clean {234} up about their homes and make
them comfortable, and helping them to live in such a way that life
would be pleasant to them. There is no reason why the members of the
lesser priesthood should not be engaged in missions and labors of this
kind.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 6.

DUTIES OF THE LESSER PRIESTHOOD. Then we have the lesser priesthood,
who attends to the different temporal matters of the Church, consisting
of priests, teachers and deacons, who labor under the direction of the
bishopric in the various wards in which they dwell, for the work of the
ministry, for the edifying of the body of Christ, the unifying of the
people and bringing them up to the standard of righteousness that they
should reach in the flesh, according to the light they possess and the
ability and talent which the Lord has given them.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904,
p. 4.

LESSER PRIESTHOOD. The bishops should take especial charge of the
lesser priesthood, and train them in the duties of their callings
--the priests, teachers and deacons. Our young men should be looked
after. The boys, as soon as it is prudent, should be called to take
part in the lesser priesthood. If it were possible to grade them, from
the deacon to the priest, and from the priest upward, through all the
offices that will eventually devolve upon them, it would be one of
the best things that could be done. All these things should be looked
after by the presiding authorities of the Church, especially those
who preside over the quorums. I will repeat what I said before, it is
expected that every man on whom responsibility is placed will do his
duty faithfully and be diligent in the performance thereof.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1907, p. 6.

THE WORK OF THE BISHOPRIC. The work of the bishopric is both temporal
and spiritual. The average bishop gives all his time and efforts for
the betterment of the people over whom he presides. The bishop should
not try to do all the work that is necessary to be done in his ward.
His {235} counselors are there to help him, and a due portion of the
responsibility of the bishop of the ward should be placed upon his
counselors. Neither is it wise that the bishopric of the ward should
feel they are compelled to do all that is necessary to be done in their
wards. They should exercise their right to call upon the priesthood
to visit the people as teachers and preachers of the gospel of Jesus
Christ that they may give to all as far as possible an opportunity to
exercise their talents and to do good in their wards. It is sometimes
advisable to give to each counselor special duties, and assign each
of the counselors his proportion of the responsibilities which belong
to the bishopric, each one doing some special work for which he is
adapted, so that all may be active.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 6.

DIGNITY OF TEACHERS' CALLING. We have had called to our attention,
recently, the fact that some men who are of long standing in the
Church--indeed, some of them born and reared in the Church, and who
are occupying prominent positions in some of the quorums of the
priesthood--when their presidents or their bishops of the wards
in which they live call upon them to visit the Saints, teach the
principles of the gospel and perform the duties of teachers, they
coolly inform their bishops that they have graduated from that calling
and refuse to act as teachers. Brother Charles W. Penrose is eighty-two
years of age. I am going on seventy-six, and I believe that I am older
than several of these good men who have graduated from the duties in
the lesser priesthood, and I want to tell them and you that we are
not too old to act as teachers, if you will call us to do it--not one
of us. There is never a time, there never will come a time to those
who bold the priesthood in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, when men can say of themselves that they have done enough. So
long as life lasts, and so long as we possess ability to do good, to
labor for the upbuilding of Zion, and for the benefit of the human
family, we ought, with willingness, {236} to yield with alacrity to the
requirements made of us to do our duty, little or great.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1914, p. 7.

VALUE OF TEACHERS' WORK. I don't know of any duty that is more sacred,
or more necessary, if it is carried out as it should be, than the
duties of the teachers who visit the homes of the people, who pray with
them, who admonish them to virtue and honor, to unity, to love, and
to faith in and fidelity to the cause of Zion; who strive to settle
uncertainties in the minds of the people and bring them to the standard
of the knowledge that they should possess in the gospel of Jesus
Christ. May all the people open their doors, call in the members of
their families, and respect the visit of the teachers to their homes,
and join with them in striving to bring about a better condition, if
possible, in the home than ordinarily exists. If you can advance, try
to aid the teachers to help you make that advancement.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1915, p. 140.

THE RESTORATION OF THE MELCHIZEDEK PRIESTHOOD. "No man can be exalted
unless he be independent. * * * Mankind are naturally independent
and intelligent beings, they have been created for the express
purpose of exalting themselves." The study of the subject of the Holy
or Melchizedek Priesthood, including the Aaronic, is one of vast
importance to the human family. The student of the true science of
theology will readily comprehend the necessity of its existence among
men, for the reason that true theology, or the Church of Jesus Christ,
cannot exist without it. It lies at the foundation of the Church, it
is the authority by which the Church is established or organized,
built up and governed, and by which the gospel is preached, and all
the ordinances thereof designed for the salvation of mankind are
administered or solemnized. No ordinance of the gospel can be performed
acceptably to God or with efficacy to man except by its authority and
power, and certainly there is no ordinance or rite instituted by the
Almighty in {237} the great plan of redemption which is not essential
to the salvation or exaltation of his children. Therefore, where the
Melchizedek or holy Priesthood does not exist, there can be no true
Church of Christ in its fulness. When this priesthood is not found
among mankind they are destitute of the power of God, and therefore
of the true science of theology, or the Church and religion of Jesus
Christ who is the great High Priest and Apostle of our salvation. While
the Prophet Joseph Smith was engaged in translating the Book of Mormon,
in 1829, he and Oliver Cowdery became animated over the truths and
glorious promises unfolded to them in their work, and desired to reach
out after these blessings before their work was done, but the Lord
gently admonished them not to be in a hurry; he said: "You must wait
yet a little while, for ye are not yet ordained," but the promise was
given that they should be ordained thereafter, and they should go forth
and deliver the word of God unto the children of men, and he pronounced
a woe upon the inhabitants of the earth if they would not then hearken
unto their words.

The ordinary meaning of the word priesthood, as generally understood
and applied in the world, signifies a class or body of men set apart
for sacred duties, or holding the priestly office, or an order of
persons composed of priests spoken of or taken collectively. This
is not, however, the sense in which the words Melchizedek or holy
Priesthood, are used here. Reference is made in this article to the
sacred office itself, or the principle of power which constitutes
the office, and is the authority by which individuals or the several
orders, or quorums, as we use the term, composing the priesthood of the
Church, may legitimately act in the name of the Lord; or the moving,
directing, controlling, governing or presiding agency, right and
authority, which is vested in the Godhead and delegated unto man for
the purpose of his instruction, initiation into the Church, spiritual
{238} and temporal guidance, government and exaltation. That is the
Melchizedek Priesthood, which is without father, without mother, or
descent, or beginning of days, or end of life, which the great high
priest, Melchizedek, so honored and magnified in his time that it was
called after his name, in honor to him and to avoid the too frequent
repetition of the name of the Son of God.

This distinction between the quorums of the priesthood and the
priesthood itself should always be kept in mind in the use of the
term Melchizedek or Holy Priesthood. The Holy Priesthood after
the order of the Son of God was the original name given to this
priesthood. Subsequently it was called the Melchizedek Priesthood. This
priesthood was confirmed upon Adam, Abel, Seth, Enoch, Methuselah,
Noah, Melchizedek, Abraham, Moses and many others, and doubtless upon
many of the prophets prior to the birth of Christ, upon his chosen
disciples among the Jews, before his crucifixion, and upon the Nephite
disciples upon this continent, after his resurrection and ascension
on high. These he made his apostles, to bear witness of him upon both
hemispheres and to all the world; and doubtless the Savior conferred
this priesthood upon other disciples whom he chose from among the
"other sheep" of whom he spoke to the Nephites, which were not of the
folds of the Jews or of the Nephites, whose records are yet to come
forth to bear witness of him, in the due time of the Lord.

We learn from the revelations that God took Moses, and the Holy
Priesthood also, out of the midst of the children of Israel. But the
lesser or Aaronic Priesthood, which was confirmed upon Aaron and his
seed, continued among them till the coming of Christ in the meridian of
time. John, the son of Zacharias, was probably the last who held the
keys of this Priesthood among the Jews. He was raised up and sent as
the forerunner of Christ to prepare the way for his first coming. And
he was also sent to the world in this dispensation {239} to begin the
work of preparation for Christ's second advent.

"There are in the Church two Priesthoods, namely, the Melchizedek and
Aaronic, including the Levitical Priesthood. Why the first is called
the Melchizedek Priesthood is because Melchizedek was such a great high
priest. Before his day it was called the Holy Priesthood after the
order of the Son of God." The Melchizedek priesthood holds the keys
of all the spiritual blessings of the Church, of the mysteries of the
kingdom of heaven, of communion with the general assembly and Church
of the first born, and the presence of God, the Father, and Jesus, the
Mediator.

The Aaronic priesthood is an appendage to the first, and holds the keys
of the ministering of angels, and the outward ordinances and letter
of the gospel, the baptism of repentance for the remission of sins,
agreeable to the covenants and commandments.

The Melchizedek priesthood which Christ restored to the earth, remained
among men between three and four hundred years afterwards. When in
consequence of transgressions, apostasy from the true order of the
priesthood and Church of Christ, the innovations of priestcraft and
paganism, the true order of God was lost, the holy priesthood was taken
from the earth, and the Church of Christ ceased to be among men, so far
as we have any knowledge by revelation or from the history and records
of the past.

Then were fulfilled many predictions of the prophets and apostles,
contained in the word of God. Among them the word of God spoken by
John, in the 12th chapter of Revelations, and the prophecy of Amos:
"Behold the days come, saith the Lord God, that I will send a famine in
the land, not a famine of bread, nor a thirst for water, but of hearing
the words of the Lord: and they shall wander from sea to sea, and from
the north even to the east, they shall run to and fro to seek the
word of the Lord, and shall not find it." (Amos {240} 8:11, 12.) The
proclamation of the word of the Lord is, and always has been dependent
upon the authority of the holy priesthood.

How could they hear without a preacher, and how shall they preach
except they be sent?

The Gentiles among whom the priesthood had been established and the
gospel preached, fell away also after the example of unbelief and the
manner of the Jews, or children of Israel. God who spared not the
natural branches, also cut off engrafted ones, and "Mystery, Babylon
the Great, the mother of harlots and abominations of the earth," was
set up as foretold by the Prophet Daniel and the Apostle John. This
power made war with the Saints, and overcame them, changed time and
laws, "wore out the Saints of the Most High," was drunken with their
blood and with the blood of the martyrs of Jesus, and destroyed the
holy people. But this mystical power, in turn, is to be overcome and,
in the due time of the Lord, utterly destroyed.

Before this great event shall occur must come to pass the restoration
of the gospel of Christ, and the establishment of the kingdom of God
again on the earth, with all the powers and blessings of the Holy
priesthood, concerning which we have the most positive assurances.
The declarations of the sacred writers of the Bible and the Book of
Mormon not only affirm the restoration of all things spoken of by holy
prophets relative to this great event, but also that this kingdom shall
no more be thrown down nor be left to another people, nor cease until
the whole earth shall be filled with the brightness of its glory,
with its truths, its power, might, majesty and dominion, and that
the kingdom and the greatness thereof under the whole heaven will be
given unto the Saints of the Most High God, and they shall possess it
forever. The declaration of this truth is even now very galling to the
unbelieving world, and to those who reject the truth; nevertheless the
Saints will inherit the blessings, and the {241} word of God will come
to pass, however much the wicked object to it or whether we as the
beginners in the great cause endure faithful to the end and realize the
promise or not. This great and glorious redemption will be consummated
through the power and agencies of the Holy Spirit. God has ever dealt,
and will always deal, with the children of men; for this priesthood
"administereth the gospel and holdeth the key of the mysteries of
the kingdom, even the key of the kingdom of God; therefore, in the
ordinances thereof, the of godliness is manifest; and without the
ordinance thereof, and the authority of the priesthood, the power of
God is not manifest unto men in the flesh; for without this no man can
see the face of God, even the Father and live."

The lesser priesthood holdeth the key of the ministering of angels and
the preparatory gospel; which gospel is the gospel of repentance and
of baptism, and the remission of sins, which continued "with the house
of Aaron among the children of Israel until John, whom God raised up,
being filled with the Holy Ghost from his mother's womb." He, John,
"was baptized while he was yet in his childhood and was ordained by
the angel of God at the time he was eight days old unto this power, to
overthrow the kingdom of the Jews, and to make straight the way of the
Lord before the face of his people, to prepare them for the coming of
the Lord in whose hand is given all power." (Doc. and Cov. 84:26-28.)

It was the same John who appeared to Joseph Smith and Oliver Cowdery,
on the fifteenth day of May, 1829, and conferred upon them the Aaronic
priesthood with all its keys and power. The ordination was in the
following words:

"Upon you my fellow servants, in the name of Messiah, I confer the
Priesthood of Aaron, which holds the keys of the ministering of angels,
and of the gospel of repentance, and of baptism by immersion for the
remission of sins; and this shall never be taken again from the earth,
until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto the Lord in
righteousness." {242} There is nothing said here about the offices of
this priesthood. They were an after consideration. I will remark here
that the priesthood is greater than the offices which grew out of it,
and are mere appendages to it, "all other authorities or offices in
the Church are appendages to this priesthood"--meaning the Melchizedek
Priesthood. But there are two divisions or grand heads (not three, nor
many); one is the Melchizedek priesthood and the other is the Aaronic
or Levitical priesthood. The offices in the priesthood are necessary
appendages thereof--for the purposes of order and government, and the
duties of these several offices are defined in the revelations and laws
and commandments of God.

This most sacred and important event, above quoted, occurred at or
near a place called Harmony, in Susquehanna county, Pennsylvania,
while Joseph Smith was living there, engaged in the translation of the
Book of Mormon, and Oliver Cowdery was writing for him. We have not,
unfortunately, any account so definite, of the reception by Joseph and
Oliver, of the Melchizedek priesthood as we have the confirmation of
the Aaronic priesthood. But we have positive information and knowledge
that they did receive this priesthood at the hands of Peter, James and
John, to whom the keys and power thereof were committed by the Lord
Jesus Christ, and who were commissioned to restore it to the earth in
the dispensation of the fulness of times. We cannot fix the exact date
when this priesthood was restored, but it occurred some time between
the 15th of May, 1829, and the 6th of April, 1830. We can approximate
to within a few months of the exact time, but no further, from any of
the records of the Church, Joseph, the Prophet, designates the place
where their ordination took place, in his address to the Saints (Sec.
128:20) written in 1842, as follows:

"Again what do we hear? * * * the voice of Peter, James, and John,
in the wilderness between Harmony, {243} Susquehanna, county, and
Colesville, Broome county, on the Susquehanna river, declaring
themselves as possessing the keys of the kingdom of the dispensation
of the fulness of times." And in a revelation given September, 1830,
referring to Joseph and Oliver, the Lord said in reference to partaking
again of the Sacrament on the earth, that "the hour cometh that I will
drink of the fruit of the vine with you on the earth, and with Moroni,
* * * and also with Elias, * * * and also John the son of Zacharias, *
* * which John I have sent unto you, my servants, Joseph Smith, Jun.,
and Oliver Cowdery, to ordain you unto this first priesthood which you
have received, that you might be called and ordained even as Aaron;
and also Elijah, * * * and also with Joseph and Jacob, and Isaac, and
Abraham, your fathers, by whom the promises remain; and also with
Michael, or Adam, the father of all, the prince of all, the ancient of
days. And also with Peter, and James, and John, whom I have sent unto
you, by whom I have ordained you and confirmed you to be apostles, and
especial witnesses of my name, and bear the keys of your ministry,
and of the same things which I revealed unto them; unto whom I have
committed the keys of my kingdom, and a dispensation of the gospel
for the last times; and for the fulness of times, in the which I will
gather together in one all things, both which are in heaven and which
are on earth." (Doc. and Cov. 27:5-13.)

A revelation given April, 1830, Sec. 20:2, 3, says: "Which commandments
were given to Joseph Smith, Jun., who was called of God and ordained an
apostle of Jesus Christ, to be the first elder of this Church; and to
Oliver Cowdery, who was also called of God, an apostle of Jesus Christ,
to be the second elder of this Church, and ordained under his hand."
After the Melchizedek priesthood was conferred upon Joseph and Oliver,
by the ancient apostles, they were commanded to ordain each the other,
as we see by {244} the above quotation, and the 10th and 11th verses of
Section 21, Doctrine and Covenants.

It would appear from the instructions given in the revelations, dated
June, 1829, that the apostleship had been then conferred on Joseph
Smith, Oliver Cowdery, and David Whitmer. If this supposition is
correct, it reduces the period of uncertainty when this glorious event
actually took place to a few weeks, or from the middle of May to the
end of June. It is also asserted that David Whitmer supposed the event
to have taken place about this time. It is evident, however, that David
received the apostleship under the hands of Joseph and Oliver, and was
not present when they received it under the ministration of the ancient
apostles.

In the first edition of the _Compendium_ under the heading of
"Chronology of the most important events which have transpired in
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, from A. D. 1820,
to 1856," we find the following brief statement: "June 6, 1831, the
Melchizedek priesthood was first given." This detached sentence conveys
the idea that the Melchizedek priesthood was not given until fourteen
months after the Church was established. Many have been misled and
others greatly puzzled over this statement, knowing that "elders
were ordained" on the 6th day of April, 1830, a year and two months
before, and that "the office of an elder comes under the priesthood of
Melchizedek."

It is a pity that greater attention is not paid to matters of history,
for then such mistakes would not occur. Several errors of this
character have crept into history through neglect or want of proper
attention to the subjects. The passage of history from which this brief
and misleading extract was taken reads as follows: "On the sixth of
June (1831) the elders from the various parts of the country where they
were laboring, came in; and the conference before appointed, {245}
convened in Kirtland; and the Lord displayed his power in a manner that
could not be mistaken. The man of sin was revealed, and the authority
of the Melchizedek priesthood was manifested, and conferred for the
first time upon several of the elders." Now, if this does not mean
that on this occasion several elders received their first ordination,
then it must mean that these several elders who had previously been
ordained, then, for the first time, received the power or authority
of their ordinations. The words "conferred for the first time upon
several of the elders," would seem at first glance to mean that several
were then ordained elders, but taking the complete sentence together,
namely, "The man of sin was revealed, and the authority of the
Melchizedek priesthood was manifested, and conferred for the first time
upon several of the elders," we naturally conclude that several who had
previously been ordained elders, had not yet received the spirit, or
power, or authority of their ordinations, but that now for the first
time, the authority of the priesthood having been manifested, it fell
upon them. It is evident from the context that the word authority
as used in this quotation means power. It reads as follows: "It was
clearly evident that the Lord gave us power in proportion to the work
to be done, and strength according to the race before us, and grace
and help as our needs required." That several persons were ordained
on that occasion is directly stated, as follows: "Great harmony
prevailed; several were ordained; faith was strengthened; and humility
so necessary for the blessing of God to follow prayer, characterized
the Saints." One thing is perfectly clear, and that is, no reference
whatever is here made to the restoration of the Melchizedek priesthood
by Peter, James and John, which great event occurred, without doubt,
between May and July, 1829. However until about the time this
conference was held, the term Melchizedek priesthood was seldom or
never used. {246} The High priesthood, or the Holy priesthood, were the
terms generally applied until then.

Thus this glorious priesthood, which "is after the holiest order of
God," has been restored to man in its plenitude and power in the
present age for the "last times," and no part of it will be "taken from
the earth again until the sons of Levi do offer again an offering unto
the Lord in righteousness," or "until God shall gather together in
one all things, both which are in heaven and which are on earth." In
conclusion I will call the attention of the readers of this to Sections
5, 13, 27, 84, 107, 110 and 128 of the Doctrine and Covenants for
further reflection on the subject.--_Contributor,_ Vol. 10, 1889, pp.
307-311.

TRIBUTE TO HEBER C. KIMBALL. My first remembrance of President Heber
C. Kimball goes back to the days of my childhood. He was a familiar
and prominent figure in my mind in Nauvoo, Illinois, as the father of
his sons, William, Heber, and David, with whom, as a little boy, I was
more intimate although the two former were several years my seniors.
I also recall him in those early days as the possessor of one of the
best homes in the City of Nauvoo, and as the husband of "Aunt" Vilate
Kimball, one of the dearest, kindest, most motherly souls who ever came
within the range of my memory or acquaintance; and also as the father
of Helen M. Kimball, a beautiful young woman, very much resembling her
mother in appearance, and who was somewhat noted in the Smith family as
being in some way related to it and who, after the death of the Prophet
Joseph Smith, was married to Horace K. Whitney, and became the mother
of our present poet and historian, Orson F. Whitney.

One of my most distinct recollections of President Kimball was in the
winter of 1845-6, in the Nauvoo temple. My mother, and her sister,
Mercy R. Thompson, were much engaged in the work going on in the temple
that winter, and {247} President Kimball was also associated with the
work being done there. It was there that my father's children were
sealed to their parents and President Kimball officiated.

In February, 1846, President Kimball took up the line of march, with
the Twelve and the Saints who were driven out of Nauvoo, for their long
journey into the wilderness, which eventually led to the occupancy
of the valley of the Great Salt Lake, the settlement of Utah, by the
Saints, and the fulfilment of the prophecy by Joseph Smith, that the
Saints should gather to the Rocky Mountains.

The incident which more particularly specialized this departure of
President Kimball to my mind, was the fact that my brother John, now
the patriarch, and then a boy of about twelve years, accompanied
President Kimball and family on their pilgrimage into the unknown
wilderness, leaving us in Nauvoo in great fear and doubt as to whether
we should ever see them again or not. This made an indelible impression
upon my mind, and ever since there seemed to be inseverable ties
connecting us with President Kimball and his family.

In 1848 we crossed the plains in a subdivision of President Kimball's
company. He baptized me in City Creek, in 1850, where the junction of
East and North Temple streets now is.

In July, 1852, while attending a meeting which was held in Salt Lake
City, my mother was taken sick and went to the home of President
Kimball, where she remained during her last illness; under the care of
Aunt Vilate. This brought me almost constantly for months directly in
contact with President Kimball and family.

It was here I became more familiar with his home life and habits. I was
greatly impressed and moved by his manner of praying in his family. I
have never heard any other man pray as he did. He did not speak to the
Lord as one afar off, but as if conversing with him face to face. Time
{248} and again I have been so impressed with the idea of the actual
presence of God, while he was conversing with him in prayer, that I
could not refrain from looking up to see if he were actually present
and visible. While President Kimball was very strict in his family, he
was ever kind and tender towards them.

I sometimes thought he was even kinder to me than to his own boys. I
have heard him reprove them, but no word of reproof ever fell from his
lips upon me. Later, through him, I was sent on my first mission. No
better or kinder thing was ever done for me. It gave me four years of
experience and seasoning which fixed my whole course of life, and it
came just at the right time to the boy that I was.

Later I was associated with him in the Endowment House, where I served
with him and under his direction for years. This brought me into the
most intimate relation with him, and gave to each of us the most
complete and perfect opportunity of becoming thoroughly acquainted with
each other. I learned to love him with the truest love, and the many
evidences of his love and confidences in me are beyond all question.

My latest recollections of him are associated with a most unusual call
made upon a number of brethren in 1861, by President Brigham Young, to
accompany him on a mission to Provo. Among these were Heber C. Kimball,
Wilford Woodruff, Abraham O. Smoot, Elijah F. Sheets, George G.
Bywater and myself. These brethren all located in Provo with President
Young, and those of the number possessed of means (Presidents Young
and Kimball, and Elders Smoot and Sheets) proceeded at once to build
themselves homes there.

It was while President Kimball was engaged in building and preparing
a place for a portion of his family in Provo, that he met with an
accident from which he did not recover, and soon after, Monday, June
22, 1868, came his {249} final summons to meet the actual presence of
the gracious Father, with whom he had, in prayer, so long and truly
counseled, as if face to face with him, and whom he had devotedly
served to the last moment.

President Heber C. Kimball was one of God's noblemen. True as steel to
every trust. Pure as refined gold. Fearless of foes or of death. Keen
of perception, full of the spirit of the prophets. Inspired of God.
Valiant in the testimony of Christ; a lifelong, undeviating friend
and witness of the divine calling and mission of Joseph Smith. He was
called by the grace of God, ordained by living authority, and lived and
died an apostle of the Lord Jesus Christ.--_Young Woman's Journal,_
Vol. 20, 1909, pp. 251-252.

TRIBUTE TO ERASTUS SNOW. My earliest vivid recollection of Elder
Erastus Snow was in the fall of 1848, just after my arrival in Salt
Lake Valley. I had the privilege of listening to a most excellent
discourse by him in the bowery at the north side of the old Pioneer
fort. This discourse so impressed itself and the speaker, upon my mind,
that it and he ever after held a most distinguished place in my memory.
As an orator and profound reasoner, I always felt impressed that he had
no superior, especially when he warmed up to his subject, and entered
into his discourse with the full force and energy of his active and
vigorous mind.

As a counselor, his wisdom was manifest from every point of view.

As a colonizer and builder, from the pioneer days to the completion of
his work, he was equal to the foremost of his associates. In point of
endurance and perseverance in whatever he engaged, he was untiring and
almost inexhaustible.

As a legislator or statesman, he was the peer of any of his associates,
among whom were builders of this commonwealth. One of the marked
peculiarities of his character {250} was continuity and perseverance
in whatever he undertook to do, until his object was attained and
his purpose accomplished. Nothing could turn him aside from the
discharge of his duty. He was, without doubt, a chosen and an effective
instrument in the hand of God for the accomplishment of the mission
assigned him, in which he always concentrated his mind, and threw the
whole force of his vigorous and noble spirit.

As the head of a numerous family, he was an example to all mankind. His
friendship was always true and boundless. I esteem him as one of the
great men, not only of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints,
but of the world.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14, Feb., 1911, p. 280.

PURPOSE OF VISITS OF CHURCH LEADERS. We have come to see the condition
and the spirit of the Latter-day Saints, and to present ourselves
before them; that they may judge us by what we say and by the spirit
we bring, as to whether we are in fellowship with them and with the
Lord; and that they may see whether we measure up to the standards that
they expect in those who stand at the head of the Church.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 21, December, 1917, p. 98.

{251}



CHAPTER X

SPIRITUAL GIFTS

THE GIFT OF TONGUES. The devil himself can appear like an angel of
light. False prophets and false teachers have arisen in the world.
There is perhaps no gift of the Spirit of God more easily imitated by
the devil than the gift of tongues. Where two men or women exercise
the gift of tongues by the inspiration of the Spirit of God, there
are a dozen perhaps who do it by the inspiration of the devil. Bless
your souls, apostates speak in tongues, apostates prophesy, apostates
claim to have marvelous manifestations. And what is that to us? The
trouble is, we know so little of the truth ourselves, and we live by it
so poorly, that almost any little jackanapes in the country may rise
up and claim he has had a vision or some marvelous dream, and however
absurd or untrue it may be, he may find believers and followers among
those who profess to be Latter-day Saints.

I believe in the gifts of the Holy Spirit unto men, but I do not want
the gift of tongues, except when I need it. I needed the gift of
tongues once, and the Lord gave it to me. I was in a foreign land, sent
to preach the gospel to a people whose language I could not understand.
Then I sought earnestly for the gift of tongues, and by this gift and
by study, in a hundred days after landing upon those islands I could
talk to the people in their language as I now talk to you in my native
tongue. This was a gift that was worthy of the gospel. There was a
purpose in it. There was something in it to strengthen my faith, to
encourage me and to help me in my ministry. If you have need of this
gift of tongues, seek for it and God will help you in it. But I do not
ask you to be very hungry for the gift of tongues, {252} for if you
are not careful the devil will deceive you in it. He can talk by the
gift of tongues as well as the Lord can. Paul did not seem to care much
about the gift of tongues either. He said to the Corinthians:

"I had rather speak five words with my understanding, that by my voice
I might teach others also, than ten thousand words in an unknown
tongue."--1 Cor. 14:19.

So far as I am concerned, if the Lord will give me ability to teach
the people in my native tongue, or in their own language to the
understanding of those who hear me, that will be sufficient gift of
tongues to me. Yet if the Lord gives you the gift of tongues, do not
despise it, do not reject it. For if it comes from the Spirit of God,
it will come to those who are worthy to receive it, and it is all
right. But this idea of seeking it, desiring it, when you don't pay
your tithing, when you don't pray in your families, when you don't pay
your debts, when you desecrate the Sabbath day, and when you neglect
other duties in the Church; I tell you the devil will take advantage of
you by and by, if he does not at first.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 41.

THE SACRAMENT OF THE LORD'S SUPPER. The Sacrament of the Lord's Supper
is a very important and sacred ordinance; however simple it may appear
to our minds, it is one which will add to our acceptance before God, or
to our condemnation.

It was instituted by the Savior in the place of the law of sacrifice
which was given to Adam, and which continued with his children down to
the days of Christ, but which was fulfilled in his death, he being the
great sacrifice for sin, of which the sacrifices enjoined in the law
given to Adam were a similitude.

The Lord designed in the beginning to place before man the knowledge of
good and evil, and gave him a commandment to cleave to good and abstain
from evil. But if he {253} should fail, he would give to him the law
of sacrifice and provide a Savior for him, that he might be brought
back again into the presence and favor of God and partake of eternal
life with him. This was the plan of redemption chosen and instituted
by the Almighty before man was placed on the earth. And when man did
fall by transgressing the law which was given him, the Lord gave to him
the law of sacrifice, and made it clear to his understanding, that it
was for the purpose of reminding him of that great event that should
transpire in the meridian of time, whereby he and all his posterity
might be brought forth by the power of redemption and resurrection from
the dead, and partake of eternal life with God in his kingdom. For this
reason Adam and his posterity, from generation to generation, observed
this law, and continually looked forward to a time when there should be
provided for them a means of redemption from the fall and restoration
from death to life, for death was the penalty of the law transgressed,
which man was powerless to avert, that fiat of God being, "In the day
that thou eatest thereof, thou shalt surely die," and this penalty
was to follow upon all flesh, all being as helpless and dependent as
he was in this matter. Their only hope of redemption from the grave
and the power of death was in the Savior whom God had promised, who
should suffer death, but being without sin, having himself never
transgressed any law, being without blemish, pure and holy, he should
have power to break the bands of death and from the grave rise to
immortal life, thereby opening the way for all who should follow him
in the regeneration, to come forth to life again, redeemed from the
penalty of the law, and from the sin of transgression to eternal life.
In anticipation, therefore, of this great sacrifice which was to be
offered for Adam and his seed, they offered sacrifices more or less
acceptable, and in conformity to the pattern given, in proportion to
the knowledge of {254} God and of the gospel which they had, in their
faithfulness from generation to generation, to the days of Jesus.

They would take the firstlings of their flocks, the best fruits of
their fields, and those things which were emblematic of purity,
innocence, and perfection, symbolical of him who was without sin,
and as "a lamb slain from the foundation of the world," and offer
sacrifices unto God in memory of him, and the matchless and wonderful
deliverance to be wrought out for them by him.

Undoubtedly the knowledge of this law and of other rites and ceremonies
was carried by the posterity of Adam into all lands, and continued
with them, more or less pure, to the flood, and through Noah, who was
a "preacher of righteousness," to those who succeeded him, spreading
out in all nations and countries, Adam and Noah being the first of
their dispensations to receive them from God. What wonder, then, that
we should find relics of Christianity so to speak among the heathens,
and nations who know not Christ, and whose histories date back beyond
the days of Moses, and even beyond the flood, independent of and apart
from the records of the Bible. The ground taken by infidels, that
"Christianity" sprang from the heathen, it being found that they have
many rites similar to those recorded in the Bible, etc., is only a
vain and foolish attempt to blind the eyes of men and dissuade them
from their faith in the Redeemer of the world, and from their belief
in the Scriptures of divine truth, for if the heathen have doctrines
and ceremonies resembling to some extent those which are recorded in
the Scriptures, it only proves, what is plain to the Saints, that
these are the traditions of the fathers handed down from generation to
generation, from Adam, through Noah, and that they will cleave to the
children to the latest generation, though they may wander into darkness
and perversion, until but a slight resemblance to their origin, which
was divine, can be seen. * * *

{255} The ordinances of the gospel have been restored in their purity.
We know why the law of sacrifice was given to Adam, and how it is that
relics of the gospel are found among the heathen.

When Jesus came and suffered, "the just for the unjust," he that was
without sin for him that had sinned, and was subjected to the penalty
of the law which the sinner had transgressed, the law of sacrifice was
fulfilled, and instead thereof he gave another law, which we call the
"Sacrament of the Lord's Supper," by which his life and mission, his
death and resurrection, the great sacrifice he had offered for the
redemption of man, should be kept in everlasting remembrance, for, said
he, "this do ye * * * in remembrance of me, for as often as ye eat this
bread and drink this cup, ye do shew the Lord's death till he come."
Therefore this law is to us what the law of sacrifice was to those who
lived prior to the first coming of the Son of Man, until he shall come
again. Therefore, we must honor and keep it sacredly, for there is a
penalty attached to its violation, as we shall see by reading the words
of Paul (1 Cor. 11:27-30):

"Wherefore whosoever shall eat this bread, and drink this cup of the
Lord, unworthily, shall be guilty of the body and blood of the Lord.

"But let a man examine himself, and so let him eat of that bread, and
drink of that cup.

"For he that eateth and drinketh unworthily, eateth and drinketh
damnation to himself, not discerning the Lord's body.

"For this cause many are weak and sickly among you, and many sleep."

And it is even more plainly given in the Book of Mormon, which I will
read (III Nephi 18:26-29):

"And now it came to pass that when Jesus had spoken these words, he
turned his eyes again upon the disciples whom he had chosen, and said
unto them, behold verily, {256} verily I say unto you, I give unto you
another commandment, and then I must go unto my Father, that I may
fulfil other commandments which he hath given me. And now behold, this
is the commandment which I give unto you, that ye shall not suffer any
one knowingly, to partake of my flesh and blood unworthily, when ye
shall minister it; for whoso eateth and drinketh my flesh and blood
unworthily, eateth and drinketh damnation to his soul; therefore if ye
know that a man is unworthy to eat and drink of my flesh and blood, ye
shall forbid him."

These are some of the injunctions and commandments that are given
in relation to the partaking of the Lord's Supper. Now let us be
careful what we do, that we may not incur the penalty affixed to the
transgression of this law, remembering that the ordinances which
God has given are sacred and binding, that his laws are in force,
especially upon all that have covenanted with him in baptism, and upon
all unto whom they come, whether they embrace them or not, as Jesus
said, "This is the condemnation of the world, that light has come into
the world, but ye love darkness rather than light." Therefore all men
will be held accountable for the use they make of the light which they
possess. For this reason we are commanded to preach the gospel unto
every creature, that those who obey and are baptized may be saved, and
those who reject it may be condemned.

I bear my testimony to these things. I know that Joseph Smith was and
is a prophet of the living God, and President Young is also a prophet
of God, and that by inspiration and revelation, and not of man. God
bless you, and help us to be faithful, is my prayer in the name of
Jesus. Amen.--Discourse delivered in the Thirteenth Ward Assembly
Rooms, Salt Lake City, February 9, 1873. _Journal of Discourses,_
Vol. 15, pp. 324-328.

ORDER OF ADMINISTERING TO THE SICK. In the matter of administering to
the sick, according to the order and practice {257} established in the
Church, care should be taken to avoid unwarranted repetitions. When
an administration is made, and when the blessing pronounced upon the
afflicted one has been received, the ordinance should not be repeated,
rather let the time be given to prayer and thanksgiving for the
manifestation of divine power already granted and realized. No limit
should be or can be set to the offering of prayer and the rendering
of praise to the Giver of Good, for we are specially told to pray
without ceasing, and no special authority of the priesthood or standing
in the Church is essential to the offering of prayer; but the actual
administration by anointing with oil and by the imposition of hands by
those who hold the proper office in the priesthood is an authoritative
ordinance, too sacred in its nature to be performed lightly, or to
be repeated loosely when the blessing has been gained.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 38, January, 1902, p. 18.

THE USE OF A TESTIMONY. The sanctity of a true testimony should
inspire a thoughtful care as to its use. That testimony is not to be
forced upon everybody, nor is it to be proclaimed at large from the
housetop. It is not to be voiced merely to "fill up the time" in a
public meeting; far less to excuse or disguise the speaker's poverty of
thought or ignorance of the truth he is called to expound.

The individual testimony is a personal possession. One cannot give
his testimony to another, yet he is able to aid his earnest brother
in gaining a true testimony for himself. The over-zealous missionary
may be influenced by the misleading thought that the bearing of his
testimony to those who have not before heard the gospel message, is to
convince or condemn, as the hearers accept or reject. The elder is sent
into the field to preach the gospel--the good news of its restoration
to earth, showing by scriptural evidence the harmony of the new message
with the predictions of earlier times; expounding the truths embodied
in the first principles of the gospel; then if he bears his testimony
under divine {258} inspiration, such a testimony is as a seal attesting
the genuineness of the truths he has declared, and so appealing to the
receptive soul whose ears have been saluted by the heaven-sent message.

But the voicing of one's testimony, however eloquently phrased or
beautifully expressed, is no fit or acceptable substitute for the
needed discourse of instruction and counsel expected in a general
gathering of the people. The man who professes a testimony as herein
described, and who assumes that his testimony embraces all the
knowledge he needs, and who therefore lives in indolence and ignorance
shall surely discover his error to his own cost and loss. A gift from
God, if neglected, or unworthily used, is in time withdrawn; the
testimony of the truth will not remain with one who, having received,
uses not the sacred gift in the cause of individual and general
advancement.

Search out the truth of the written word; listen for and receive the
truth declared by living prophets and teachers; enrich your minds with
the best of knowledge and facts. Of those who speak in his name, the
Lord requires humility, not ignorance. Intelligence is the glory of
God; and no man can be saved in ignorance.

Study and strive to acquire the knowledge that leads toward, and the
wisdom that shall reach, the goal of life eternal. Your testimony as
to the truth of the restored gospel may operate toward salvation or
condemnation as it is used or misused.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 41,
August, 1906, p. 465.

PURPOSE AND PRACTICE OF TESTIMONY BEARING. The practice of bearing
testimonies once a month in the Sabbath schools has become so general,
and is of such far-reaching importance to the faith and happiness of
our young people, that a word of caution and of encouragement may be
helpful at this time. It is not the chief purpose of testimony bearing
to accumulate physical evidences of the truth of the {259} gospel. It
is not so much argument and physical demonstration that are wanted as
it is the cultivation of the Spirit of God within the hearts of the
children.

Many of the children live in homes where there is comparatively little
or no sickness, and perhaps have no opportunity whatever to witness
manifestations of divine power in the healing of the sick. At testimony
meetings, these children would perhaps have little to say if the
idea prevailed that the testimonies of the children were to consist
chiefly, if not wholly, in recounting instances of healing through the
administrations of the elders.

The healing of the sick is but one of those spiritual blessings that
follow those who have faith, and the blessing belongs peculiarly to the
Church, but is not confined exclusively to those who are members of the
Church. In Christ's day, many were healed who were strangers to his
great mission, simply through their faith in him, or that the glory of
God might be made manifest.

Now, the healing of the sick is simply one of the evidences; but if
it were the only evidence of the divinity of this work it would be
insufficient, because in the organization of the Church, the existence
of apostles, the gathering, the payment of tithes and offerings, the
laying on of hands, baptism, and other laws and ordinances of the
gospel are equally evidence of its divine origin, and the importance of
one ought not to be emphasized to the neglect of any other. The fact
that all these ordinances and principles are taught and practiced by
the Saints constitutes a convincing argument that the Church is now the
same as it was in the days of the Master.

Testimony-bearing should have a strong educational influence upon the
feelings and lives of the children, and it is intended to cultivate
within them feelings of thankfulness and appreciation for the blessings
they enjoy. The Spirit of God may work within the life of a child and
make the {260} child realize and know that this is the work of God.
The child knows it rather because of the Spirit than because of some
physical manifestation which he may have witnessed. Our testimony
meetings, then, should have as one of their aims the cultivation of
the children's feelings of gratitude not only toward God, but toward
their parents, teachers and neighbors. It is advisable, therefore, to
cultivate as far as possible their appreciation for the blessings that
they enjoy.

Testimony bearing is chiefly for the benefit of those who bear the
testimony, in that their gratitude and appreciation are deepened.
Testimony bearing is not the accumulation of arguments or evidences
solely for the satisfaction and testimony of others. Let the
testimonies, then, of the young people include the training of their
feelings by way of making them more appreciative and more thankful for
the blessings they enjoy, and the children should be made to understand
what these blessings are and how they come to them. It is an excellent
way to make people helpful and thankful to others, by first making them
thankful to God.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, April, 1903, p. 246.

THE TEMPORAL AND THE SPIRITUAL NOT SEPARATE. You Must continue to
bear in mind that the temporal and the spiritual are blended. They
are not separate. One cannot be carried on without the other, so long
as we are here in mortality. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints on the earth is a physical organization as well as a spiritual
organization. We need practical faith--that is, we need to practice the
principles of our faith. Without the practice of the principles of the
gospel, we can never realize our hopes and expectations concerning the
results of this great latter-day work.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 46.

SPIRITUAL AND TEMPORAL SALVATION. The Latter-day Saints believe not
only in the gospel of spiritual salvation, but also in the gospel of
temporal salvation. We have to look after the cattle and the sheep and
the horses, the gardens {261} and the farms, the irrigation canals and
ditches, and other necessary things for the maintenance of ourselves
and our families in the earth. In this respect this Church is different
from many other denominations. We do not feel that it is possible for
men to be really good and faithful Christian people unless they can
also be good, faithful, honest and industrious people. Therefore, we
preach the gospel of industry, the gospel of economy, the gospel of
sobriety. We preach that the idler shall not eat the bread of the
laborer, and that the idler is not entitled to an inheritance in Zion.
We preach that those who are industrious, those who work, those who
through their integrity and industry are good citizens of the kingdom
of God, are better citizens of the country in which they live than
those who are not so diligent in this regard.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p.
74.

THE GOSPEL DESIGNED FOR TEMPORAL BENEFITS, ALSO. The work that we are
engaged in is not designed to be limited by the spiritual necessities
of the people alone. It is the purpose of God in restoring the gospel
and the holy priesthood not only to benefit mankind spiritually,
but also to benefit them temporally. The Lord has expressed this
many times, in the word that he gave to his servant Joseph Smith,
the prophet; he designed that his people should become the richest
of all people. And this not only means the richest of all people
in heavenly gifts--in spiritual blessings and riches, but it also
means that the people of God shall be the richest of all people with
regard to temporal matters. If faithful, we have a right to claim
the blessings of the Lord upon the labor of our hands, our temporal
labors. The farmer has a right to ask the Lord for blessings upon his
farm, upon the labor that he bestows upon it. He has a right to claim
the blessings of the Lord upon the animals that are necessary to the
cultivation of his farm. He has a right to ask God to bless the grain
that he sows and the seeds of the fruit that he plants in the soil.
It is his privilege, {262} not only to ask and claim these blessings
at the hand of the Lord, but it is his right and privilege to receive
blessings from God upon his labor, upon his farm, and upon all that he
puts his hand unto in righteousness. It is our privilege to ask God
to remove the curse from the earth, and to make it fruitful. If we
will live so that we shall be entitled to his favor, and so that we
may justly and righteously claim the blessings and gifts that he has
promised unto his Saints, then that which we ask will be given, and
we shall receive and enjoy them more abundantly. It is our privilege
to ask God to bless the elements that surround us and to temper them
for our good, and we know he will hear and answer the prayers of his
people, according to their faith.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, pp. 9-10.

THE SPIRIT NEEDS FOOD. Many people are inconsistent in that they study
concerning the needs of the body, and observe strictly the laws of
health, yet they disregard the equally urgent needs of the spirit. For
the spirit, as well as the body, needs food. Some people are either
ignorant or thoughtless concerning the great blessings promised to
those who observe the Word of Wisdom.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21,
December, 1917, p. 103.

{263}



CHAPTER XI

OBEDIENCE

OBEDIENCE AN ETERNAL PRINCIPLE. We have entered into the bond of
that new and everlasting covenant agreeing that we would obey the
commandments of God in all things whatsoever he shall command us. This
is an everlasting covenant even unto the end of our days. And when
is the end of our days? We may think it has reference to the end of
our mortal lives; that a time will come after we have finished this
probation when we can live without obedience to the commandments of
God. This is a great error. We shall never see the day in time nor in
eternity, when it will not be obligatory, and when it will not be a
pleasure as well as a duty for us, as his children, to obey all the
commandments of the Lord throughout the endless ages of eternity. It
is upon this principle that we keep in touch with God, and remain
in harmony with his purposes. It is only in this way that we can
consummate our mission, and obtain our crown and the gift of eternal
lives, which is the greatest gift of God. Can you imagine any other way?

God has established all things in their order. The house of God is
a house of order, and not a house of confusion. In this house God
himself is the Supreme Head, and he must be obeyed. Christ is in the
image and likeness of his being, his Only Begotten Son, and he stands
as our Savior and our God. We must walk in his paths, and observe
his precepts to do them, or we will be cut off. Next unto God and
Christ, on the earth is placed one unto whom the keys of power and
the authority of the holy priesthood are conferred, and unto whom the
right of presidency is given. He is God's mouthpiece to his people, in
all things pertaining to the building up of Zion and to the spiritual
and {264} temporal salvation of the people. He is as God's vicegerent;
I do not hesitate to announce this truth; for it is his word, and
therefore it is true. The people who have entered into covenant to keep
the commandments of the Lord must hearken unto the voice of him who is
placed to preside over them; and, secondarily, to those who are called
to act with him as his counselors in the holy priesthood. It takes this
council of three to constitute the presiding and governing authority of
the priesthood on the earth. God the Father, God the Son, and God the
Holy Ghost, constitute the Godhead and the matchless governing quorum
over all the creations of the Father. Three men stand at the head of
the Church on the earth. Yet there are those who call themselves Saints
who hesitate not to rise up in condemnation of, and to express words of
hatred and malice toward these men who stand at the head of the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, pp. 68-69.

HOW TO RISE ABOVE THE WEAKNESS OF MORTALITY. I would like all the
Latter-day Saints to feel in their hearts that the work in which they
are engaged is not only the work that God has instituted in the latter
days, but that it is a work in which each individual member of the
Church is deeply and vitally interested. Every man and every woman
should feel a deep and abiding interest in the work of the Lord, in
the growth and development of the great latter-day cause, which cause
is intended for the redemption of all men from the powers of sin, from
all its contaminating effects, for the redemption of man from his own
weakness and ignorance, and from the grasp that Satan holds upon the
world, that men may be made free; for no man is or can be made free
without possessing a knowledge of the truth and obeying the same. It is
only the possession and observance of the truth that can make men free,
and all those who do not possess and obey it are slaves and not free
men.

{265} It is only by obedience to the laws of God that men can rise
above the petty weaknesses of mortality and exercise that breadth of
affection, that charity and love, that should actuate the hearts and
the motives of the children of men. The gospel as it has been restored
is intended to make free indeed, free to choose the good and forsake
the evil, free to exercise that boldness in their choice of that which
is good, by which they are convinced of right, notwithstanding the
great majority of the people of the world may point at them the finger
of scorn and ridicule. It requires no especial bravery on the part
of men to swim with the currents of the world. When a man makes up
his mind to forsake the world and its follies and sins, and identify
himself with God's people, who are everywhere spoken evil of, it takes
courage, manhood, independence of character, superior intelligence and
a determination that is not common among men; for men shrink from that
which is unpopular, from that which will not bring them praise and
adulation, from that which will in any degree tarnish that which they
call honor or a good name.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1903, pp. 1, 2.

OBEDIENCE TO CHURCH ORDINANCES INDISPENSABLE. From remarks that
sometimes fall from members of the Church one is led to believe that
they regard the gospel of Jesus Christ simply from the standpoint of a
code of morals; that if one lives an honest, upright life, that is all
that the gospel requires of him; that it is not necessary to observe
the rites, ceremonies and ordinances of the Church; that the latter
constitute a sort of religious trapping that has no substantial value
in the plan of life and salvation. Such a position does not harmonize
with the word of God given to this people nor with the teachings of
Christ in his day, nor is it in harmony with the universal instinct of
man to worship God.

Jesus himself attended to the ordinance of baptism; he instituted the
sacrament of the Lord's supper, and ordained {266} its observance; and
performed other rites which he thought essential to man's salvation. In
the case of Nicodemus, he so emphasized baptism that he made the birth
of water and the Spirit essential to man's salvation.

Besides the rites and ceremonies and the moral effect they and other
means of worshiping God have upon the moral life of man, the gospel
is also a power in itself. It is a creative power which gives man not
alone dominion in the world, but the power, if he can attain it by
his faith, to ordain and create other worlds. On one occasion Jesus
commended to the disciples the value of faith as a power when he told
them that if they had faith as a grain of mustard, they could say
unto the mountain, be thou removed, and it should be done. It is true
that our faith would be greatly weakened by acts of immorality, and
it might be wholly destroyed by such acts; but faith and morality are
not convertible terms. A moral life is one of the means by which we
cultivate faith, but it is not the only means. We may not see any moral
virtue in the ordinance of baptism, in the laying on of bands, or in
any other rite or ceremony of the Church, but our obedience to these
rites and ordinances may be quite as helpful in developing our faith
as any act of charity we may perform. Faith is always a gift of God to
man, which is obtained by obedience, as all other blessings are.

The man or woman in this Church who desires to enrich his or her faith
to the highest possible degree will desire to observe every rite
and ordinance in the Church in conformity to the law of obedience
to the will of God. In these things, and through them, man gains a
more perfect knowledge of God's purposes in the world. An enriched
faith means an enlarged power, and though man may not have in this
life an occasion to exercise all the powers that come to him through
the enrichment of his faith, those powers may be exercised in
their fulness in eternity, if not in time. The {267} man or woman,
therefore, among the Latter-day Saints, who does not see the necessity
for the ordinances of the House of God, who does not respond to the
requirements of the gospel in all its rites and ordinances, can have no
proper conception of the great work which the Latter-day Saints have
been called upon to perform in this age, nor can he or she enjoy the
blessing that comes from the virtue of obedience to a law higher than
that of man.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, November 1, 1903, p. 656.

OBEDIENCE BRINGS LIGHT AND FREEDOM. The gospel is very simple when
we understand it properly. It is plain and easily understood. It is
always right, good, uplifting, comforting and enlightening. It prompts
men and women to do that which is acceptable before God, who is just,
righteous, allwise, allgood, and allmerciful.

The gospel teaches us to forgive, to overcome selfishness,
covetousness; to abjure anger, wrath, faultfinding, complaining and the
spirit of contention and strife. The gospel warns and forewarns the
children of men against the evils which bring disunion and contention
and shut out honesty and love from among the children of men; which
mislead people to acts of injustice, selfishness, covetousness,
wickedness and sin, things which the gospel of Jesus Christ teaches us
to eschew and avoid as we would the gates of hell. There is nothing
intricate or incomprehensible in the gospel of Jesus Christ to those
who possess the Spirit of the Lord.

There is nothing mysterious and unaccountable in the dealings of God
with his children if we can only see and understand by the spirit
of truth. Jesus has given us in this life the example, the type of
that which exists in greater perfection, in a purer, higher and more
glorious excellence where he dwells himself. The gospel teaches us to
do here just what we would be required to do in the heavens, with God
and the angels, if we would listen to its teachings, and {268} obey it,
and put it into practice. There would be no covetousness in the hearts
of the children of men, if they possessed the Spirit of Jesus Christ,
and understood the precepts of the gospel as he taught and admonished
all men to observe them.

There would be no strife, no anger, nothing of the spirit of
unforgiveness, unchastity and injustice, in the hearts of the children
of men, if we loved the truth and obeyed it as it was taught by the Son
of Man. With this spirit we could advance to the extreme position that
we would pray for those who despitefully use us, who speak all manner
of evil against us falsely, accuse us of wrongdoing, and lay plans and
plots to bring us into disrepute. There would be no such desires in the
hearts of the children of men, if they possessed the Spirit of the Lord
Jesus Christ. There would be no contention, dishonor, nor dishonesty
among neighbors nor in the communities of the people. None would take
advantage of the unwary, the weak or unsuspecting; no one would seek to
wrong another; but, on the contrary, we would feel like Jesus himself
expressed it, "he that is greatest among you, let him be the servant
of all." If we would be great among the children of men, let us show
that we are willing to serve and to do good to our fellowmen, set them
a right example, shield them from wrong, show them the right way, help
them to avoid error and sin, and to walk in the light, as God is in the
light, that they may have fellowship with him and with one another, and
that the blood of Christ may indeed cleanse them from all sin.

The spirit of the gospel should teach us that if men sue us at the law,
and take away our coat wrongfully and wickedly, intending to injure
or degrade us, that we would rise above the spirit of contention and
retribution in our own souls, and speak as Jesus spoke: "Forgive them,
for they know not what they do."

My brethren and sisters, if we would build up ourselves, {269} or
ever become worthy to inherit the kingdom of God, we will do so on
the principle of eternal truth. The truth is what will make us free;
free from error, prejudice, selfishness, ignorance, contention, the
power of the adversary of our souls, free from the power of death and
hell; free to inherit the fulness of the everlasting gospel; free to
have joy in our hearts for all things good and for the welfare of
mankind; free to forgive those who err because of lack of judgment and
understanding. But the Spirit of truth, mark you, will not tolerate and
will not forgive determined, premeditated and deliberate wrong in man
or woman, in the world--truth will not tolerate it. We can not forgive
that kind or class of crime and wickedness. We can not, or if we do,
we transgress the laws of God, for he has no sympathy with Satan, nor
with him who knoweth to do good and doeth evil; who knoweth to do right
but is determined to do wrong. There is no forgiveness to such without
humble and most contrite repentance of sin. When one gets far enough
along in the crime of wickedness and disobedience to the principles
of the gospel, and in the abandonment of love for his fellowmen and
for the Church of Jesus Christ, so that he will fight and lie about
the Church and the truth, and seek by every power within his reach to
injure and wrong them, there is no forgiveness for that man, and if he
goes just far enough, there is no repentance for him either.

And how do you pray? To be heard because of many words? No; but because
the Lord has said it is your duty to inquire of him; I will be inquired
of, by my people; I will be asked for blessings, for my gifts, and the
door will be opened to those who knock, and those who seek after the
truth shall find it.

Fathers, pray with your families; bow down with them morning and at
night; pray to the Lord, thank him for his goodness, mercy and Fatherly
kindness, just as our earthly {270} fathers and mothers have been
extremely kind to us poor, disobedient and wayward children.

Do you pray? What do you pray for? You pray that God may recognize
you, that he may hear your prayers, and that he may bless you with his
Spirit, and that he may lead you into all truth and show you the right
way; that he will warn you against wrong and guide you into the right
path; that you may not fall astray, that you may not veer into the
wrong way unto death, but that you may keep in the narrow way. You pray
for your wives to have health and strength, blessed to be happy and
contented, true to their children, true to their homes, true to you.
The wives pray that they may also have power to overcome the weaknesses
of fallen human nature, and rise to teach their children the beauty
and glory of a righteous life, and that the children may be blessed to
carry out in their lives the wish and desire of their parents; that
they may perfect their lives here by living up to the wise teachings of
the gospel. So we pray for what we need.

While in my boyhood days, when I was like some of these little boys,
I used to wonder--how could the Lord hear me when I was in secret, or
wherever I might be? I wondered at it! Do you wonder at it now, when
you have learned something of the late discoveries made by human wisdom
and human intelligence?

They have discovered that there is a principle by which communication
between distant points, thousands of miles away, may take place, and
one man may communicate with another through the air, his words and
voice being distinctly and clearly heard. If in the midst of the
Pacific ocean, a thousand or more miles from shore, I could send a
message inland a thousand or more miles, and could send it without the
medium of wire, merely by the power or force of electricity, to my
home thousands of miles away, how easy, is it not, for God to bear our
prayers, who understands, and knows all things, long before we ever
thought of such wonderful {271} inventions and who has power over all
things!

Is it any wonder that the Lord can hear you when you whisper, even in
your secret closet? Is there any doubt in your minds about it? If man
can communicate across the continent by means of a telephone without
wires--by means of human invention, by reason of the wisdom of man, is
there any one who doubts the ability of God to hear the earnest, honest
supplication of the soul? Do not doubt any more that the Lord can hear
your prayers, when, with a small instrument, sensitive to the electric
spark, you can distinctly hear the human voice in your home received
from the ocean thousands of miles away. When you can communicate to
some one in the midst of the ocean from your home, far inland from
the ocean--do not for a moment doubt that the Lord understands all
these means of communication and that he has means of hearing and
understanding your innermost, exact thoughts. "Prayer is the soul's
sincere desire, uttered or unexpressed." It does not take many words
to ask the Lord for what we need; but we must ask in faith, confidence
and trust. It will not do to have doubts in our minds when we call upon
the Lord for a blessing. "If any of you lack wisdom, let him ask of
God, that giveth to all men liberally, and upbraideth not; and it shall
be given him. But let him ask in faith, nothing wavering. For he that
wavereth is like a wave of the sea, driven with the wind and tossed.
For let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord."
(James 1:5-7.)

When a little child bows down in its perfect simplicity and asks the
Father for a blessing, the Father hears the voice, and will answer in
blessings upon his head, because the child is innocent and asks in full
trust and confidence.

These are simple principles that I have sought to impress upon your
minds. They are simple, but necessary, and essential. There is no
mystery about them, there is no mystery in the birth of man into the
world, when you understand {272} the laws of nature, which are the
laws of God--no mystery about it. There will be no more mystery in the
resurrection from the dead to life and everlasting light, than there is
in the birth of man into the world, when we understand the truth, as we
will some day, as the Lord of glory instituted it. There is no mystery
in the birth or begetting of the Son of God, nor regarding his birth
into the world. It was just as natural, and as strictly in accordance
with the laws of nature and of God, as the birth of any one of his
children, the birth of any one of us. It was simply in accordance with
truth, and law and order. Will the men of the world receive the gospel?
Will they hearken to the truth? Or will they mystify the truth and seek
to becloud the children of men over simple truths when they should
understand them? From the middle-aged to the gray-haired man, as well
as the youth, all should understand the principles of the gospel, the
simple truths given for the redemption and exaltation of man.--_Granite
Stake Conference,_ Sunday, Nov. 25, 1917.

BLESSING FROM OBEDIENCE. Every good and perfect gift comes from the
Father of Light, who is no respecter of persons and in whom there is
no variableness, nor shadow of turning. To please him we must not only
worship him with thanksgiving and praise, but render willing obedience
to his commandments. By so doing he is bound to bestow his blessings;
for it is upon this principle (obedience to law) that all blessings are
predicated.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, December, 1917.

{273}



CHAPTER XII

PRAYER

PRAY EVERY DAY. Observe that great commandment given of the Master,
always to remember the Lord, to pray in the morning, and in the
evening, and always remember to thank him for the blessings that you
receive day by day.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 6.

PRAY IN WISDOM. My brethren and sisters, let us remember and call
upon God and implore his blessings and his favor upon us. Let us do
it, nevertheless, in wisdom and in righteousness, and when we pray we
should call upon him in a consistent and reasonable way. We should
not ask the Lord for that which is unnecessary or which would not be
beneficial to us. We should ask for that which we need, and we should
ask in faith, "nothing wavering, for he that wavereth," as the apostle
said, "is like the wave of the sea, driven by the wind and tossed. For
let not that man think that he shall receive anything of the Lord." But
when we ask of God for blessings let us ask in the faith of the gospel,
in that faith that he has promised to give to those who believe in him
and obey his commandments.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 7.

KEEP THE SPIRIT OF PRAYER. We should carry with us the spirit of prayer
throughout every duty that we have to perform in life. Why should we?
One of the simple reasons that appeals to my mind with great force
is that man is so utterly dependent upon God! How helpless we are
without him; how little can we do without his merciful providence in
our behalf! I have often been led to make the remark, that not one of
us, not a human being in all the world can make even a single spear of
grass grow without the help of God. We have to use his earth, we must
avail ourselves of the benefit of his soil, his air and his sunshine,
and the moisture that God provides, and gives to the earth, to enable
us to produce {274} even a single blade of grass; and the same applies
to everything that ministers to our existence in the world. You can't
raise an ear of corn or grain of wheat without God's help. You cannot
produce a single thing essential to the existence of man or beast
without the help of God. Then, why should we not feel dependent upon
the Lord? Why should we not call upon his name? Why should we not
remember him in our prayers? Why should we not love him with all our
heart and mind, and strength, since he has given us life, since he has
formed us in his own likeness and image, since he has placed us here
that we may become like unto his Only Begotten Son and to inherit the
glory, exaltation and reward provided for God's own children?--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1914, p. 6.

TRUE PRAYER. I pray you, my young brethren who are present in this vast
congregation, and who are liable to be called to preach the gospel to
the world, when you are called to go out, I pray that you will know how
to approach God in prayer. It is not such a difficult thing to learn
how to pray. It is not the words we use particularly that constitute
prayer. Prayer does not consist of words, altogether. True, faithful,
earnest prayer consists more in the feeling that rises from the heart
and from the inward desire of our spirits to supplicate the Lord in
humility and in faith, that we may receive his blessings. It matters
not how simple the words may be, if our desires are genuine and we come
before the Lord with a broken heart and contrite spirit to ask him for
that which we need. I would like to know if there is a young man in
this congregation, or anywhere else, who does not need something of the
Lord. Where is there a soul upon the earth that does not need something
that the Almighty can give? In the first place, all that we have comes
from him. It is by his providence that we exist on the earth. It is
by his kind mercy that we see and hear, that we have the power of
speech, and that we possess intelligence, for as the sage of old said,
"There is a spirit in man; and {275} the inspiration of the Almighty
giveth them understanding." Therefore, the very power of understanding
that we possess is the gift of God. In and of ourselves we are but a
lifeless lump of clay. Life, intelligence, wisdom, judgment, power to
reason, all are the gifts of God to the children of men. He gives us
our physical strength as well as our mental powers. Every young man
should feel from the depth of his heart that he is indebted to Almighty
God for his being and for every attribute that he possesses which is
in likeness of the attributes of God. We should seek to magnify the
attributes that we possess. We should honor God with our intelligence,
with our strength, with our understanding, with our wisdom, and with
all the power that we possess. We should seek to do good in the world.
This is our duty; and if a young man can only feel as all men should
feel, he will find that it is an easy matter for him to bow down before
the Lord in humble prayer and seek unto God for the aid, comfort, and
inspiration of his Holy Spirit, that he may not be left entirely to
himself, nor to the wisdom and ways of the world. But as a rule, where
young men have good parents to provide for them, where they have good
homes and their food and raiment are sure, they feel that they are
not dependent upon anybody, unless perchance they should be afflicted
in some way, and then begin to realize their weakness and dependence.
But I want to say to you, my young friends, that in the hour of your
independence, at the moment when you feel the strongest, you should
bear in mind that you are but human, the breath of life is in your
nostrils, and you are destined to pass from this world through the
portals of death.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, pp. 69, 70.

HOW TO PRAY. My brethren and sisters, do not learn to pray with your
lips only. Do not learn a prayer by heart, and say it every morning and
evening. That is something I dislike very much. It is true that a great
many people fall into the rut of saying over a ceremonious prayer. They
{276} begin at a certain point, and they touch at all the points along
the road until they get to the winding up scene; and when they have
done, I do not know whether the prayer has ascended beyond the ceiling
of the room or not.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, pp. 71, 72.

AN ADDRESS ON PRAYER--PRACTICAL PRAYER AND HEALING. I thought that a
few words from the Book of Mormon might be appropriate as concluding
advice and counsel, written by the prophet Moroni:

"And now, my brethren, I judge these things of you because of your
peaceable walk with the children of men;

"For I remember the word of God, which saith by their works ye shall
know them; for if their works be good, then they are good also.

"For behold, God bath said, A man being evil cannot do that which is
good; for if he offereth a gift, or prayeth unto God, except he shall
do it with real intent it profiteth him nothing.

"For behold, it is not counted unto him for righteousness.

"For behold, if a man being evil, giveth a gift, he doeth it
grudgingly; wherefore it is counted unto him the same as if he had
retained the gift; wherefore he is counted evil before God.

"And likewise also is it counted evil unto a man, if he shall pray, and
not with real intent of heart; yea, and it profiteth him nothing; for
God receiveth none such." (Moroni 7:4-9.)

Here, indeed, is a text that would give an opportunity to one moved by
the proper spirit, to make a telling discourse among the Latter-day
Saints--not applicable to all, but applicable to far too many. It is
not good for us to pray by rote, to kneel down and repeat the Lord's
prayer continually. I think that one of the greatest follies I have
ever witnessed is the foolish custom of men repeating the Lord's prayer
continually without considering its meaning. The Lord gave {277} this
as a pattern to his disciples who were going out into the world to
preach the gospel. It was to show them that they were not to use many
words, but were to come directly to the Lord, and ask him for the
things they might need, consequently one of the specific provisions
in that prayer, and the example set was: "Give us this day our daily
bread;" and we see people clothed with plenty, possessed of millions,
perhaps, and yet, if they pray at all, they repeat simply the Lord's
prayer. It thus becomes only a form; there is no power in it; neither
is it acceptable, because it is not offered from the heart, nor with
the understanding; and I think that it is desirable for us to look well
to our words when we call upon the Lord. He hears us in secret, and can
reward us openly. We do not have to cry unto him with many words. We do
not have to weary him with long prayers. What we do need, and what we
should do as Latter-day Saints, for our own good, is to go before him
often, to witness unto him that we remember him and that we are willing
to take upon us his name, keep his commandments, work righteousness;
and that we desire his Spirit to help us. Then, if we are in trouble,
let us go to the Lord and ask him directly and specifically to help us
out of the trouble that we are in; and let the prayer come from the
heart, let it not be in words that are worn into ruts in the beaten
tracks of common use, without thought or feeling in the use of those
words. Let us speak the simple words, expressing our need, that will
appeal most truly to the Giver of every good and perfect gift. He can
hear in secret; and he knows the desires of our hearts before we ask,
but he has made it obligatory, and a duty that we shall call upon his
name--that we shall ask that we may receive; and knock that it may be
opened to us; and seek that we may find. Hence, the Lord has made it a
loving duty that we should remember him, that we should witness unto
him morning, noon, and night, that we do not forget the Giver of every
good gift unto us.

{278} "Wherefore, a man being evil, cannot do that which is good;
neither will he give a good gift.

"For behold, a bitter fountain cannot bring forth good water; neither
can a good fountain bring forth bitter water, wherefore a man being a
servant of the devil, cannot follow Christ; and if he follow Christ, he
cannot be a servant of the devil.

"Wherefore, all things which are good, cometh of God; and that which
is evil, cometh of the devil; for the devil is an enemy unto God, and
fighteth against him continually, and inviteth and enticeth to sin, and
to do that which is evil continually.

"But behold, that which is of God, inviteth and enticeth to do good
continually; wherefore, everything which inviteth and enticeth to do
good, and to love God, and to serve him, is inspired of God.

"Wherefore take heed, my beloved brethren, that ye do not judge that
which is evil to be of God, or that which is good and of God, to be of
the devil.

"For behold, my brethren, it is given unto you to judge, that ye may
know good from evil; and the way to judge is as plain, that ye may know
with a perfect knowledge, as the daylight is from the dark night.

"For behold, the Spirit of Christ is given to every man, that they may
know good from evil; wherefore I show unto you the way to judge; for
everything which inviteth to do good, and to persuade to believe in
Christ, is sent forth by the power and gift of Christ; wherefore ye may
know with a perfect knowledge it is of God.

"But whatsoever thing persuadeth men to do evil, and believe not in
Christ and deny him, and serve not God, then ye may know with a perfect
knowledge it is of the devil, for after this manner doth the devil
work, for he persuadeth no man to do good, no, not one; neither doth
his angels; neither do they who subject themselves unto him.

{279} "And now, my brethren, seeing that ye know the light by which ye
may judge, which light is the light of Christ, see that ye do not judge
wrongfully; for with that same judgment which ye judge, ye shall also
be judged.

"Wherefore I beseech of you, brethren, that ye should search diligently
in the light of Christ, that ye may know good from evil; and if ye will
lay hold upon every good thing, and condemn it not, ye certainly will
be a child of Christ." (Moroni 7:10-19.)

I think that here, in the words that I have read, are some plain
fingerboards, some plain, simple guideposts; and if we, as Latter-day
Saints, believing as we do in the divinity of this book which was
translated by the gift and power of God, through the inspiration that
came to the Prophet Joseph Smith, would read these words as believing
children should read, with understanding, in faith, being sure that God
inspired them, and then put them into practice, I think it would not
be long before we could do away with appeals to bishops' courts, and
high councils, and with the present necessity for teachers' visits, to
try to settle difficulties among Latter-day Saints. I believe every
man would be his own judge, for he would judge righteously, because
he would judge in the light of truth, in the light and justice--not
selfishly, not covetously, but in the light that has come from the
heavens in the latter days, through revelations from God.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 11, August, 1908, pp. 729-732.

PRAY FOR THE AUTHORITIES. We have met together this afternoon in the
capacity of a conference of this stake of Zion. We have had presented
before us the stake authorities, together with the home missionaries,
that we might sustain them by our vote, which means also by our faith
and prayers, and to stand by them in the discharge of all the duties
that devolve upon them. It is an important duty resting upon the Saints
who vote to sustain the authorities of the Church, to do so not only
by the lifting of the hand, the mere form, {280} but in deed and in
truth. There never should be a day pass but all the people composing
the Church should lift up their voices in prayer to the Lord to sustain
his servants who are placed to preside over them. Not only should they
do this in behalf of the president of the stake and his counselors,
but they should do it in behalf of the high council, before whom, in
connection with the presidency of the stake, matters of vast importance
to the members of the Church are brought from time to time for their
judgment and counsel. These men should have the faith of the people to
sustain them in discharge of their duties, in order that they may be
strong in the Lord. These authorities are also presented before the
people, so that if there is any fault in them, worthy of objection, to
their acting in the positions to which they are called, the Saints who
know of these objections may make them manifest, in order that such
inquiry may be instituted as may be necessary to ascertain the truth,
that those who are not worthy may be dropped, and only such as are
worthy and faithful in the performance of their duties be sustained in
these exalted positions in the Church.

We should not permit ourselves to go about from day to day with a
spirit of murmuring and fault-finding in our hearts against those who
are presented before us to be sustained in responsible positions. If we
have anything in our hearts against any of these brethren, it is our
duty, as conscientious members of the Church, first, as the Spirit may
direct, to go to them alone and make known to them our feeling toward
them and show them the cause of such feeling; not with a desire in our
hearts to widen or increase the difficulty, but we should go to them in
the spirit of reconciliation and brotherly love, in a true Christian
spirit, so that if any feeling of bitterness exists within us it may
be absolutely removed; and if we have cause against our brother, that
we may be in a position to remedy the evil. We should seek to love one
another and to sustain one another {281} as children of God and as
brothers and sisters in the cause.

The presentation of the authorities of the Church before a conference
is made obligatory upon the Church. It is the command of the Lord that
we shall meet together to transact the business of the Church, an
important part of which is to sustain the authorities of the Church,
thus renewing our covenant to uphold God's authority which he has
instituted in the earth for the government of his Church. And I cannot
emphasize too strongly the importance of Latter-day Saints honoring and
sustaining in truth and in deed the authority of the holy priesthood
which is called to preside. The moment a spirit enters the heart of a
member to refrain from sustaining the constituted authorities of the
Church, that moment he becomes possessed of a spirit which inclines
to rebellion or dissension; and if he permits that spirit to take a
firm root in his mind, it will eventually lead him into darkness and
apostasy. It makes no difference how much we may profess to love the
gospel and prize our standing in the Church, if we allow the spirit of
darkness to take possession of our minds, the light and love within
us will go out, and bitterness and enmity will take possession of our
souls. Then, oh how dark, how bitter and wicked we may become!--_Salt
Lake Stake, C. R.,_ June 12, 1898.

BLESSINGS FOLLOW PRAYERS. Family and secret prayers should be observed,
not alone to comply with the commandment of the Lord, but because of
the wonderful blessings to be gained. The Lord has said we should
inquire of him.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, December, 1917, p. 104.

CORRECT OUR NEGLECTS. What shall we do if we have neglected our
prayers? Let us begin to pray. If we have neglected any other duty,
let us seek unto the Lord for his Spirit, that we may know wherein
we have erred and lost our opportunities, or let them pass by us
unimproved.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 24, p. 708.

{282}



CHAPTER XIII

TITHING; THE POOR; INDUSTRY

WHY THE LAW OF TITHING WAS INSTITUTED. The Lord revealed to his people
in the incipiency of his work a law which was more perfect than the
law of tithing. It comprehended larger things, greater power, and a
more speedy accomplishment of the purposes of the Lord. But the people
were unprepared to live by it, and the Lord, out of mercy to the
people, suspended the more perfect law, and gave the law of tithing,
in order that there might be means in the storehouse of the Lord for
the carrying out of the purposes he had in view; for the gathering of
the poor, for the spreading of the gospel to the nations of the earth,
for the maintenance of those who were required to give their constant
attention, day in and day out, to the work of the Lord, and for whom
it was necessary to make some provision. Without this law these things
could not be done, neither could temples be built and maintained, nor
the poor fed and clothed. Therefore the law of tithing is necessary
for the Church, so much so that the Lord has laid great stress upon
it.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 47.

ESSENTIAL NATURE OF THE LAW OF TITHING. By this principle (tithing) the
loyalty of the people of this Church shall be put to the test. By this
principle it shall be known who is for the kingdom of God and who is
against it. By this principle it shall be seen whose hearts are set on
doing the will of God and keeping his commandments, thereby sanctifying
the land of Zion unto God, and who are opposed to this principle and
have cut themselves off from the blessings of Zion. There is a great
deal of importance connected with this principle, for by it it shall
be known whether we are faithful or unfaithful. In this respect it is
as essential {283} as faith in God, as repentance of sin, as baptism
for the remission of sin, or as the laying on of hands for the gift of
the Holy Ghost. For if a man keep all the law save one point, and he
offend in that, he is a transgressor of the law, and he is not entitled
to the fulness of the blessings of the gospel of Jesus Christ. But when
a man keeps all the law that is revealed, according to his strength,
his substance, and his ability, though what he does may be little, it
is just as acceptable in the sight of God as if he were able to do a
thousand times more.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, pp. 47, 48.

THE LAW OF TITHING A TEST. The law of tithing is a test by which the
people as individuals shall be proved. Any man who fails to observe
this principle shall be known as a man who is indifferent to the
welfare of Zion, who neglects his duty as a member of the Church and
who does nothing toward the accomplishment of the temporal advancement
of the kingdom of God. He contributes nothing, either, toward spreading
the gospel to the nations of the earth, and he neglects to do that
which would entitle him to receive the blessings and ordinances of the
gospel.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 47.

THE LAW OF TITHING, THE LAW OF REVENUE. The purpose of the law of
tithing is similar to that of the law of revenue which is enacted
by every state, every country, and every municipality in the world,
I suppose. There is no such thing as an organization of men for any
purpose of importance, without provisions for carrying out its designs.
The law of tithing is the law of revenue for the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints. Without it, it would be impossible to carry on
the purposes of the Lord.

TITHING. No doubt, a good deal more could be read from the scriptures
in relation to this principle of tithing, which God has revealed to
us in this dispensation, and which he requires at our hands, that we
may sanctify, by obedience to his law, this land that it may become
indeed a land {284} of Zion unto us; and the promise is, that if we
will obey the laws of God, if we will put our trust in him, if we will
draw near unto him he will draw near unto us, and he will reward us
with his favor and his blessing. He will rebuke the devourer, and he
will cause that the earth shall be fruitful, that it shall yield in its
strength to the husbandman, the tiller of the soil, and to the herder
of flocks. He will increase his kine, and will prosper him upon the
right hand and upon the left, and he shall have an abundance, because
he puts his trust in God; he draws near unto him, and he is willing
to prove him, to see whether he will not open the windows of heaven
and pour out blessings upon him that he shall not have room to contain
them. Let every man who has received the gospel of Jesus Christ receive
this saying, and hearken to these words, for all they are worth. Some
men may esteem them lightly, and those who do, will, without doubt,
fail to draw near, they will neglect to prove the Lord, they will not
fulfil the commandments that he has given, and they will never know
that God tells the truth, and that he is able to fulfil his word and
promise unto his people when they are willing to obey and keep his law.
While they who appreciate these promises, who obey these laws that were
given anciently, and have been renewed again in the dispensation of the
fulness of times, for the blessing of the people, for the building up
of Zion, for the feeding of the widow and the orphan, or the spreading
of the gospel of Christ to the nations of the earth, and for the
gathering of the people from the four quarters of the earth, those who
hearken to these words, prize them as the truth, and apply them in
their practice throughout their lives, will come to know that God is
a rewarder of those who diligently serve him, and that he is able to
fulfil his promises unto them.

A short time ago I met a brother--I need not call his name, for he is
but one among thousands who can bear the same testimony, not only by
the word of mouth but by {285} the evidences of thrift, of prosperity,
of progress and of improvement which surround him in the midst of
the deserts. This season he has gathered in rich harvests, his farms
having produced in abundance, while the farms of many of his neighbors
are clogged with weeds, and their harvests have been only one-half or
one-third what his has been. How do you account for it? I account for
it in the fact that God has blessed him; and so does he, for he is an
intelligent man, a man that not only labors wisely and prudently, but
in the fear of God, and in the desire of his heart to obey his laws.
He said to me and my companion with whom we were traveling: "God has
blessed me because I have striven to keep his laws, and because I have
been true to my family." He went out there upon the desert seven or
eight years ago, impoverished by persecution and exile, being driven
from his home and from his affairs, compelled to wander in exile for
years, part of the time preaching the gospel. He returned seven or
eight years ago, and settled down upon the desert. Today, out of the
earth, the burning sands, he has produced beautiful homes, he has
fruitful fields, which are spread out before the eyes of any man who
wishes to go and look upon them. He pays his tithing, he remembers his
offerings, he is obedient to the laws of God, and he is not afraid
to bear testimony to his friends and neighbors that it is through
obedience that God has blessed and prospered him, and made him what he
is today. He is not the only one; there are others who are prospered in
like manner. And I testify that it is because God has blessed him, and
his soil, and his labors, that he obtained the increase, and secured
the blessings for which he sought and labored. He has acted in good
faith with the Lord; the Lord has known his heart, and has blessed him
accordingly, and he is prosperous today in that desert, while as to
many of his neighbors--go and look for yourselves at their broad acres.
They tell the story for themselves. His lands are clear from noxious
weeds, {286} because he has labored, and taken care of his lands, and
because God has inspired him, and enlightened his mind. The Lord has
blessed him in his basket and in his store, in his labors and in the
thoughts of his mind, he has been inspired and enabled to accomplish
the work that he has done: I testify that it is because of man's faith
in the promise of the Lord, and his desire to obey his laws, that he is
blessed and prospered of him.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1897, pp. 35, 36.

THE WIDOW AND HER TITHING. Will you then deny the widow, because she
has only a mite to bestow? Because the tenth which she proposes to give
in obedience to the commandment of God is but a penny, are you going to
deprive her of the privilege of having her name enrolled on the book
of the law of the Lord, and of having her genealogy acknowledged and
recorded in the archives of the Church? And because her name is not
found there, are you going to deny her the privileges of the house of
God and of the ordinances of the gospel? I think it is time the bishops
understood this principle. The bishop should encourage every man, woman
and child, who earns and receives a return for labor, to honor the Lord
and to prove obedient to the law of God by giving the one-tenth of that
which he or she receives, as the Lord requires, so that they may have
their names enrolled on the book of the law of the Lord, that their
genealogies may be had in the archives of the Church, and that they may
be entitled to the privileges and blessings of the house of God.

I recollect most vividly a circumstance that occurred in the days of
my childhood. My mother was a widow, with a large family to provide
for. One spring when we opened our potato pits, she had her boys get
a load of the best potatoes and she took them to the tithing office;
potatoes were scarce that season. I was a little boy at the time, and
drove the team. When we drove up to the steps of the tithing {287}
office, ready to unload the potatoes, one of the clerks came out and
said to my mother, "Widow Smith, it's a shame that you should have to
pay tithing." He said a number of other things that I remember well,
but they are not necessary for me to repeat here. The first two letters
of the name of that tithing clerk were William Thompson, and he chided
my mother for paying her tithing, called her anything but wise or
prudent; and said there were others who were strong and able to work
that were supported from the tithing office. My mother turned upon him
and said: "William, you ought to be ashamed of yourself. Would you deny
me a blessing? If I did not pay my tithing, I should expect the Lord
to withhold his blessings from me. I pay my tithing, not only because
it is a law of God, but because I expect a blessing by doing it. By
keeping this and other laws, I expect to prosper, and to be able to
provide for my family." Though she was a widow, you may turn to the
records of the Church from the beginning unto the day of her death, and
you will find that she never received a farthing from the Church to
help her support herself and her family; but she paid in thousands of
dollars in wheat, potatoes, corn, vegetables, meat, etc. The tithes of
her sheep and cattle, the tenth pound of her butter, her tenth chicken,
the tenth of her eggs, the tenth pig, the tenth calf, the tenth colt--a
tenth of everything she raised was paid. Here sits my brother who can
bear testimony to the truth of what I say, as can others who knew her.
She prospered because she obeyed the laws of God. She had abundance to
sustain her family. We never lacked as much as many others did; for
while we found nettle greens most acceptable when we first came to the
valley; and while we enjoyed thistle roots, segoes and all that kind of
thing, we were no worse off than thousands of others, and not as poor
as many, for we were never without corn-meal and milk or butter, to my
knowledge. Then that widow had her name recorded in the book of the
{288} law of the Lord. That widow was entitled to the privileges of the
house of God. No ordinance of the gospel could be denied her, for she
was obedient to the laws of God, and she would not fail in her duty,
though discouraged from observing a commandment of God by one who was
in an official position.

This may be said to be personal. By some it may be considered
egotistical. But I do not speak of it in that light. When William
Thompson told my mother that she ought not to pay tithing, I thought
he was one of the finest fellows in the world. I believed every word
he said. I had to work and dig and toil myself. I had to help plow the
ground, plant the potatoes, hoe the potatoes, dig the potatoes, and
all like duties, and then to load up a big wagon-box full of the very
best we had, leaving out the poor ones, and bringing the load to the
tithing office, I thought in my childish way that it looked a little
hard, specially when I saw certain of my playmates and early associates
of childhood, playing round, riding horses and having good times, and
who scarcely ever did a lick of work in their lives, and yet were being
fed from the public crib. Where are those boys today? Are they known
in the Church? Are they prominent among the people of God? Are they or
were they ever valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ? Have they a
clear testimony of the truth in their hearts? Are they diligent members
of the Church? No; and never have been, as a rule, and most of them are
dead or vanished out of sight. Well, after I received a few years of
experience, I was converted, I found that my mother was right and that
William Thompson was wrong. He denied the faith, apostatized, left the
country, and led away as many of his family as would go with him. I do
not want you to deny me the privilege of being numbered with those who
have the interests of Zion at heart, and who desire to contribute their
proportion to the upbuilding of Zion, and for the maintenance {289} of
the work of the Lord in the earth. It is a blessing that I enjoy, and I
do not propose that anybody shall deprive me of that pleasure.--_Apr.
C. R.,_ 1900, pp. 48, 49.

THE WIDOW AND TITHING. I preach that which I believe and that which
I do know to be true, and I do know that if men will obey the laws
of God, God will honor and bless them. I have proven it all my life
through. I saw it manifested in circumstances which occurred in my
childhood, and I know that God has blessed the widow and the fatherless
when they have been obedient to his laws and have kept his commandments.

I can tell you the history of a widow woman, with a large family, who
was more particular, if possible, to pay the Lord what belonged to him
than she was to pay to her neighbors to whom she might be indebted,
and she never was indebted to her neighbors, thank God, for anything
that she did not pay to the last cent, because the Lord blessed her
with plenty, and in her latter years she did not have to borrow of
her neighbors, nor did she have to call upon the Church for support,
either, but she paid thousands of dollars in products and money into
the storehouse of the Lord, although she was a widow with a large
family to support. I know this. I can testify of this, and that the
Lord Almighty blessed her, not only in the products of her fields,
but in her flocks and herds. They were not devoured. They were not
destroyed. They did not lie down and die. They increased. They did
not stray away; and thieves did not steal them. One reason for that
was, she had a little boy that watched them very carefully under
her direction, and prompting. Her eye was upon everything, she had
supervision over everything, she directed those whom she employed,
and her children; and I am a witness--and here sits another witness
(Patriarch John Smith)--that God, the eternal Father, blessed her and
prospered her while she {290} lived, and she was not only enabled to
maintain herself and children that were left to her in poverty, in a
day of trial, and when she was driven out into the wilderness, but she
was able to feed scores of the poor, and to pay her tithes besides.
Verily the Lord prospered her, and she was blessed.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1897, pp. 35-37.

WHO RECEIVES CHURCH HELP SHOULD BE TITHE PAYERS. When one comes to
a bishop and asks for assistance because of his or her straitened
circumstances, the first thing the bishop should do is to inquire if
he or she is a tithe-payer. He should know whether the name is on the
book of the law of the Lord, and if not on the book, if he or she has
been derelict and negligent in relation to this principle of tithing,
he or she has no claim upon the bishop, neither have their children;
and if, under those circumstances, the bishop assists him, it will
simply be out of pure charity and not because such have any claim upon
the Church. That is why the widow who receives assistance from the
Church should pay her tithing, so that her name may be on the records
of the Church. It is not a law that is applicable to one and not to
another. If the rich may not receive blessings because their names are
not on the record, then neither shall the poor receive blessings in
the house of God, if their names are not recorded. So long as a poor
person receives his or her support through the tithings of the people,
they should be willing to observe the law themselves in order that
they may be entitled to what they receive. They should show by their
observance of the law that they are law-keepers and not law-breakers.
Our children, as soon as they become old enough to earn means, should
be taught to pay their tithing, that their names may be written in the
book of the law of the Lord, so that if perchance their father die
and they are left orphans, their names as well as the names of their
parents, will be found upon the records and they will, as God lives, be
entitled to {291} their support and to their education. It is our duty
to look after these children and see that they have an equal chance
with those who are most favored with parents to look after them.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1899, pp. 44, 45.

USE OF TITHING. I mention this simply to show that these men, whose
whole time is occupied in the ministry, are only drawing their
necessary support from the Church. They must have that. You would
not begrudge them that. Men who are faithful, valiant, instant in
season and out of season, and consequently engaged in the work of the
ministry, you surely would not say that they should not have food to
eat, raiment to wear, and where to lay their heads; and that is all
these men get from the Church. The laborer is certainly worthy of
his hire. So that your tithing is not enriching your brethren of the
ministry. It is being used to keep up the ordinances of the house of
God in these four temples. Thousands and thousands of dollars of it are
being used in educating the youth of Zion and in maintaining the Church
schools. Thousands of dollars are being expended to feed and clothe
the poor, and to take care of those who are dependent upon the Church.
They look to their "mother" for succor and support, and it is right and
proper that the Church should provide for its own poor and indigent,
feeble and helpless, so far as possible._--Apr. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 71.

COMMERCIALISM AND TITHING. The Church is charged with commercialism.
There is not the least resemblance of it, in truth. The Church is
neither buying nor selling goods or chattels. It is not engaged in
merchandising of any description, and never has been; and there could
not well be a more false and groundless statement made against the
Church than to charge it with commercialism. It is true that, unlike
other churches or religious organizations, the people of this Church
observe the law of tithing, which is the law of revenue of the Church.
We do not pass around {292} the hat to you, nor the collection box, for
means to defray the expenses incident to carrying on of the work of the
Church. You give it voluntarily. This reminds me of another falsehood
that is spread abroad by our enemies, namely: That the "Mormon" people
are compelled to pay tithing, that the authorities of the Church demand
it of them, that it is made obligatory upon them, and is tyrannically
exacted from them all the time, which is an infamous falsehood, a
slander, for there is not a word or syllable of truth in it. The
observance of the law of tithing is voluntary. I can pay my tithing
or not, as I choose. It is a matter of choice with me, whether I will
do it or not do it; but, feeling as I do, loyal to the Church, loyal
to its interests, believing that it is right and just to observe the
law of tithing I do observe it--on the same principle that I think it
is right for me to observe the law of repentance, and of baptism, for
the remission of sins. It is my pleasure to do my duty with reference
to the observance of these principles, and to pay my tithing. The Lord
has revealed how this means shall be cared for, and managed; namely,
by the Presidency of the Church and the High Council of the Church
(that is, the Twelve Apostles), and the Presiding Bishopric of the
Church. I think there is wisdom in this. It is not left for one man to
dispose of it, or to handle it alone, not by any means. It devolves
upon at least eighteen men, men of wisdom, of faith, of ability, as
these eighteen men are. I say it devolves upon them to dispose of the
tithes of the people and to use them for whatever purpose in their
judgment and wisdom will accomplish the most good for the Church; and
because this fund of tithing is disposed of by these men whom the Lord
has designated as having authority to do it, for the necessities and
benefit of the Church, they call it "commercialism." What absurdity!
You may just as well call their practices in passing around their
contribution boxes, for collecting means with which to build their
{293} churches, with which to pay their ministers, and with which to
carry on the monetary affairs of their churches, "commercialism," as
for them to charge us with "commercialism," because we handle the
tithing of the Church, and appropriate and use it for the benefit of
the Church.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 5, 6.

TITHING USED CAREFULLY AND FULL ACCOUNTS KEPT. I defy any man on earth
to point his finger to a dollar that is wilfully wasted or stolen by
the servants of God. The tithing books are kept as accurately and as
perfectly as any books are kept in any bank. Every man who pays a
dollar tithing gets his credit on the books; and if he wants to see
that his credit is there he can go and see for himself. But we do not
propose to open our books and show your accounts to every Tom, Dick
and Harry in the land who never did pay any tithing. We do not propose
to do that, if we can help it. But you Latter-day Saints who pay your
tithes and your offerings, if you want to see for yourselves that you
may be eye and ear witnesses, the books are open to you, and you can
come and examine your accounts any business day you want.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1905, p. 5.

BOOKS OPEN TO TITHE-PAYERS. The man who complains about not knowing
what is done with the tithing, in ninety-nine cases out of a hundred,
is the man who has no credit on the books of the Church for paying
tithing. We do not care to exhibit the books of the Church to such
carpers, and to that class of people. But there is not a tithe-payer
in the Church who cannot go to the Presiding Bishop's office, or
to the office of the Trustee-in-Trust, if he desires, and find his
account, and see to it that every dollar he has given to the Lord for
tithing is credited to him. Then, if he wants to be more searching as
a tithe-payer, and find out what is done with the tithing, we will set
before him the whole thing, and if he has any good counsel to give us
we will take it from him. But we will not--because we do {294} not have
to, and it is not the business of the world to require it--open our
books to the world, unless we wish to. We are not ashamed of them. We
are not afraid for them to be inspected. They are honest and straight;
and there is not a man in the world who will look at them, but will say
so, if he is honest himself.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1906, pp. 6, 7.

WE SHOULD SYMPATHIZE WITH THE UNFORTUNATE. We too frequently see a
disposition on the part of our children to make fun of the unfortunate.
A poor cripple, or a poor, weak-minded person comes along, and the boys
will poke fun at him, and make unbecoming remarks about him. This is
entirely wrong, and such a spirit as this should never be witnessed
among the children of the Latter-day Saints.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, pp.
87, 88.

CHARITY TO BE ACCEPTED ONLY WHEN NECESSARY. There is such a thing as
encouraging idleness and fostering pauperism among men. Men and women
ought not to be willing to receive charity unless they are compelled to
do so to keep them from suffering. Every man and woman ought to possess
the spirit of independence, a self-sustaining spirit, that would
prompt him or her to say, when they are in need, "I am willing to give
my labor in exchange for that which you give me." No man ought to be
satisfied to receive, and to do nothing for it. After a man is brought
down to poverty and is under the necessity of receiving aid, and his
friends give it to him, he should feel that it is an obligation under
which he is placed, and when the Lord should open his way he would
return the gift. That is the feeling we should cultivate in our hearts,
to make us a free and independent people. The cultivation of any other
feeling or spirit than this is calculated to make paupers, to degrade
and bring mankind down to beggary, which is a most wretched condition
for men to be in. It is a bad thing for men to think the world owes
them a living, and all they have to do is to beg or steal to get it. *
* * I don't refer to the {295} cripple, or to those who are enfeebled
by age, because I look at them in an entirely different light; there is
a necessity for them to live, and there is a necessity for us to assist
such, but there is no great need in this world for men and women who
are able to work and will not work.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, pp. 46-48.

CEASE TO WASTE TIME; CEASE TO BE IDLE. I desire to say to this
congregation at this time that I have felt very strongly of late a
desire, a responsibility, I may say, resting upon me, to admonish the
Latter-day Saints everywhere to cease loitering away their precious
time, to cease from all idleness. It is said in the revelations that
the idler in Zion shall not eat the bread of the laborer, and there is
vastly too much, in some parts--not universally, but there is far too
much precious time wasted by the youth of Zion, and perhaps by some
that are older and more experienced and who ought to know better, in
the foolish, vain and unprofitable practice of card-playing. We hear of
card parties here and card parties there, and entertainments where the
playing of cards is the principal amusement; and the whole evening is
thus wasted. The whole precious time of those who are gathered together
on occasions of this kind, aggregating many hours, absolutely wasted.
If there was nothing else to be said against this practice, that alone
should be sufficient to induce Latter-day Saints not to indulge in this
foolish and unprofitable pastime.

Read good books. Learn to sing and to recite, and to converse upon
subjects that will be of interest to your associates, and at your
social gatherings, instead of wasting the time in senseless practices
that lead only to mischief and sometimes to serious evil and
wrongdoing; instead of doing this, seek out of the best books knowledge
and understanding. Read history. Read philosophy, if you wish. Read
anything that is good, that will elevate the mind and will add to your
stock of knowledge, that those who associate {296} with you may feel
an interest in your pursuit of knowledge and of wisdom.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1903, p. 98.

GOSPEL BLESSING OBTAINED BY LABOR. We can never attain to the blessings
of the gospel by merely becoming acquainted with it and then sitting
down and doing nothing ourselves to stem the current of evil that is
preying upon us and upon the world.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 40.

IDLERS HAVE NO PLACE IN ZION. There should be no idlers in Zion. Even
the poor who have to be assisted should be willing to do all in their
power to earn their own living. Not one man or woman should be content
to sit down and be fed, clothed, or housed without any exertion on
his or her part to compensate for these privileges. All men and women
should feel a degree of independence of character that would stimulate
them to do something for a living, and not be idle; for it is written
that the idler shall not eat the bread of the laborer of Zion, and
he shall not have place among us. Therefore, it is necessary that we
should be industrious, that we should intelligently apply our labor to
something that is productive and conducive to the welfare of the human
family. God help us to do this, is my prayer. Amen.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1899, p. 42; Doc. and Cov. 42:42; 68:30; 75:29.

A MESSAGE OF THE LATTER-DAY SAINTS ON BEHALF OF THE POOR. The position
of the Latter-day Saints in regard to the poor is perhaps well
understood by most readers of the _Era_. But there are some points
which are not quite clear to a number of our friends.

God has commanded this people to remember the poor, and to give means
for their support. No other community, perhaps, has proved more
willing than the Latter-day Saints to obey this command. They have
demonstrated this in the past and have been very willing to impart of
their properties to aid the poor and unfortunate, not only in their own
midst, but also those who live in other nations and other {297} places
in our own country. No call for help has ever been heard in vain by
them. And this is true, notwithstanding the fact that they have often
suffered from unjust oppression and great poverty, in which they have
received little, if any, sympathy and no help. They have always taken
care of themselves and besides have helped others.

A leading mission of the Church is to teach the gospel of Christ in
the world. It has an important message to deliver, which not only
includes the spiritual salvation of men, but also their temporal
welfare. It not only teaches that faith is necessary, but also that
works are required. Belief in Jesus is well and good, but it must
be of a living 'kind which induces the believer to work out his own
salvation, and to aid others to do the same. We do not believe in
charity as a business; but rather we depend on mutual helpfulness.
While the gospel message requires faith and repentance, it requires
also that temporal necessities must be met. So the Lord has revealed
plans for the temporal salvation of the people. For the benefit of the
poor we have the fast instituted, a leading object of which among other
things is to provide the poor with food and other necessities until
they may help themselves. For it is clear that plans which contemplate
only relieving present distress are deficient. The Church has always
sought to place its members in a way to help themselves, rather than
adopting the method of so many charitable institutions of providing
for only present needs. When the help is withdrawn or used up, more
must be provided from the same source, thus making paupers of the poor
and teaching them the incorrect principle of relying upon others'
help, instead of depending upon their own exertions. This plan has
made the Latter-day Saints independent wherever they have settled. It
has prevented a constant recurring of calls for help and established
permanent conditions by which the people help themselves. Our idea of
charity, therefore, is to relieve present wants and then to {298} put
the poor in a way to help themselves so that in turn they may help
others. The funds are committed for distribution to wise men, generally
to bishops of the Church, whose duty it is to look after the poor.

We submit the equitable fast-day plan of the Lord to the churches of
the world as a wise and systematic way of providing for the poor. I
say equitable because it gives an opportunity for the contribution of
much or little, according to the position and standing of those who
contribute; and besides, it helps both the giver and the receiver. If
the churches would adopt the universal monthly fast-day, as observed
by the Latter-day Saints, and devote the means saved during the day to
the alleviation, blessing and benefit of the poor, and with a view to
helping them to help themselves, there would soon be no poor in the
land.

It would be a simple matter for people to comply with this requirement
to abstain from food and drink one day each month, and to dedicate what
would be consumed during that day to the poor, and as much more as they
pleased. The Lord has instituted this law; it is simple and perfect,
based on reason and intelligence, and would not only prove a solution
to the question of providing for the poor, but it would result in good
to those who observe the law. It would call attention to the sin of
over-eating, place the body in subjection to the spirit, and so promote
communion with the Holy Ghost, and insure a spiritual strength and
power which the people of the nation so greatly need. As fasting should
always be accompanied by prayer, this law would bring the people nearer
to God, and divert their minds once a month at least, from the mad rush
of worldly affairs and cause them to be brought into immediate contact
with practical, pure and undefiled religion--to visit the fatherless
and the widow, and keep themselves unspotted from the sins of the
world. For religion is not in believing the commandments {299} only, it
is in doing them. I would to God that men would not only believe Jesus
Christ and his teachings, but would broaden their belief to the extent
of doing the things that are taught by him, and doing them in spirit.

He certainly taught fasting, prayer and helpfulness. No better start
can be made than by fasting, praying to God, and sacrificing means
for the poor. This law combines belief and practice, faith and works,
without which neither Armenian nor Latter-day Saint, neither Jew nor
Gentile, can be saved.

When appeals are made to the Latter-day Saints for aid, they are always
willing to comply; but we have also our mission to perform; to preach
the gospel, to establish peace, secure plenty, and promote happiness
in the land; and our people have learned through the commandments of
God how to take care of themselves and are trying to help others to
do likewise. They are ever helping each other and it is seldom that
poor are found among them who are unprovided for. They are practically
independent and may become entirely so by a stricter adherence to the
law of the Lord! We believe that if other communities would adopt
the plans of consecration, fasting, and tithing, which the Lord has
revealed to the Latter-day Saints and carry them out in spirit, with
faith and works, that poverty and pauperism would be greatly reduced
or entirely overcome. Opportunities would be presented so that all
might obtain work and thus provide for themselves; and the other
command of the Lord would be obeyed: "Thou shalt not be idle; for he
that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear the garments of the
laborer."--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 10, pp. 831-833.

{300}



CHAPTER XIV

TEMPERANCE; THE SABBATH

MAN SHOULD BE MASTER OF HIS APPETITES. How humiliating it must be to
a thoughtful man to feel that he is a slave to his appetites, or to
an over-weening and pernicious habit, desire or passion. We believe
in strict temperance. We believe in abstinence from all injurious
practices, and from the use of all hurtful things. Poison, in the
judgment of the physician, may be beneficial, under some conditions in
life, as a momentary relief; but poison, under any circumstance, should
only be used as a temporary expedient, necessary, perhaps, in our best
judgment, for the time being, for the instant--for sudden and certain
desired relief--but the continued use of that poison will fasten its
fangs upon us, so to speak, in such a way that by and by we will find
that we are overpowered by it, and we become slaves of the pernicious
habit that becomes a tyrannical master over us.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1908, p.
4.

MODERATION. We may make evil of all amusements, but the Saints should
not be unwise, but rather understand what the will of the Lord is,
and practice moderation in all things. They should avoid excesses and
cease from sin, putting far from them "the lusts of men;" and in their
amusements and pastimes adopt a course that looks to the spirit as well
as the letter, the intention and not the act alone, the whole and not
the part, which is the meaning of moderation. In this way their conduct
will be reasonable and becoming, and they shall find no trouble in
understanding the will of the Lord.

Let me exhort the young people particularly, and the Saints generally,
to weigh well the value of moderation in all their actions and
amusements. Remember, too, that excessive {301} feasting is not
good; neither is excessive labor, but idleness and waste of precious
time is infinitely worse. "Let your moderation be known to all
men."--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, p. 857, Sept., 1903.

TEMPERANCE. We endorse any movement looking to temperance, looking to
virtue, tending to purity of life and to faith in God and obedience to
his laws; and we are against evil of every description; and we are, in
our faith and prayers, against evil-doers--not that we would pray for
evil to come upon evil-doers, but that evil-doers might see the folly
of their ways and the wickedness of their acts and repent of them and
turn away from them.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 8.

HOW TO TEACH TEMPERANCE. The best way to teach temperance is to keep
the Word of Wisdom; and the next best is to assist others to keep it,
by removing artificial temptations from their lives. Such temptation
is the saloon, and it is time that the sentiment in the communities
where the members of the Church reside should be declared against this
soul-destroying evil.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 46, p. 333, June,
1911.

USE OF TOBACCO AND STRONG DRINKS. The use of tobacco in its various
forms and of strong drinks to some extent is also to be lamented and
deplored, especially among the youth, and this evil should be stamped
out. The people of God should set their faces like flint against
these practices, and they should see to it that their children are
taught better, and that a better example is set before them by their
parents, in order that the children may grow up without sin in these
things.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 2.

DO NOT SMOKE. Teach your children not to smoke; persuade them not to do
it. Watch and look after them, and try to teach them better, and to be
courteous and kind.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 86.

THE SALOON. No member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints can afford to do himself the dishonor, {302} or bring upon
himself the disgrace, of crossing the threshold of a liquor saloon or a
gambling hell, or of any house of ill-fame of whatever name or nature
it may be. No Latter-day Saint, no member of the Church, can afford it,
for it is humiliating to him, it is disgraceful in him to do it, and
God will judge him according to his works.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 7.

If, I say, the people observe the principles of this revelation
(Doctrine and Covenants 89), there could not exist in their midst that
most obnoxious institution known as a saloon; it can not exist where
only Latter-day Saints dwell.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 6.

DEFEAT THE LIQUOR INTERESTS. The liquor interests--the enemies of the
race--are again making keen efforts to restore the former low-down
conditions. In some places, we understand, enough petitioners have
already been obtained and the names filed with the commissioners
requesting an election this June. With all good people we join in
hoping that these efforts may utterly fail to restore the saloon.
This should be the desire of all Latter-day Saints, and their prayers
should be supported by their works and votes. In these elections
the wives, mothers and sisters have their golden opportunity with
fathers and brothers to arise and utterly crush the cursed traffic
in drink for which so many have suffered in sweat, and pain, and
tears.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 16, 1912-13, p. 824.

VITALITY AND PATENT MEDICINES. Instead of flocking out to hear
smooth-tongued impostors people should leave them severely alone.
Instead of dosing themselves with patent medicines, they should
learn to keep their bodies healthy by right living (see Doctrine and
Covenants, Sec 89), by inhaling pure air, taking plenty of exercise,
and bathing not only often in fresh water, but also in the sunshine
with which our merciful Father has so abundantly provided us. If there
are cases of sickness, as there will be {303} notwithstanding any
precaution we may take, which common sense and good nursing, or simple
home remedies do not suffice to cure, let us follow the advice of the
Scriptures (James 5:14-16), but if we do not believe in the elders, or
in the prayer of faith saving the sick, let a reputable and faithful
physician be consulted. By all means, let the quack the traveling
fakir, the cure-all nostrum, and the indiscriminate dosing with patent
medicine, be abolished like so much trash.

The young man who would cope with the world, who would be full of
vigor, and fresh for the battle of life, will find his strength in
living according to the word of the Lord; for the promise is that all
"who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in obedience to
the commandments, shall receive health in their navel, and marrow to
their bones, and shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge,
even hidden treasures; and shall run and not be weary, and shall walk
and not faint; and I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the
destroying angel shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not
slay them."--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, June, 1902, p. 624.

STAMP OUT PROFANITY AND VULGARITY. We should stamp out profanity, and
vulgarity, and everything of that character that exists among us; for
all such things are incompatible with the gospel and inconsistent with
the people of God.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1901, p. 2.

SATURDAY'S WORK. A good modern eighth commandment might read something
like this: Do not so overwork and fret on Saturday as to deprive the
Sabbath of the devotions and worship that belong to it as a day of rest.

In the home, Saturday is the day set apart for house cleaning, for
extra cooking, for mending and all sorts of repairs that the Sabbath is
thought to require. In business, Saturday is a day for picking up all
lose ends, for closing up all the unfinished details of a week's work.

{304} The consequences of our modern treatment of the last day of the
week are too often manifested in an indolence and supine indifference
that make our feelings and a total lack of energy almost incompatible
with the spirit of worship. No worn-out man or woman, by the excessive
toil of an early Saturday morning and a late Saturday night, can
properly worship God in spirit and in truth.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 44, July, 1909, p. 295.

PURPOSE OF THE SABBATH. The Sabbath is a day of rest and of worship,
designated and set apart by special commandment of the Lord to the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and we should honor and
keep it holy. We should also teach our children this principle.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1901, pp. 1, 2.

THE MEANING OF SUNDAY. True, Sunday is a day of rest, a change from the
ordinary occupations of the week, but it is more than that. It is a day
of worship, a day in which the spiritual life of man may be enriched.
A day of indolence, a day of physical recuperation is too often a very
different thing from the God-ordained day of rest. Physical exhaustion
and indolence are incompatible with a spirit of worship. A proper
observance of the duties and devotions of the Sabbath day will, by its
change and its spiritual life, give the best rest that men can enjoy on
the Sabbath day.

Saturday evening may be wisely set apart as a time for thoughtful
conversation or helpful reading as an introduction to the Sabbath
day.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 44, July, 1909, p. 297.

WHAT SHALL WE DO ON THE SABBATH DAY? My belief is that it is the duty
of Latter-day Saints to honor the Sabbath day and keep it holy, just as
the Lord has commanded us to do. Go to the house of prayer. Listen to
instructions. Bear your testimony to the truth. Drink at the fountain
of knowledge and of instruction, as it may be opened for us from those
who are inspired to give us instruction. When {305} we go home, get the
family together. Let us sing a few songs. Let us read a chapter or two
in the Bible, or in the Book of Mormon, or in the book of Doctrine and
Covenants. Let us discuss the principles of the gospel which pertain
to advancement in the school of divine knowledge, and in this way
occupy one day in seven. I think it would be profitable for us to do
this.--_M.I.A. Conference,_ June 11, 1916, _Young Woman's Journal,_
Vol. 27, pp. 455-460.

NECESSITY OF SUNDAY WORSHIP. It is imperatively necessary, at all
times, and especially so when our associations do not afford us the
moral and spiritual support which we require for our advancement that
we go to the house of the Lord to worship and mingle with the Saints,
that their moral and spiritual influence may help to correct our
false impressions and restore us to that life which the duties and
obligations or our conscience and true religion impose upon us.

"Good times" are often dangerous times, and social fraternity, if not
of the right character, will prove more harmful than helpful. Let us,
therefore, in the midst of our worldly callings and associations,
not forget that paramount duty which we owe to ourselves and to our
God.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 47, March, 1912, p. 145.

BE WISE IN ALL YOU DO. Leave these poisonous and injurious things
alone; live within your means; get out of debt; and keep out of debt;
do not run faster than you can go safely; be careful and cautious
in what you do; advise with those who have wisdom and experience,
before you leap, lest you leap into the dark; and so guard yourselves
from possible evil and disadvantage, that the Lord can pour out the
blessings of heaven upon you, yes, "open the windows of heaven" and
pour out upon you blessings that you shall scarcely have room to
contain them.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1910, pp. 6, 7.

THE NATURE AND PURPOSE OF FASTING. The law to the {306} Latter-day
Saints, as understood by the authorities of the Church, is that
food and drink are not to be partaken of for twenty-four hours,
"from even to even," and that the Saints are to refrain from all
bodily gratification and indulgences. Fast day being on the Sabbath,
it follows, of course, that all labor is to be abstained from. In
addition, the leading and principal object of the institution of the
fast among the Latter-day Saints was that the poor might be provided
with food and other necessities. It is, therefore, incumbent upon every
Latter-day Saint to give to his bishop, on fast day, the food that he
or his family would consume for the day, that it may be given to the
poor for their benefit and blessing; or, in lieu of the food, that its
equivalent amount, or, if the person is wealthy, a liberal donation, in
money, be so reserved and dedicated to the poor.

Now, while the law requires the Saints in all the world to fast from
"even to even" and to abstain both from food and drink, it can easily
be seen from the Scriptures, and especially from the words of Jesus,
that it is more important to obtain the true spirit of love for God
and man, "purity of heart and simplicity of intention," than it is to
carry out the cold letter of the law. The Lord has instituted the fast
on a reasonable and intelligent basis, and none of his works are vain
or unwise. His law is perfect in this as in other things. Hence, those
who can are required to comply thereto; it is a duty from which they
cannot escape; but let it be remembered that the observance of the
fast day by abstaining twenty-four hours from food and drink is not an
absolute rule, it is no iron-clad law to us, but it is left with the
people as a matter of conscience, to exercise wisdom and discretion.
Many are subject to weakness, others are delicate in health, and others
have nursing babies; of such it should not be required to fast. Neither
should parents compel their little children to fast. I have known
children to cry for something to eat on fast day. In such cases, going
without {307} food will do them no good. Instead, they dread the day
to come, and in place of hailing it, dislike it; while the compulsion
engenders a spirit of rebellion in them, rather than a love for the
Lord and their fellows. Better teach them the principle, and let them
observe it when they are old enough to choose intelligently, than to so
compel them.

But those should fast who can, and all classes among us should be
taught to save the meals which they would eat, or their equivalent, for
the poor. None are exempt from this; it is required of the Saints, old
and young, in every part of the Church. It is no excuse that in some
places there are no poor. In such cases the fast donation should be
forwarded to the proper authorities for transmission to such stakes of
Zion as may stand in need.

So shall we gain favor in the sight of God, and learn the acceptable
fast before him.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, December, 1903, p. 146.

KEEPING THE SABBATH HOLY. To observe the Sabbath day properly is the
plain duty of every Latter-day Saint--and that includes the young
men and young women and the boys and girls. It may seem strange that
it should be necessary to repeat this often-asserted fact. But there
appear to be some people, and sometimes whole communities, who neglect
this duty, and therefore stand in need of this admonition.

What are we required to do on the Sabbath day? The revelations of the
Lord to the Prophet Joseph are very plain on this subject, and these
should govern us, for they are in strict harmony with the teachings of
the Savior. Here are some of the simple requirements:

The Sabbath is appointed unto you to rest from your labors.

The Sabbath is a special day for you to worship, to pray, and to show
zeal and ardor in your religious faith and duty--to pay devotions to
the Most High.

{308} The Sabbath is a day when you are required to offer your time and
attention in worship of the Lord, whether in meeting, in the home, or
wherever you may be--that is the thought that should occupy your mind.

The Sabbath day is a day when, with your brethren and sisters, you
should attend the meetings of the Saints, prepared to partake of the
sacrament of the Lord's supper; having first confessed your sins before
the Lord and your brethren and sisters, and forgiven your fellows as
you expect the Lord to forgive you.

On the Sabbath day you are to do no other thing than to prepare your
food with singleness of heart, that your fasting may be perfect, and
your joy may be full. This is what the Lord calls fasting and prayer.

The reason for this required course upon the Sabbath day is also
plainly stated in the revelations. It is that one may more fully keep
himself unspotted from the world; and to this end, also, the Saints are
required to go to the house of prayer and offer up their sacraments on
the Sabbath day.

Now, what is the promise to the Saints who observe the Sabbath? The
Lord declares that inasmuch as they do this with cheerful hearts and
countenances, the fulness of the earth is theirs: "the beasts of the
field and the fowls of the air, and that which climbeth upon the
trees and walketh upon the earth. Yea, and the herb, and the good
things which cometh of the earth, whether for food or for raiment,
or for houses, or for barns, or for orchards, or for gardens, or for
vineyards." (Doc. and Cov. 59.)

These are all made for the benefit and use of man to please the eye and
to gladden the heart, to strengthen the body and to enliven the soul.
All are promised to those who keep the commandments, and among the
commandments is this important one, to observe properly the Sabbath day.

{309} The Lord is not pleased with people who know these things and do
them not.

Men are not resting from their labors when they plow, and plant and
haul and dig. They are not resting when they linger around the home all
day on Sunday, doing odd jobs that they have been too busy to do on
other days.

Men are not showing zeal and ardor in their religious faith and duty
when they hustle off early Sunday morning on the cars, in teams, in
automobiles, to the canyons, the resorts, and to visit friends or
places of amusement with their wives and children. They are not paying
their devotions in this way to the Most High.

Not in seeking pleasure and recreation do they offer their time and
attention in the worship of the Lord; nor can they thus rejoice in the
spirit of forgiveness and worship that comes with partaking of the holy
sacrament.

Boys and young men are not fasting with singleness of heart that their
joy may be full when they spend the Sabbath day loafing around the
village ice-cream stand or restaurant, playing games, or in buggy
riding, fishing, shooting, or engaged in physical sports, excursions
and outings. Such is not the course that will keep them unspotted from
the world, but rather one that will deprive them of the rich promises
of the Lord, giving them sorrow instead of joy, and unrest and anxiety
instead of the peace that comes with works of righteousness.

Let us play and take recreation to our hearts' content during other
days, but on the Sabbath let us rest, worship, go to the house of
prayer, partake of the sacrament, cat our food with singleness of
heart, and pay our devotions to God, that the fulness of the earth may
be ours, and that we may have peace in this world and eternal life in
the world to come.

"But," says one, "in our settlement we have no other {310} day for
amusement and sports, excursions and outings, ball games and races."

Then demand one.

Is it possible that parents, in the face of the promises of the Lord,
will deny a day in the week when their children may have recreation;
and so force them to spend the Sabbath in sports!

One prominent man, in one of the northern stakes, where ball games and
other sports are said to be the rule on Sunday, asked what could be
done to remedy the evil. He was told to try a half holiday on one of
the week days.

"Then," he replied, "we can have no change nor remedy. Here are
hundreds of acres of hay and ripening fields crying for workmen, and we
cannot spare our boys for play."

The best reply to such an argument is the question: "Which is best--to
let the hay go to ruin, or the boy?" Let the hay go; save the boy.
He is worth more than all your material possessions. Save him in the
spirit of the gospel--protect him from Sabbath breaking--by offering
a little temporal sacrifice, and the Lord will keep his promise to
you. Get together in your ward, unitedly select a day for play and
recreation; and like faithful Saints demand that the Sabbath day, as
far as you and yours are concerned, shall be devoted to the Lord our
God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 13, 1909-10, pp. 842-844.

DO NOT ROB THE SABBATH DAY. It is incumbent on members of the Church
to so plan their work that there shall be no excuse for robbing the
Lord's day of its sanctity. To this end let the boys and girls have
a half holiday during the week, which may be profitably used for
recreations, leaving the Sabbath for spiritual culture and worship. It
is equally obligatory that we so plan our amusements that these shall
not interfere with our worship. Let therefore some other night than
Saturday be provided for the purpose. The Lord has commanded his people
to observe {311} the Sabbath day to keep it holy, and on that day to go
to the house of prayer and offer up their sacraments in righteousness
with willing hearts and penitent spirits.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 12,
1909, p. 315.

MAN MUST BE MASTER OF HIMSELF. No man is safe unless he is master of
himself; and there is no tyrant more merciless or more to be dreaded
than an uncontrollable appetite or passion. We will find that if we
give way to the groveling appetites of the flesh and follow them up,
that the end will be invariably bitter, injurious and sorrowful,
both to the individual and society. It is hurtful in example as well
as in its individual effects; dangerous and hurtful to the unwary;
while the denial of these appetites--the crucifixion of the flesh, so
to speak--and an aspiration for something noble; whenever possible,
doing good to our fellow creatures, hoping for the future, laying up
treasures in heaven, where moth and rust cannot corrupt, and where
thieves cannot break through and steal--all these things will bring
everlasting happiness; happiness for this world and the world to come.
If there is no pleasure in the world except that which we experience
in the gratification of our physical desires--eating, drinking, gay
associations, and the pleasures of the world--then the enjoyments of
the world are bubbles, there is nothing in them, there is no lasting
benefit or happiness to be derived from them.--_Deseret Weekly News,_
Vol. 33, 1884, p. 130.

{312}



CHAPTER XV

MANY DUTIES OF MAN

THE OBJECT OF MAN'S EXISTENCE. The object of our being here is
to do the will of the Father as it is done in heaven, to work
righteousness in the earth, to subdue wickedness and put it under our
feet, to conquer sin and the adversary of our souls, to rise above
the imperfections and weaknesses of poor, fallen humanity, by the
inspiration of Almighty God and his power made manifest, and thus
become indeed the saints and servants of the Lord in the earth.--_Apr.
C. R.,_ 1902, p. 85.

WE DEAL WITH THE LORD. We are dealing with our faith and consciences,
you are dealing not with me, not with the Presidency of the Church,
but with the Lord. I am not dealing with men respecting my tithing, my
dealings are with the Lord; that is, with reference to my own conduct
in the Church as a tithe-payer, and with reference to my observance
of the other laws and rules of the Church; if I fail to observe the
laws of the Church, I am responsible to my God, and will have to
answer to him, by and by, for my neglect of duty, and I may have to
answer to the Church for my fellowship. If I do my duty, according to
my understanding of the requirements that the Lord has made of me,
then I ought to have a conscience void of offense; I ought to have
satisfaction in my soul, in the consciousness that I have simply done
my duty as I understand it, and I will risk the consequences. With me
it is a matter between me and the Lord; so it is with every one of
us.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1911, p. 6.

NECESSITY FOR ALL TO ACCOMPLISH THEIR MISSIONS. He that sent his Only
Begotten Son into the world to accomplish the mission which he did,
also sent every soul within the sound of my voice, and indeed every
man and woman in the world, to accomplish a mission, and that mission
cannot {313} be accomplished by neglect; nor by indifference; nor
can it be accomplished in ignorance. We must learn our duty; learn
the requirements that the Lord has made at our hands, and understand
the responsibilities that he has placed upon us. We should learn the
obligation that we are under to God and to each other, and that we are
under also to the cause of Zion, that has been restored to the earth
in the latter days. These things are essential, and we cannot prosper
in spiritual things, we cannot grow in knowledge and understanding,
our minds cannot expand in the knowledge of God, or in wisdom, nor
in the gifts of the Holy Spirit, without we devote our thoughts and
our efforts toward our own betterment, toward the increase of our own
wisdom, and knowledge in the things of God.

We labor day by day for the bread that perishes, and we devote but
a few hours, comparatively, in seeking to obtain the bread of life.
Our thoughts, in great measure, are placed upon worldly things, the
things that perish, and therefore we are prone to neglect the higher
duties that devolve upon us as the children of our Father, and to
forget, in some measure, the greater obligations that rest upon us. It
is therefore proper, and indeed it becomes the duty of those who are
placed upon the towers as watchmen in Zion, to exhort the people to
diligence, to prayerfulness, to humility, to a love of the truth that
has been revealed to them, and to earnest devotion to the work of the
Lord, which is intended for their individual salvation, and so far as
they have influence upon others, the salvation of those whom they may
have power to influence to move in the right direction; not that I can
save any man, nor that any one man can save any other man or fit him
for exaltation in the kingdom of God. This is not given to me to do
for others, nor is it given to any man to be a Savior in this sense,
or in this way, to his fellowman; but men can set an example; men can
urge the precepts of the gospel. Men can proclaim the {314} truth to
others, and can point out the way to them in which to walk, and if they
will harken to their counsel, listen to their admonitions and be led
by them, they themselves will seek the path of life and they will walk
in it, and obtain their exaltation for themselves. And thus the work
required of us by the Lord is an individual work, it devolves upon each
individual alike. No man can be saved in the kingdom of God in sin.
No man will ever be forgiven of his sins by the just judge, except be
repent of his sins. No man will ever be freed from the power of death
unless he is born again as the Lord Almighty has decreed, and declared
to the world by the mouth of his Son in the meridian of time, and as he
has declared it again in this dispensation through the Prophet Joseph
Smith. Men can only be saved and exalted in the kingdom of God in
righteousness, therefore we must repent of our sins, and walk in the
light as Christ is in the light, that his blood may cleanse us from all
sins, and that we may have fellowship with God and receive of his glory
and exaltation.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 4.

GOD HONORS THOSE WHO HONOR HIM. Though the Lord should try me by
withholding his blessings from me, and making me to drink to the very
dregs the bitter cup of poverty, that should make no difference to me.
The point is, what is the law of God? And if I know that law, it is my
duty to obey it, though I suffer death in consequence. Many a man has
gone to the stake in obedience, as he believed, to the commandments of
God. Not one of the ancient disciples who were chosen of Jesus Christ,
escaped martyrdom, except Judas and John. Judas betrayed the Lord, and
then sacrificed his own life; and John received the promise of the Lord
that he should live until He came again to the earth. All the others
were put to death, some crucified, some dragged in the streets of Rome,
some thrown from pinnacles, and some stoned to death. What for? For
obeying the law of God and bearing testimony to that which they knew to
be {315} true. So may it be today. But let the spirit of this gospel
be so imbedded in my soul that though I go through poverty, through
tribulation, through persecution, or to death, let me and my house
serve God and keep his laws. However, the promise is that you shall be
blessed through obedience. God will honor those who honor him, and will
remember those who remember him. He will uphold and sustain all those
who sustain truth and are faithful to it. God help us, therefore, to be
faithful to the truth, now and forever.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, pp. 49, 50.

QUALIFICATIONS OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS. Now we all need patience,
forbearance, forgiveness, humility, charity, love unfeigned,
devotion to the truth, abhorrence of sin and wickedness, rebellion
and disobedience to the requirements of the gospel. These are the
qualifications requisite to Latter-day Saints and to becoming
Latter-day Saints and members in good standing in the Church of Jesus
Christ and heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus Christ. No member
in good standing in the Church will be drunken or riotous or profane
or will take advantage of his brother or his neighbor, or will violate
the principles of virtue and honor and righteousness. No member of
the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in good standing will
ever be chargeable with such offenses as these, because members will
avoid these evils, and they will live above them. Then we have a
mission in the world: each man, each woman, each child who has grown to
understanding or to the years of accountability, ought to be an example
to the world. They ought not only to be qualified to preach the truth,
to bear testimony of the truth, but ought to live so that the very life
they live, the very words they speak, their every action in life will
be a sermon to the unwary and to the ignorant, teaching them goodness,
purity, uprightness, faith in God and love for the human family.--_Apr.
C. R.,_ 1916, pp. 6, 7.

PERFECTION IN OUR SPHERE. I sincerely hope that the {316} spirit of
the conference will abide with us, will go with us to our homes, and
that we will be able to continue to build on the foundations of the
gospel of the Son of God until we become perfect, even as our Father
in heaven is perfect, according to the sphere and intelligence that we
act in and possess. I do not expect that any of us will ever become in
mortality quite so perfect as God is perfect; but in the spheres in
which we are called to act, and according to the capacity and breadth
of intelligence that we possess, in our sphere, and in the existence of
the talent, the ability, and intelligence that God has given to us, we
may become as perfect in our sphere as God is perfect in his higher and
more exalted sphere. I believe that.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 140.

LET EVERY MAN LIVE TO BEAR CLOSEST INSPECTION. Let every man's life be
so that his character will bear the closest inspection, and that it may
be seen as an open book, so that he will have nothing to shrink from
or be ashamed of. Let all men who are elevated to positions of trust
in the Church live so that no man can point to their faults, because
they will have no faults; so that no man can justly accuse them of
wrongdoing, because they do no wrong; that no man can point out their
defects as "human" and as "weak mortals," because they are living
up to the principles of the gospel, and are not merely "weak human
creatures," devoid of the Spirit of God and the power to live above
sin. That is the way for all men to live in the kingdom of God.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1906, pp. 9, 10.

NEED OF INDIVIDUAL RESPONSIBILITY. It is not safe for men or women
to conclude that because they have fulfilled carefully their public
responsibilities they have done all that is required of them. Public
requirements are changeable. Public demands vary with the times.
Sometimes they are strict and sometimes they are very lax. Public
sentiment becomes fickle and it is often indifferent to the conduct of
individuals who take license from a public indifference to wrongdoing.
{317} Individual responsibility is more concerned with the duties which
men owe to their God whose requirements are positive and constant. When
men feel that they are ever under an All-seeing Eye, their conduct is
measured in the strictest terms. They are not subject to lapses of
public sentiment.

The first and highest standard of correct living is to be found in
that individual responsibility which keeps men good for the truth's
sake. It is not difficult for men who are true to themselves to be
true to others. Men who honor God in their private lives do not need
the restraint of public opinion which may not only be indifferent but
positively wrong. It is by the individual responsibilities which men
feel that they are able to place themselves on the right side of all
public questions. Those who neglect the inner life are dependent upon
public guidance which leads them into all sorts of inconsistencies.

To walk safely and steadfastly without leaning upon the arm of flesh
is the individual duty of every Latter-day Saint. Such a duty becomes
a responsibility which men owe to themselves and to their God. The
Saints should study their responsibilities, both public and individual,
and find out, if they can, just what they are.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
December, 1909, Vol. 44, p. 519.

CONQUER OURSELVES FIRST. I feel very grateful for the excellent peace
and spirit which has pervaded all our meetings. It is true we are all
engaged in a warfare, and all of us should be valiant warriors in the
cause in which we are engaged. Our first enemy we will find within
ourselves. It is a good thing to overcome that enemy first and bring
ourselves into subjection to the will of the Father, and into strict
obedience to the principles of life and salvation which he has given
to the world for the salvation of men. When we shall have conquered
ourselves, it will be well for us to wage our war without, against
false teachings, {318} false doctrines, false customs, habits and
ways, against error, unbelief, the follies of the world that are so
prevalent, and against infidelity, and false science, under the name of
science, and every other thing that strikes at the foundations of the
principles set forth in the doctrine of Christ for the redemption of
men and the salvation of their souls.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 128.

LET US CONQUER OURSELVES. Let us conquer ourselves, and then go to
and conquer all the evil that we see around us, as far as we possibly
can. And we will do it without using violence; we will do it without
interfering with the agency of men or of women. We will do it by
persuasion, by long-suffering, by patience, and by forgiveness and love
unfeigned, by which we will win the hearts, the affections and the
souls of the children of men to the truth as God has revealed it to us.
We will never have peace, nor justice, nor truth, until we look to the
only true fountain for it, and receive from the fountainhead.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1906, p. 129.

CHARITY THE GREATEST PRINCIPLE. Charity, or love, is the greatest
principle in existence. If we can lend a helping hand to the oppressed,
if we can aid those who are despondent and in sorrow, if we can uplift
and ameliorate the condition of mankind, it is our mission to do it, it
is an essential part of our religion to do it._--Apr. C. R.,_ 1918, p.
4.

LOOK FOR GOOD; NOT FOR EVIL. Change the focus of your view, and of
your eye, from watching for evil to watching for that which is good,
that which is pure, and leading and prompting those who err into that
path which has no error in it, and that will not admit of mistakes.
Look for good in men, and where they fail to possess it, try to build
it up in them; try to increase the good in them; look for the good;
build up the good; sustain the good; and speak as little about the
evil as you possibly can. It does not do any good to magnify evil, to
publish evil, or to promulgate {319} it by tongue or pen. There is no
good to be obtained by it. It is better to bury the evil and magnify
the good, and prompt all men to forsake evil and learn to do good;
and let our mission be to save mankind and to teach and guide in the
path of righteousness, and not to sit as judges and pass judgment upon
evil-doers, but rather to be saviors of men.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 8.

ESTIMATE MEN BY THEIR NOBLE DEEDS. One fruitful source of apostasy
from the Church comes from an inclination on the part of those who
apostatize to consider the small, mostly unintentionally committed
errors of its officers, rather than the broader and more important
labors which enter into their experience. Young men so inclined
turn from the infinite truth of the gospel, and the mighty plan of
salvation, the eternal purposes of God, to carp and cavil upon the
insignificant actions and the imperfect achievements of men, judging
the inspiring magnitude of the former by the disagreeable and tiresome
detail of the latter. Many of the serious annoyances of communal life
among the Saints would be obliterated entirely, if men would search for
the great and noble aspirations actuating their neighbors, rather than
for the imperfect sidelights that lay bare their puny shortcomings.
Those who wish to advance in the world will avoid soul-destroying,
mind-narrowing thoughts, and devote the days allotted to them, which it
will be found are none too numerous, in studying the greater, nobler,
and grander subjects that tend to build character, provide happiness,
and create harmony with the mighty purposes of the Church and its
founder, the Lord Jesus Christ.

Let us estimate our brethren by their best desires and noblest
aspirations, not by their trifling shortcomings and failures.
We estimate the majesty of the Wasatch by Monte Christo, Baldy,
Observatory, the mighty Cottonwoods, Clayton, Timpanogos, and Nebo--its
loftiest peaks--not by its rolling elevations or hillocky spurs, rocky
ravines or trifling {320} canyons. So also let us judge our fellows,
and so the Church. It is the better way.--_Improvement Era,_ March,
1902, Vol. 5, p. 388.

LET US SUSTAIN ONE ANOTHER. Let us sustain Christ, his people, and his
cause of righteousness and redemption; let us sustain one another in
the right, and kindly admonish one another in regard to wrongdoing,
that we may be friends and saviors on Mount Zion, one for another, and
that we may help the weak and strengthen them, encourage the doubtful
and bring light to their right understanding as far as it is possible,
that we may be instrumental in the hands of God of being saviors among
men. Not that we have power to save men. We have not; but we have power
to show them how they can obtain salvation through obedience to the
laws of God. We can show them how to walk in order to be saved, for we
have the right to do that, we have knowledge and understanding as to
how to do it, and it is our privilege to teach it and to enforce it by
example as well as by precept among our associates wherever we are in
the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, pp. 9, 10.

DO NOT BEAR MALICE AGAINST ONE ANOTHER. Brethren and sisters, we
want you to be united. We hope and pray that you will go from this
conference to your homes feeling in your hearts and from the depths
of your souls to forgive one another, and never from this time forth
to bear malice toward another fellow creature. I do not care whether
he is a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints or
not, whether he is a friend or a foe, whether he is good or bad. It
is extremely hurtful for any man holding the priesthood, and enjoying
the gift of the Holy Ghost, to harbor a spirit of envy, or malice, or
retaliation, or intolerance toward or against his fellowmen. We ought
to say in our hearts, let God judge between me and thee, but as for
me, I will forgive. I want to say to you that Latter-day Saints who
harbor a feeling of unforgiveness {321} in their souls are more guilty
and more censurable than the one who has sinned against them. Go home
and dismiss envy and hatred from your hearts; dismiss the feeling of
unforgiveness; and cultivate in your souls that spirit of Christ which
cried out upon the cross, "Father, forgive them; for they know not what
they do." This is the spirit that Latter-day Saints ought to possess
all the day long. The man who has that spirit in his heart and keeps it
there will never have any trouble with his neighbor; he will never have
any difficulties to bring before the bishop, nor high council; but he
will always be at peace with himself, at peace with his neighbors, and
at peace with God. It is a good thing to be at peace with God.--_Oct.
C. R.,_ 1902, pp. 86, 87.

HONOR YOURSELVES AND YOUR NEIGHBORS. We admonish, we beseech our
brothers and sisters, in the gospel of Jesus Christ, not only to honor
themselves by a proper course of living, but also to honor and love and
be charitable to their neighbors, every one of them. We admonish you
not only to keep the greatest of all the commandments that has ever
been given of God to man, to love the Lord your God, with all your
heart, and mind, and strength, but we exhort you also to observe that
second law, next unto it, to love your neighbors as yourselves; return
good for evil, do not revile others because you are or may be reviled.
We have no need to tear down the houses of other people (using this
expression as a symbol). We are perfectly willing that they should live
in the homes they have erected for themselves, and we will try to show
them a better way. While we will not condemn that which they love and
cherish above all other things in the world, we will endeavor to show
them a better way and build them a better house, and then invite them
kindly, in the spirit of Christ, of true Christianity, to enter the
better dwelling. This is the principle, and I wish to impress it upon
you this morning. I desire to impress, if I can, upon the minds of the
parents the necessity of properly {322} instructing and teaching their
children with reference to this glorious principle, charity and love,
that love for our neighbor that will enable us to cherish his rights as
sacredly as we cherish our own, to defend his rights and liberties, put
up the fallen bars in the fences of our neighbors that are carelessly
left down, just as we would put our own bars up surrounding our own
fields, in order to protect our crops from the ravages of stray
animals.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1917, p. 4.

AVOID COURTS. Be reconciled to each other. Do not go to the courts of
the Church nor to the courts of the land for litigation. Settle your
own troubles and difficulties; and, as Bishop Hunter used to say, which
is an axiom that cannot be disputed, there is only one way in which a
difficulty existing between man and man can be truly settled, and that
is when they get together and settle it between them. The courts cannot
settle troubles between me and my brother._--Oct. C. R.,_ 1916, pp. 6,
7.

LET US LIVE OUR RELIGION. I will say now to all of the Latter-day
Saints: Let us live our religion; let us pay our tithing and be
blessed; let us remember the poor and the needy, and sustain and help
them; let us visit the sick and afflicted, and administer consolation
unto them; let us help the weak; let us do all in our power to build
up Zion, to establish righteousness in the earth, and to plant in the
hearts of the people the glorious truth that Jesus is the Christ,
the Redeemer of the world, that Joseph Smith is a prophet of the
living God, whom the Lord raised up in these last days to restore
the everlasting gospel and the power of the holy priesthood to the
world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 88.

LET US BE TRUE TO THE FAITH. We should set an example; we should be
true to the faith, as Brother Stephens sings to us; true to the faith!
We should be true to our covenants, true to our God, and true to one
another, and to the interests of Zion, no matter what the consequences
may be, no matter what may result. I can tell you that the man {323}
who is not true to Zion and to the interests of the people will be the
man who will be found, by and by, left out and in a pitiable spiritual
condition. The man who stays with the kingdom of God, the man who is
true to this people, the man who keeps himself pure and unspotted from
the world, is the man that God will accept, that God will uphold, that
he will sustain, and that will prosper in the land, whether he be in
the enjoyment of his liberty or be confined in prison cells, it makes
no difference where he is, he will come out all right.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1906, p. 9.

CHURCH DUTIES ARE PARAMOUNT. Our duties in the Church should be, I
think, paramount to every other interest in the world. It is true that
we are under the necessity of looking after our worldly interests. It
is, of course, necessary for us to labor with our hands and our minds,
in our various occupations for obtaining the necessaries of life. It
is essential that the Latter-day Saints should be industrious and
persevering in all the labors that devolve upon them, for it is written
that "the inhabitants of Zion shall remember their labors, inasmuch as
they are appointed to labor, in all faithfulness; for the idler shall
be had in remembrance before the Lord." Again it is written: "Let every
man be diligent in all things. And the idler shall not have place in
the Church, except he repent and mend his ways." Again: "Thou shalt
not be idle; for he that is idle shall not eat the bread nor wear
the garments of the laborer." But in all our labors in life, in all
the cares that beset us, and the temporal responsibilities that rest
upon us, we should put uppermost in our thoughts, and highest in our
appreciation and love, the cause of Zion, which is indeed the cause of
truth and righteousness.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, p. 2. See Doc. and Cov.
42:42; 68:30; 75:29.

WE SHOULD STUDY THE GOSPEL. I believe it is good to seek knowledge out
of the best books, to learn the histories of nations, to be able to
comprehend the purposes of {324} God with reference to the nations of
the earth; and I believe that one of the most important things, and
perhaps more important to us than studying the history of the world, is
that we study and become thoroughly acquainted with the principles of
the gospel, that they may be established in our hearts and souls, above
all other things, to qualify us to go out into the world to preach
and teach them. We may know all about the philosophy of the ages and
the history of the nations of the earth; we may study the wisdom and
knowledge of man and get all the information that we can acquire in a
lifetime of research and study, but all of it put together will never
qualify any one to become a minister of the gospel unless he has the
knowledge and spirit of the first principles of the gospel of Jesus
Christ.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 138.

ENCOURAGE SINGING. It delights my heart to see our little children
learning to sing, and to see the people, our people everywhere,
improving their talents as good singers. Everywhere we go among our
people, we find sweet voices and talent for music. I believe that this
is a manifestation to us of the purpose of the Lord in this direction
toward our people, that they will excel in these things, as they should
excel in every other good thing.--_Apr. C. R.,_ Sunday School, 1904, p.
81.

CULTIVATE SINGING. I can remember when I was a little boy, hearing my
father sing. I do not know how much of a singer he was, for at that
time I was not capable of judging as to the quality of his singing,
but the hymns he sang became familiar to me, even in the days of my
childhood. I believe that I can sing them still, although I am not
much of a singer. When young men go out into the world to preach the
gospel, they will find it very beneficial for them to know how to sing
the songs of Zion. I repeat the admonition and request made by Brother
McMurrin, who {325} has recently returned from a lengthy mission to
Europe, that the young men who are eligible to preach the gospel, and
who are likely to be called into the missionary field, begin at once
to improve their talent to sing, and do not think it is beneath their
dignity to join the choirs of the wards in which they live and learn
how to sing. When we listen to this choir, under the leadership of
Brother Stephens, we listen to music, and music is truth. Good music
is gracious praise of God. It is delightsome to the ear, and it is one
of our most acceptable methods of worshiping God. And those who sing
in the choir and in all the choirs of the Saints, should sing with the
spirit and with the understanding. They should not sing merely because
it is a profession, or because they have a good voice; but they should
sing also because they have the spirit of it, and can enter into the
spirit of prayer and praise to God who gave them their sweet voices. My
soul is always lifted up, and my spirit cheered and comforted, when I
hear good music. I rejoice in it very much indeed.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899,
pp. 68, 69.

BE FREE FROM DEBT. One of these subjects is, that in the time of
prosperity, which we are now enjoying, it is highly proper for the
Latter-day Saints to get out of debt. I have unceasingly urged this
thought upon the brethren for the past year or more. Wherever I have
had the opportunity of speaking, I have scarcely ever forgotten to
hold out to the people the necessity--that I feel, at least--of our
settling our obligations and freeing ourselves from debt in the day
of prosperity. Our experience in the years that have passed must have
led us to the conclusion that we have periods of prosperity, followed
by periods of depression. We have now had a long period of success
and prosperity, and we may expect, almost at any time, to see these
conditions change and a time of depression spread over the land and
over the people. I would say, in connection with this subject, that
one of the best ways that I know of to pay my {326} obligations to my
brother, my neighbor, or business associate, is for me first to pay my
obligations to the Lord. I can pay more of my debts to my neighbors, if
I have contracted them, after I have met my honest obligations with the
Lord, than I can by neglecting the latter; and you can do the same. If
you desire to prosper, and to be free men and women and a free people,
first meet your just obligations to God, and then meet your obligations
to your fellowman. Bishop Hunter used to put the matter in these words:
"Brethren, pay your tithing and be blessed," and that is just what I
mean.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1903, p. 2.

WHAT THE LORD REQUIRES OF HIS SAINTS. There is a circumstance recorded
in the Scriptures, that has been brought forcibly to my mind while
listening to the remarks of the elders who have spoken to us during
conference. A young man came to Jesus and asked what good things he
should do that he might have eternal life. Jesus said unto him, "Keep
the commandments." The young man asked which of them. Then Jesus
enumerated to him some of the commandments that he was to keep--he
should not murder, nor commit adultery, nor steal, nor bear false
witness, but he should honor his father and mother, and love his
neighbor as himself, etc. Said the young man, "All these I have kept
from my youth up: what lack I yet?" Jesus said, "If thou wilt be
perfect, go and sell that thou hast, and give to the poor, and thou
shalt have treasure in heaven: and come and follow me." And we are told
that he turned away sorrowful, because he had great possessions. He
would not hearken to, nor obey the law of God in this matter. Not that
Jesus required of the young man to go and sell all that he possessed
and give it away; that is not the principle involved. The great
principle involved is that which the elders of Israel are endeavoring
to enforce upon the minds of the Latter-day Saints today. When the
young man turned away in sorrow, Jesus said to his disciples, "A rich
man {327} shall hardly enter into the kingdom of heaven." (See Matt.
19:16-23.)

Is this because the rich man is rich? No. May not the rich man, who has
the light of God in his heart, who possesses the principle and spirit
of truth, and who understands the principle of God's government and law
in the world, enter into the kingdom of heaven as easily, and be as
acceptable there as the poor man may? Precisely. God is not a respecter
of persons. The rich man may enter into the kingdom of heaven as freely
as the poor, if he will bring his heart and affections into subjection
to the law of God and to the principle of truth; if he will place his
affections upon God, his heart upon the truth, and his soul upon the
accomplishment of God's purposes, and not fix his affections and his
hopes upon the things of the world. Here is the difficulty, and this
was the difficulty with the young man. He had great possessions, and he
preferred to rely upon his wealth rather than forsake all and follow
Christ. If he had possessed the spirit of truth in his heart to have
known the will of God, and to have loved the Lord with all his heart
and his neighbor as himself, he would have said to the Lord, "Yea,
Lord, I will do as you require, I will go and sell all that I have, and
give it to the poor." If he had had it in his heart to do this, that
alone might have been sufficient, and the demand would probably have
stopped there; for undoubtedly the Lord did not deem it essential for
him to go and give his riches away, or to sell his possessions and give
the proceeds away, in order that he might be perfect, for that, in a
measure, would have been improvident. Yet, if it had required all this
to test him and to prove him, to see whether he loved the Lord with all
his heart, mind, and strength, and his neighbor as himself, then he
ought to have been willing to do it; and if he had been, he would have
lacked nothing and would have received the gift of eternal life, which
is the greatest gift of God, and which can be received on no {328}
other principle than the one mentioned by Jesus to the young man. If
you will read the sixth lecture on faith, in the book of Doctrine and
Covenants, you will learn that no man can obtain the gift of eternal
life unless he is willing to sacrifice all earthly things in order to
obtain it. We cannot do this so long as our affections are fixed upon
the world.

It is true that we are in a measure of the earth, earthy; we belong to
the world. Our affections and our souls are here; our treasures are
here, and where the treasure is there the heart is. But if we will lay
up our treasures in heaven; if we will wean our affections from the
things of this world, and say to the Lord our God, "Father, not my
will, but thine be done," then may the will of God be done on earth as
it is done in heaven, and the kingdom of God in its power and glory
will be established upon the earth. Sin and Satan will be bound and
banished from the earth, and not until we attain to this condition of
mind and faith will this be done.

Then let the Saints unite; let them hearken to the voices of the
servants of God that are sounded in their ears; let them hearken to
their counsels and give heed to the truth; let them seek their own
salvation, for, so far as I am concerned, I am so selfish that I
am seeking after my salvation, and I know that I can find it only
in obedience to the laws of God, in keeping the commandments, in
performing works of righteousness, following in the footsteps of our
file leader, Jesus the Exemplar and the Head of all. He is the Way of
life, he is the Light of the world, he is the Door by which we must
enter, in order that we may have a place with him in the celestial
kingdom of God.--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 18, 1877, pp. 133-135.

CULTIVATE GRATITUDE. We are almost daily put under obligations to one
another, especially to friends and acquaintances, and the sense of
obligation creates within us feelings of thankfulness and appreciation
which we call gratitude. The spirit of gratitude is always pleasant and
satisfying {329} because it carries with it a sense of helpfulness to
others; it begets love and friendship, and engenders divine influence.
Gratitude is said to be the memory of the heart.

And where there is an absence of gratitude, either to God or man, there
is the presence of vanity and the spirit of self-sufficiency. Speaking
of Israel, Paul says: "Because that, when they knew God, they glorified
him not as God, neither were thankful; but became vain in their
imaginations, and their foolish heart was darkened." (Rom. 1:21)

Thomas Gibbons expresses in verse most beautifully the idea of
ingratitude:

  "That man may last, but never lives,
  Who much receives, but nothing gives;
  Whom none can love, whom none can thank,
  Creation's blot, creation's blank."

Naturally people feel grateful to those who have done them a kindness,
and the feeling of gratitude is generally a sufficient compensation
for those who have done a kind and unselfish act. But when one does
a favor for another, and behind that favor is the secret and selfish
intent that the gratitude which is awakened by the favor shall become a
debt which the receiver at some time and in some way must repay to the
selfish needs of the one who bestowed the favor, then gratitude becomes
a debt which it is expected will be paid.

An act of apparent kindness can never result in good when it is
intended to put any man under obligations that deprive him of his
freedom to act. That is the characteristic of a politician. It is
buying up one's freedom, and such a bargain is worse upon the man who
seeks to make it than Shylock's contract for a pound of flesh.

When we win the friendship of others, because that friendship is
helpful and encouraging to us, and because we need it for our happiness
in life, gratitude of others toward us has a {330} beautiful and
lasting charm. That is the gratitude which Saints enjoy.

It is always safer and better to enjoy the gratitude which we feel
to others than to set store upon the gratitude which we think others
should have toward us. The grateful man sees so much in the world to be
thankful for, and with him the good outweighs the evil. Love overpowers
jealousy, and light drives darkness out of his life. Pride destroys
our gratitude and sets up selfishness in its place. How much happier
we are in the presence of a grateful and loving soul, and how careful
we should be to cultivate, through the medium of a prayerful life, a
thankful attitude toward God and man!--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38,
April, 1903, pp. 242, 243.

BACKBITING. In a letter recently received by me, the following request
and question were submitted for my opinion: "I would like you to define
backbiting. There seems to be a difference of opinion respecting the
meaning of the term. Some claim that so long as you speak the truth
about a person, it is not backbiting, no matter what you say or how you
say it. Would it not be better, if we knew a person had faults, to go
to him privately and labor with him, than to go to others and speak of
his faults?"

Nothing could be farther from the spirit and genius of the gospel than
to suppose that we are always justified in speaking the truth about a
person, however harmful the truth to him may be. The gospel teaches
us the fundamental principles of repentance, and we have no right
to discredit a man in the estimation of his fellowmen when he has
truly repented and God has forgiven him. We are constantly beset by
temptation, and often say and do things of which we immediately repent,
and no doubt, if our repentance is genuine, it is always acceptable to
our Heavenly Father. After he has accepted the contrition of the human
heart and forgiven men their trespasses, it is dangerous for {331} us
to hold up their evil deeds for the contempt of the world.

As a rule, it is not necessary to be constantly offering advice to
those who in our judgment are possessed of some fault. In the first
place, our judgments may be in error, and in the second place, we
may be dealing with a man who is strongly imbued with the spirit
of repentance, and who, conscious of his weakness, is constantly
struggling to overcome it. The utmost care, therefore, should be
observed in all our language that implies a reproach of others. As
a general rule, backbiting is better determined by the spirit and
purpose that actuate us in speaking of things we consider faults in
others than in the words themselves. A man or woman who possesses the
Spirit of God will soon detect in his or her own feelings the spirit
of backbiting, as that spirit is present in the remarks that are made
concerning others. The question of backbiting, therefore, is probably
best determined by the ancient rule that, "the letter killeth but the
spirit giveth life."--_Juvenile Instructor,_ October 15, 1904, Vol. 39,
p. 625.

DO NOT INFLICT WOUNDS, BUT HEAL WOUNDS. Almost anyone can inflict a
wound. It may be made by a word, a slight, or by general conduct. But
the healing of a wound is an art not acquired by practice, alone, but
by the loving tenderness that comes from universal good will and a
sympathetic interest in the welfare and happiness of others. If people
were always as ready to administer kindness as they are indifferent to
the pain of others--if they were as patient to heal as they are quick
to wound--many an unkind word would never be spoken, many a slight
would be avoided. The art of healing is really one of the highest
qualities and attributes of man; it is a characteristic of a great and
noble soul; the sure indication of generous impulse.

In the discipline of the home, of the school, and social life, the
infliction of wounds may be unavoidable, if they be {332} not an actual
necessity; but wounds should never be left open to fester--they should
be bound up and cared for until they are healed. Perhaps the most
perfect ideal in the art of healing is the mother whose tender and
gracious love asserts itself in taking away the sting of a deserved
or undeserved punishment. How her love heals every wound! How quick
her caresses bind up and soothe! The example of her life is the wisdom
which love teaches. In the school, children may suffer humiliation into
which their wayward or careless conduct has brought them, and their
punishment may be just; but their wounds the teacher should never leave
unhealed. Nature wounds us when we violate her laws; but nature has
her antiseptic methods of treating and healing every wound. The wise
teacher has his also.

The cultivation of kindly thoughts and sentiments towards others is
always helpful in the art of healing. It is sometimes helpful to
lift ourselves out of our own shells in which, by our surroundings
and habits of thought, we are incrusted, and place ourselves in the
positions which others occupy in life. Constant consideration for the
welfare and happiness of others, is every day imposed upon us by the
divine injunction, "Thou shalt love thy neighbor as thyself."

The test, then, of our soul's greatness is rather to be sought in our
ability to comfort and console, our ability to help others, rather
than in our ability to help ourselves and crowd others down in the
struggle of life. If the reader will stop a moment to reflect upon the
healing qualities of Christ's life, he will understand that Christ
was a Master in the art of healing, not alone of the wounds he made,
but of self-inflicted wounds, and the wounds that others made. What a
comfort his life is to those in sorrow! How instinctively our thoughts
turn to him! How prone we are to go to him for consolation He is truly
the great Healer of the afflictions of others.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
March, 1903, Vol. 38, pp. 178, 179.

{333} USE GOOD LANGUAGE. Language, like thought, makes its impression
and is recalled by the memory in a way that may be unpleasant if not
harmful to those who have been compelled to listen to unseemly words.
Thoughts that in themselves are not proper may be exalted or debased by
the language used to express them. If inelegant expressions should be
eschewed, what shall be said of profanity?--_Juvenile Instructor,_ May
1, 1906, Vol. 41, p. 272.

DO NOT DESTROY LIFE WANTONLY. I have just a few words to say in
addition to those that have already been said, in relation to shedding
blood and to the destruction of life. I think that every soul should be
impressed by the sentiments that have been expressed here this evening
by all who have spoken, and not less with reference to the killing of
our innocent birds, natives of our country, who live upon the vermin
that are indeed enemies to the farmer and to mankind. It is not only
wicked to destroy them, it is abominable, in my opinion. I think that
this principle should extend, not only to the bird life, but to the
life of all animals. When I visited, a few years ago, the Yellowstone
National Park, and saw in the streams and the beautiful lakes, birds
swimming quite fearless of man, allowing passers-by to approach them
as closely almost as tame birds, and apprehending no fear of them, and
when I saw droves of beautiful deer herding along the side of the road,
as fearless of the presence of men as any domestic animal, it filled
my heart with a degree of peace and joy that seemed to be almost a
foretaste of that period hoped for when there shall be none to hurt and
none to molest in all the land, especially among all the inhabitants of
Zion. These same birds, if they were to visit other regions, inhabited
by man, would, on account of their tameness, doubtless become more
easily a prey to the gunner. The same may be said of those beautiful
creatures--the deer and antelope. If they should wander out of the
park, beyond the protection that is established there for these
animals, {334} they would become, of course, an easy prey to those who
were seeking their lives. I never could see why a man should be imbued
with a blood-thirsty desire to kill and destroy animal life. I have
known men--and they still exist among us--who enjoy what is, to them,
the "sport" of hunting birds and slaying them by the hundreds, and who
will come in after a day's sport, boasting of how many harmless birds
they have had the skill to slaughter, and day after day, during the
season when it is lawful for men to hunt and kill (the birds having had
a season of protection and not apprehending danger) go out by scores or
hundreds, and you may hear their guns early in the morning on the day
of the opening, as if great armies had met in battle; and the terrible
work of slaughtering the innocent birds goes on.

I do not believe any man should kill animals or birds unless he needs
them for food, and then he should not kill innocent little birds that
are not intended for food for man. I think it is wicked for men to
thirst in their souls to kill almost everything which possesses animal
life. It is wrong, and I have been surprised at prominent men whom I
have seen whose very souls seemed to be athirst for the shedding of
animal blood. They go off hunting deer, antelope, elk, anything they
can find, and what for? "Just for the fun of it!" Not that they are
hungry and need the flesh of their prey, but just because they love
to shoot and to destroy life. I am a firm believer, with reference to
these things, in the simple words of one of the poets:

  "Take not away the life you cannot give,
  For all things have an equal right to live."

--_Juvenile Instructor,_ April, 1913, Vol. 48, pp. 308-309.

COMMENCEMENT ADDRESS. The point which seems the most perspicuous, and
which will appear with greatest force to your minds, no doubt, on this
occasion, is that it should have a speedy ending. Not so, however,
with the efforts of those students who graduate with honors from this
college, {335} today. Before them lies a strange, meandering, endless
path, by them as yet untrodden, however well beaten by the weary feet
of pilgrims who have passed over to the great beyond. This path is
fraught with all there is in life, of good or ill to them. They are
entering upon the great problem of life, and each will be compelled
to solve that problem for himself. The problem of death--which is
spiritual midnight--the unenlightened soul--will solve itself. As the
stream flows naturally down the slope to the dead waters of our inland
sea, so is the common trend of the natural man down to the dark valley
of the shadows of death. He needs to make no effort to reach this goal;
by lazily floating on the tide of common events, he will reach it all
too soon. But, to the fountain of life, to the summit of existence, to
the fulness of moral, religious and intellectual manhood, the finger
board of truth points eternally up the stream. To reach this glorious
fountain, to scale this magnificent height, one must work; he must stem
the current, must climb the hill--must climb and work and persevere.
Thus he will succeed.

It is a very important thing to make a commencement in life. It is
no less important to make that commencement upon a sound and proper
footing. A man going to the summit of Twin Peaks, which tower towards
the heavens on the southeast of us, will have a long, weary journey
before he reaches his destination. Although not far away at first,
if he starts off toward the northwest, the longer he continues in
that direction the further he goes from his objective point. True, he
may circumscribe the earth and, if he keep the proper bearing, will
come back to the point at last. But eternity is a wondrous globe to
circumnavigate, and we will find it to our advantage not to undertake
the feat when we can so easily avoid it by commencing as we should.
Error is a worthless and an injurious thing. To avoid it should always
be our careful study. Mistakes, if they are indeed mistakes, are never
fortunate, and may be extremely painful {336} and hard to rectify. But
the sooner rectified the better. It is braver and more honorable to
promptly disavow and fly from error, no matter what the present seeming
cost, or to frankly acknowledge a mistake, and apologize for it, and
thus get rid of it, than to crouch beneath the burden, which is moral
cowardice.

The students now graduating from this school in the branches of
education which they have taken, are ready to commence the application
of the knowledge they have acquired to the practical duties of life.
You may apply this knowledge to the development of the natural
resources and prosperity of our country, or to the betterment of the
social problems of the times in which you live, or you may apply it to
the further intellectual development of yourselves and others. That
which you have gained by study and the assistance of your teachers
should be wisely used by you as an aid to the attainment of other and
greater knowledge.

Whatever may be your course in the future, or your choice of
occupation, always remember the grand scriptural injunction:
"Whatsoever thy hand findeth to do, do it with thy might; for there
is no work, nor device, nor knowledge, nor wisdom, in the grave,
whither thou goest." (Ec. 9:10.) This scripture applies directly to the
temporal life and death, and only to them. Whatever is worth doing at
all, should be well and faithfully and thoroughly done. The failures
occurring in the legitimate pursuits of life, resulting solely from the
unprofitableness thereof, are few and far between. The vast majority of
failures are the results of neglect, or of want of careful attention,
or of ignorance, or of dishonesty on the part of the applicants, and
not of the business itself.

Carefully select your occupation with a view to your qualifications or
adaptability therefor; let it be worthy of the noblest ambition and
purest desire, and then engage in it in earnest, put your heart into
it, and your mind upon it, with due consideration to other essential
things, until you {337} succeed. All extremes should be avoided. To
fix the heart and mind upon a single object, however good, and close
the eyes to all else in life, may make an expert, a bigot, or a crank,
but never a wise and broad-minded man. It is foolish to become too
much absorbed in material things. Labor and relaxation should go hand
in hand, and pure and undefiled religion will lighten every burden
you have to bear, and help to sweeten the bitter draught of many a
sorrowing soul. The proper admixture of labor and leisure will not only
promote the highest mental capabilities, but also the most perfect
physical conditions.

Man is a dual being. He is spiritual and he is physical. The latter is
dependent upon the former for intelligence and life. The body without
the spirit is dead, but the spirit is an immortal and an independent
principle and being. It is the more important part, yet man bestows
more thought and labor upon the body, as a rule, than upon the better
part. Neither should be neglected, least of all, the spiritual. This
is truth, and it is the truth that makes man free. By it they stand,
without it they fall.

The Great Teacher of the world has said, "If ye continue in my word,
then are ye my disciples indeed; and ye shall know the truth, and
the truth shall make you free." (John 8:31-2.) Again: "And truth is
knowledge of things as they are, and as they were, and as they are to
come." (Doc. and Cov. 93:24.)

This knowledge of truth, combined with proper regard for it, and its
faithful observance, constitutes true education. The mere stuffing of
the mind with a knowledge of facts is not education. The mind must not
only posses a knowledge of truth, but the soul must revere it, cherish
it, love it as a priceless gem; and this human life must be guided
and shaped by it in order to fulfil its destiny. The mind should not
only be charged with intelligence, but the soul should be filled with
admiration and desire for pure intelligence {338} which comes of a
knowledge of the truth. The truth can only make him free who hath it,
and will continue in it. And the word of God is truth, and it will
endure forever.

Educate yourself not only for time, but also for eternity. The
latter of the two is the more important. Therefore, when we shall
have completed the studies of time, and enter upon the commencement
ceremonies of the great hereafter, we will find our work is not
finished, but just begun, we may then say with the poet:

  "Lay this aside--say not your work is done,
  No need of love or goodness ever dies,
  But in the lives of others--multiplies,
  Say it has just begun."

In conclusion permit me to repeat a portion of the first psalm:
"Blessed is the man that walketh not in the counsel of the ungodly,
nor standeth in the way of sinners, nor sitteth in the seat of the
scornful. But his delight is in the law of the Lord; and in his law
doth he meditate day and night. And he shall be like a tree planted
by the rivers of water, that bringeth forth his fruit in his season;
his leaf also shall not wither; and whatsoever he doeth shall prosper.
The ungodly are not so; but are like the chaff which the wind driveth
away."--_Contributor,_ Vol. 16, pp. 569-571. Delivered at the
commencement exercises of the Latter-day Saints College, Salt Lake
City, June 5, 1895.

OUR MAIN PURPOSE OF LIFE. The important consideration is not how long
we can live but how well we can learn the lesson of life, and discharge
our duties and obligations to God and to one another. One of the main
purposes of our existence is that we might conform to the image and
likeness of him who sojourned in the flesh without blemish--immaculate,
pure, and spotless! Christ came not only to atone for the sins of
the world, but to set an example before all men and to establish the
standard of God's {339} perfection, of God's law, and of obedience to
the Father.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 104 December, 1917.

HOW TO LOVE YOUR NEIGHBOR. Love your neighbor as yourself? How are you
to do it? If your neighbor is in danger, protect him to the utmost of
your power. If you see your neighbor's property in danger of injury,
protect his property as you would your own, as far as it lies in your
power: If your neighbor's boy or girl is going astray, go directly
to your neighbor, in the spirit of love, and help him to reclaim his
child. How are we to love our neighbor as we love ourselves. It is
the simplest thing in the world; but too many people are selfish and
narrow and not given to that breadth of feeling which reaches out and
considers the benefit and welfare of their neighbors; and they narrow
themselves down to their own peculiar and particular benefit and
blessing and well being, and feel it to say: "O, let my neighbor take
care of himself." That is not the spirit that should characterize a
Latter-day Saint.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, pp. 103, 104, December,
1917.

QUESTION OF CHURCH LEADERS. We have come to ask you if you are in
strict accord with the two great commandments: "Thou shalt love the
Lord thy God with all thy heart, and with all thy soul, and with all
thy mind, * * * and thy neighbor as thyself."--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
21, p. 98, December, 1917; Matt. 22: 34-40.

THE SIN OF INGRATITUDE. And I believe that one of the greatest sins
of which the inhabitants of the earth are guilty today is the sin of
ingratitude, the want of acknowledgement, on their part, of God and his
right to govern and control. We see a man raised up with extraordinary
gifts, or with great intelligence, and he is instrumental in developing
some great principle. He and the world ascribe his great genius and
wisdom to himself. He attributes his success to his own energies,
labor and mental capacity. He does not acknowledge the hand of God in
anything connected {340} with his success, but ignores him altogether
and takes the honor to himself; this will apply to almost all the
world. In all the great modern discoveries in science, in the arts,
in mechanics, and in all material advancement of the age, the world
says, "We have done it." The individual says, "I have done it," and he
gives no honor or credit to God. Now, I read in the revelations through
Joseph Smith, the prophet, that because of this, God is not pleased
with the inhabitants of the earth but is angry with them because they
will not acknowledge his hand in all things.--_Deseret Weekly News,_
1884, Vol. 33, p. 130; Doc. and Cov. 59:21.

{341}



CHAPTER XVI.

MARRIAGE, THE HOME AND THE FAMILY

NECESSITY OF MARRIAGE. The house of the Lord is a house of order and
not a house of confusion; and that means that the man is not without
the woman in the Lord, neither is the woman without the man in the
Lord; and that no man can be saved and exalted in the kingdom of God
without the woman, and no woman can reach the perfection and exaltation
in the kingdom of God alone. That is what it means. God instituted
marriage in the beginning. He made man in his own image and likeness,
male and female, and in their creation it was designed that they should
be united together in sacred bonds of marriage, and one is not perfect
without the other. Furthermore, it means that there is no union for
time and eternity that can be perfected outside of the law of God, and
the order of his house. Men may desire it, they may go through the form
of it, in this life, but it will be of no effect except it be done and
sanctioned by divine authority, in the name of the Father and of the
Son and of the Holy Ghost.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913, pp. 118-119.

MARRIAGE, GOD--ORDAINED AND SANCTIONED. "And again, I say unto you,
that whoso forbiddeth to marry is not ordained of God, for marriage is
ordained of God unto men." (Doc. and Cov. 49:15)

I desire to emphasize this. I want the young men of Zion to realize
that this institution of marriage is not a man-made institution. It
is of God. It is honorable, and no man who is of marriageable age
is living his religion who remains single. It is not simply devised
for the convenience alone of man, to suit his own notions, and his
own ideas; to marry and then divorce, to adopt and then to discard,
just as he pleases. There are great consequences connected with it,
consequences which reach beyond this present time, into all {342}
eternity, for thereby souls are begotten into the world, and men and
women obtain their being in the world. Marriage is the preserver of the
human race. Without it, the purposes of God would be frustrated; virtue
would be destroyed to give place to vice and corruption, and the earth
would be void and empty.

Neither are the relationships that exist, or should exist, between
parents and children, and between children and parents, of an ephemeral
nature, nor of a temporal character. They are of eternal consequence,
reaching beyond the veil, in spite of all that we can do. The man,
and the woman who are the agents, in the providence of God, to bring
living souls into the world, are made before God and the heavens, as
responsible for these acts as is God himself responsible for the works
of his own hands, and for the revelation of his own wisdom. The man and
the woman who engage in this ordinance of matrimony are engaging in
something that is of such far-reaching character, and is of such vast
importance, that thereby hangs life and death, and eternal increase.
Thereupon depends eternal happiness, or eternal misery. For this
reason, God has guarded this sacred institution by the most severe
penalties, and has declared that whosoever is untrue to the marriage
relation, whosoever is guilty of adultery, shall be put to death.
This is scriptural law, though it is not practiced today, because
modern civilization does not recognize the laws of God in relation to
the moral status of mankind. The Lord commanded, "Whosoever sheddeth
innocent blood, by man shall his blood be shed." Thereby God has given
the law. Life is an important thing. No man has any right to take life,
unless God commanded it. The law of God as to violation of the marriage
covenant is just as strict, and is on a parallel with law against
murder notwithstanding the former is not carried out. * * *

Now, every young person throughout the Church should {343} understand
this very thoroughly. The Church authorities and the teachers of our
associations should inculcate the sacredness, and teach the duty of
marriage, as it has been revealed in the latter days to us. There
should be a reform in the Church in this regard, and a sentiment
created in favor of honorable marriage, and that would prevent any
young man, or any young woman, who is a member of the Church, from
marrying except by that authority which is sanctioned of God. And no
man holding the priesthood who is worthy and of age should remain
unmarried. They should also teach that the law of chastity is one of
the most vital importance, both to children, and to men and to women.
It is a vitally important principle to the children of God in all their
lives, from the cradle to the grave. God has fixed dreadful penalties
against the transgression of his law of chastity, of virtue, of purity.
When the law of God shall be in force among men, they will be cut off
who are not absolutely pure and unsoiled and spotless--both men and
women. We expect the women to be pure, we expect them to be spotless
and without blemish, and it is as necessary and important for man to be
pure and virtuous as for woman; indeed, no woman would ever be other
than pure if men were so. The gospel of Jesus Christ is the law of
love, and love of God with the whole heart and mind is the greatest
commandment, and the next is like unto it: love thy neighbor as
thyself. This also should be remembered in the marriage relation, for,
while it is said that the desires of the woman shall be to her husband,
and he shall rule over her, it is intended that that rule shall be in
love and not in tyranny. God never rules tyrannically, except when men
so corrupt themselves that they are unfit to live. Then, and under
such conditions, it is the story of all his dealings with mankind,
that he sends judgment upon them and wipes them out and destroys
them.--_Improvement Era,_ July, 1902, pp. 713-717.

RIGHTEOUSNESS AND NECESSITY OF MARRIAGE. Many {344} people imagine that
there is something sinful in marriage; there is an apostate tradition
to that effect. This is a false and very harmful idea. On the contrary,
God not only commends but he commands marriage. While man was yet
immortal, before sin had entered the world, our heavenly Father himself
performed the first marriage. He united our first parents in the bonds
of holy matrimony, and commanded them to be fruitful and multiply and
replenish the earth. This command he has never changed, abrogated or
annulled; but it has continued in force throughout all the generations
of mankind.

Without marriage the purposes of God would be frustrated, so far as
this world is concerned, for there would be none, to obey his other
commands.

There appears to be a something beyond and above the reasons apparent
to the human mind why chastity brings strength and power to the peoples
of the earth, but it is so.

Today a flood of iniquity is overwhelming the civilized world. One
great reason therefor is the neglect of marriage; it has lost its
sanctity in the eyes of the great majority. It is at best a civil
contract, but more often an accident or a whim, or a means of
gratifying the passions. And when the sacredness of the covenant is
ignored or lost sight of, then a disregard of the marriage vows, under
the present moral training of the masses, is a mere triviality, a
trifling indiscretion.

The neglect of marriage, this tendency to postpone its responsibilities
until middle life, that so perniciously affects Christendom, is being
felt in the midst of the Saints.

Certainly we are not in favor of the very early marriages that
prevailed a few centuries ago.

But what we wish to impress upon the Saints is that the legitimate
union of the sexes is a law of God, that to be blessed of him, we must
honor that law; that if we do not do so the mere fact that we are
called by his name will not {345} save us from the evils that neglect
of this law entails, that indeed we are only his people when we observe
his law; that when we do not do so we may expect the same unfortunate
results to come upon us as flow to the rest of humanity from the same
causes.

We believe that every man holding the holy priesthood should be
married, with the very few exceptions of those who through infirmities
of mind or body are not fit for marriage. Every man is a worse man in
proportion as he is unfit for the married state. We hold that no man
who is marriageable is fully living his religion who remains unmarried.
He is doing a wrong to himself by retarding his progress, by narrowing
his experiences, and to society by the undesirable example that he sets
to others, as well as he, himself, being a dangerous factor in the
community.

We say to our young people, get married, and marry aright. Marry
in the faith, and let the ceremony be performed in the place God
has appointed. Live so that you may be worthy of this blessing. If,
however, obstacles, not at present removable, prevent this most perfect
form of marriage, have your bishop perform the ceremony, and then, at
the earliest possible moment, go to the temple. But do not marry those
out of the Church, as such unions almost invariably lead to unhappiness
and quarrels and often finally to separation. Besides, they are not
pleasing in the sight of heaven. The believer and unbeliever should not
be yoked together, for sooner or later, in time or in eternity, they
must be divided again.

And now we desire with holy zeal to emphasize the enormity of sexual
sins. Though often regarded as insignificant by those not knowing the
will of God, they are, in his eyes an abomination, and if we are to
remain his favored people they must be shunned as the gates of hell.
The evil results of these sins are so patent in vice, crime, misery
and disease that it would appear that all, young and old, must {346}
perceive and sense them. They are destroying the world. If we are to
be preserved we must abhor them, shun them, not practice the least of
them, for they weaken and enervate, they kill man spiritually, they
make him unfit for the company of the righteous and the presence of
God.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 37, p. 400, July 1, 1902.

MALE AND FEMALE ENTER HEAVEN. No man will ever enter there until he
has consummated his mission; for we have come here to be conformed to
the likeness of God. He made us in the beginning in his own image and
in his own likeness, and he made us male and female. We never could
be in the image of God if we were not both male and female. Read the
Scriptures, and you will see it for yourselves as God has made it. He
has made us in his own form and likeness, and here we are male and
female, parents and children. And we must become more and more like
him--more like him in love, in charity, in forgiveness, in patience,
long-suffering and forbearance, in purity of thought and action,
intelligence, and in all respects, that we may be worthy of exaltation
in his presence. It is for this that we have come to the earth. This is
the work that we have to perform. God has shown us the way and given
us the means by which we may consummate and fill our mission upon this
earth and perfect our destiny; for we are destined and foreordained
to become like God, and unless we do become like him we will never be
permitted to dwell with him. When we become like him you will find
that we will be presented before him in the form in which we were
created, male and female. The woman will not go there alone, and the
man will not go there alone, and claim exaltation. They may attain
a degree of salvation alone, but when they are exalted they will be
exalted according to the law of the celestial kingdom. They cannot be
exalted in any other way, neither the living nor the dead. It is well
for us to learn something about why we build temples, {347} and why we
administer in them for the dead as well as for the living. We do this
that we may become like unto him, and dwell with him eternally; that
we may become sons of God, heirs of God and joint heirs with Jesus
Christ.--_Tabernacle Sermon,_ June 12, 1898.

MARRIAGE TO REPLENISH THE EARTH. Those who have taken upon themselves
the responsibility of wedded life should see to it that they do not
abuse the course of nature; that they do not destroy the principle
of life within them, nor violate any of the commandments of God. The
command which he gave in the beginning to multiply and replenish the
earth is still in force upon the children of men. Possibly no greater
sin could be committed by the people who have embraced this gospel than
to prevent or to destroy life in the manner indicated. We are born into
the world that we may have life, and we live that we may have a fulness
of joy, and if we will obtain a fulness of joy, we must obey the law of
our creation and the law by which we may obtain the consummation of our
righteous hopes and desires--life eternal.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1900, p. 40.

ETERNAL MARRIAGE. Why did he teach us the principle of eternal union
of man and wife? Because God knew that we were his children here, to
remain his children forever and ever, and that we were just as truly
individuals, and that our individuality was as identical as that of
the Son of God, and would therefore continue, worlds without end, so
that the man receiving his wife by the power of God, for time and
for all eternity, would have the right to claim her and she to claim
her husband, in the world to come. Neither would be changed, except
from mortality to immortality; neither would be other than himself
or herself, but they will have their identity in the world to come
precisely as they exercise their individuality and enjoy their identity
here. God has revealed this principle, and it has its bearings upon
the evidence that we possess of the actual, {348} literal resurrection
of the body, just as it is and as the prophets have declared it in the
Book of Mormon.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 136-137; Mosiah 15:20-23;
16:7-11; Alma 40.

ETERNITY OF THE FAMILY ORGANIZATIONS. Our associations (family) are not
exclusively intended for this life, for time, as we distinguish it from
eternity. We live for time and for eternity. We form associations and
relations for time and all eternity. Our affections and our desires are
found fitted and prepared to endure not only throughout the temporal
or mortal life, but through all eternity. Who are there besides the
Latter-day Saints who contemplate the thought that beyond the grave we
will continue in the family organization? the father, the mother, the
children recognizing each other in the relations which they owe to each
other and in which they stand to each other? this family organization
being a unit in the great and perfect organization of God's work, and
all destined to continue throughout time and eternity?

We are living for eternity and not merely for the moment. Death
does not part us from one another, if we have entered into sacred
relationships with each other by virtue of the authority that God has
revealed to the children of men. Our relationships are formed for
eternity. We are immortal beings, and we are looking forward to the
growth that is to be attained in an exalted life after we have proved
ourselves faithful and true to the covenants that we have entered
into here, and then we will receive a fulness of joy. A man and woman
who have embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ and who have begun life
together, should be able by their power, example and influence to
cause their children to emulate them in lives of virtue, honor, and
in integrity to the kingdom of God which will redound to their own
interest and salvation. No one can advise my children with greater
earnestness and solicitude for their happiness and salvation than I
can myself. Nobody has more {349} interest in the welfare of my own
children than I have. I cannot be satisfied without them. They are
part of me. They are mine; God has given them to me, and I want them
to be humble and submissive to the requirements of the gospel. I
want them to do right, and to be right in every particular, so that
they will be worthy of the distinction that the Lord has given them
in being numbered among his covenant people who are choice above all
other people, because they have made sacrifice for their own salvation
in the truth. Speaking of the fashions of the world, I do not care
to say very much on the subject, but I do think that we live in an
age the very trend of which is to vice and wickedness. I believe
that to a very large extent the fashions of the day, and especially
the fashions of women, have a tendency to evil and not to virtue or
modesty, and I deplore that evident fact for you see it on every hand.
Young men want to get homes that are palatial, that are fine in all
their appointments, and as modern as anybody else's before they will
get married. I think it is a mistake. I think that young men and young
women, too, should be willing, even at this day, and in the present
condition of things, to enter the sacred bonds of marriage together and
fight their way together to success, meet their obstacles and their
difficulties, and cleave together to success, and cooperate in their
temporal affairs, so that they shall succeed. Then they will learn
to love one another better, and will be more united throughout their
lives, and the Lord will bless them more abundantly. I regret, I think
it is a crying evil, that there should exist a sentiment or a feeling
among any members of the Church to curtail the birth of their children.
I think that is a crime wherever it occurs, where husband and wife are
in possession of health and vigor and are free from impurities that
would be entailed upon their posterity. I believe that where people
undertake to curtail or prevent the birth of their children that they
are going to reap {350} disappointment by and by. I have no hesitancy
in saying that I believe this is one of the greatest crimes of the
world today, this evil practice.--_Relief Society Magazine,_ Vol. 4,
June, 1917, p. 314 _et. seq._

IMPORTANCE OF MARRIAGE WITHIN THE CHURCH. I would rather go myself to
the grave than to be associated with a wife outside of the bonds of the
new and everlasting covenant. Now, I hold it just so sacred; but some
members of the Church do not so regard the matter. Some people feel
that it does not make very much difference whether a girl marries a man
in the Church, full of the faith of the Gospel, or an unbeliever. Some
of our young people have married outside of the Church; but very few of
those who have done it have failed to come to grief. I would like to
see Latter-day Saint men marry Latter-day Saint women; and Methodists
marry Methodists, Catholics marry Catholics, and Presbyterians marry
Presbyterians, and so on to the limit. Let them keep within the pale of
their own faith and church, and marry and inter-marry there, and let
the Latter-day Saints do the same thing in their Church; then we will
see who comes out best in the end.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, pp. 5, 6.

NO MARRIAGE IN HEAVEN. Why did Jesus teach the doctrine that there was
no marrying nor giving in marriage in the other world? Why did he teach
the doctrine that marriage was instituted by the Father and designed
to be accomplished in this life? Why did he rebuke those who sought
to entrap him when they brought to him the example of the fulfilment
of the law of Moses, for Moses wrote the law that God gave him, that
if a man married in Israel and died without issue, it was the duty
of his brother to take his widow and raise up seed unto his brother;
and when seven of these brothers--(which is doubtless a problem that
these men put to the Savior in order to entrap him {351} if they
could)--had taken her, to whom should she belong in the resurrection,
since they all had her? Jesus declared to them, "Ye do err, not knowing
the Scriptures, nor the power of God." They did not understand the
principle of sealing for time and for all eternity; that what God hath
joined together neither man nor death can put asunder. (Matt. 19: 6.)
They had wandered from that principle. It had fallen into disuse among
them; they had ceased to understand it; and consequently they did not
comprehend the truth; but Christ did. She could only be the wife in
eternity of the man to whom she was united by the power of God for
eternity, as well as for time; and Christ understood the principle, but
he did not cast his pearls before the swine that tempted him.--_Apr. C.
R._ 1912, p. 136.

PLURAL MARRIAGE FORBIDDEN. Official Statement--"Inasmuch as there are
numerous reports in circulation that plural marriages have been entered
into contrary to the official declaration of President Woodruff, of
September 26, 1890, commonly called the Manifesto, which was issued by
President Woodruff and adopted by the Church at its general conference,
October 6, 1890, which forbade any marriages violative of the law of
the land; I Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, hereby affirm and declare that no such marriages
have been solemnized with the sanction, consent or knowledge of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and I hereby announce that
all such marriages are prohibited, and if any officer or member of the
Church shall assume to solemnize or enter into any such marriage he
will be deemed in transgression against the Church and will be liable
to be dealt with according to the rules and regulations thereof, and
excommunicated therefrom.

"Joseph F. Smith,

"President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints."

--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 75.

{352} FURTHER STATEMENT. We have announced in previous conferences,
as it was announced by President Woodruff, as it was announced by
President Snow, and as it was reannounced by me and my brethren and
confirmed by the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, plural
marriages have ceased in the Church. There isn't a man today in this
Church or anywhere else, outside of it, who has authority to solemnize
a plural marriage--not one! There is no man or woman in the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints who is authorized to contract a
plural marriage. It is not permitted, and we have been endeavoring
to the utmost of our ability to prevent men from being led by some
designing person into an unfortunate condition that is forbidden by
the conferences, and by the voice of the Church, a condition that has
to some extent, at least, brought reproach upon the people. I want
to say that we have been doing all in our power to prevent it or to
stop it; and in order that we might do this, we have been seeking, to
our utmost, to find the men who have been the agents and the cause
of leading people into it. We find it very difficult to trace them
but when we do find them, and can prove it upon them, we will deal
with them as we have dealt with others that we have been able to
find.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1911, p. 8.

MARRIAGE AND LARGE FAMILIES DESIRABLE. Bachelorhood and small families
carry to the superficial mind the idea that they are desirable because
they bring with them the minimum of responsibility. The spirit that
shirks responsibility shirks labor. Idleness and pleasure take the
place of industry and strenuous effort. The love of pleasure and
of an easy life in turn make demands upon young men who refuse to
look upon marriage and its consequent family enlargement as a sacred
duty. The real fault lies with the young men. The license of the age
leads them from paths of duty and responsibility to the pitfalls of a
pleasure-loving {353} world. Their sisters are the victims of neglect
and of a great social and family wrong.

Women would marry if they could, and would accept cheerfully the
responsibilities of family life. This loss to the home is a loss the
nation must feel, as years go on. Time will vindicate the laws of God
and the truth that individual human happiness is found in duty and not
in pleasure and freedom from care.

The spirit of the world is contagious. We cannot live in the midst of
such social conditions without suffering from the effects of their
allurements. Our young people will be tempted to follow the example
of the world about them. There is already a strong tendency to make
sport of the obligations to marry. Pretexts of ambition are set up as
an excuse to postpone marriage till some special object is attained.
Some of our leading young men desire to complete first a course of
study at home or abroad. Being natural leaders in society their example
is dangerous and the excuse is one of questionable propriety. It were
better far that many such young men never went to college than that
the excuse of college life be made the reason for postponing marriage
beyond the proper age.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 40, pp. 240, 241,
April 15, 1905.

BE TRUE TO YOUR WIVES AND CHILDREN. And oh! my brethren, be true to
your families, be true to your wives and children. Teach them the way
of life. Do not allow them to get so far from you that they will become
oblivious to you or to any principle of honor, purity or truth. Teach
your children so that they cannot commit sin without violating their
conscience, teach them the truth, that they may not depart from it.
Bring them up in the way they should go, and when they get old they
will not depart from it. If you will keep your boys close to your
heart, within the clasp of your arms; if you will make them to feel
that you love them, that you are their parents, that they are your
{354} children, and keep them near to you, they will not go very far
from you, and they will not commit any very great sin. But it is when
you turn them out of the home, turn them out of your affection--out
into the darkness of the night into the society of the depraved or
degraded; it is when they become tiresome to you, or you are tired
of their innocent noise and prattle at home, and you say, "Go off
somewhere else,"--it is this sort of treatment of your children that
drives them from you, and helps to make criminals and infidels of
them. You cannot afford to do this. How would I feel to enter into
the kingdom of God--(if such a thing were possible) and see one of
my children outside among the sorcerers, the whoremongers, and those
who love and make a lie, and that because I have neglected my duty
toward him or have not kept a proper restraint upon him? Do you think
I shall be exalted in the kingdom of my God with this stain and blot
upon my soul? I tell you, No! No man can get there until he atones for
such crime as this--for it is a crime in the sight of God and man for
a father to carelessly or wilfully neglect his children. This is my
sentiment. Take care of your children. They are the hope of Israel,
and upon them will rest by and by, responsibility of the bearing of
the kingdom of God in the earth. The Lord bless them and keep them
in the path of righteousness. I humbly pray, in the name of Jesus.
Amen.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 87.

RESPECT THE RIGHTS OF OTHERS. I sincerely hope that we shall succeed in
impressing upon the minds of the rising generation a sincere regard,
not only for themselves, to keep themselves pure and unspotted from the
world, but a sincere regard for the rights and privileges of others.
Our children should be taught to respect not only their fathers and
their mothers, and their brothers and sisters, but they should be
taught to respect all mankind, and especially should they be instructed
and taught and brought up to {355} honor the aged and the infirm, the
unfortunate and the poor, the needy, and those who lack the sympathies
of mankind.

We too frequently see a disposition on the part of our children to make
fun of the unfortunate. A poor cripple, or a poor weak-minded person
comes along, and the boys will poke fun at him, and make unbecoming
remarks about him. This is entirely wrong, and such a spirit as this
should never be witnessed among the children of the Latter-day Saints.
They ought to be taught better at home. They should be thoroughly
taught better than this in our Sunday schools, and in all the schools,
so far as that is concerned, that our children attend. Our children
should be taught to venerate that which is holy, that which is sacred.
They should venerate the name of God. They should hold in sacred
veneration the name of the Son of God. They should not take Their holy
names in vain; and they should also be taught to respect and venerate
the temples of God, the places of worship of their fathers and mothers.
Our children should be taught also that they have rights in the house
of the Lord equal to their parents and equal to their neighbors or
anybody else. It always pains me to see our little ones disturbed in
this right. I witnessed a little circumstance in our meeting this
afternoon in the aisle; a little child was sitting by its mother on a
seat. Somebody came along and took the little child off its seat, and
occupied the seat himself, leaving the child to stand. I want to say to
you, my brethren and sisters, that that act sent a pang to my heart.
I would not, for anything in the shape of remuneration of a worldly
character, grieve the heart of a little child in the house of God, lest
an impression should be left upon its mind that would make the house of
worship a distasteful place, and it would prefer not to come within its
walls, than to come and be offended.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 39,
p. 657, Semi-Annual S. S. Conference, October 9, 1904.

MUTUAL TREATMENT OF HUSBAND, WIFE AND CHILDREN. {356} Parents, in
the first place, whether they do it or not, should love and respect
each other, and treat each other with respectful decorum and kindly
regard, all the time. The husband should treat his wife with the utmost
courtesy and respect. The husband should never insult her; he should
never speak slightly of her, but should always hold her in the highest
esteem in the home, in the presence of their children. We do not
always do it, perhaps; some of us, perhaps, do not do it at all. But
nevertheless it is true that we ought to do it. The wife, also should
treat the husband with the greatest respect and courtesy. Her words to
him should not be keen and cutting and sarcastic. She should not pass
slurs or insinuations at him. She should not nag him. She should not
try to arouse his anger or make things unpleasant about the home. The
wife should be a joy to her husband, and she should live and conduct
herself at home so the home will be the most joyous, the most blessed
place on earth to her husband. This should be the condition of the
husband, wife, the father and the mother, within the sacred precinct
of that holy place, the home. Then it will be easy for the parents
to instill into the hearts of their children not only love for their
fathers and their mothers, not only respect and courtesy towards their
parents, but love and courtesy and deference between the children
at home. The little brothers will respect their little sisters. The
little boys will respect one another. The little girls will respect
one another and the girls and boys will respect one another, and treat
one another with that love, that deference and respect that should be
observed in the home on the part of the little children. Then it will
be easy for the Sunday school teacher to continue the training of the
child under the hallowed influence of the Sabbath school; and the child
will be tractable and easily led, because the foundation of a correct
education has been laid in the heart and mind of the child at home.
The teacher can then help the {357} little children, brought up under
these proper influences, to render respect and courtesy to all men and
especially to the unfortunate, the aged and the infirm.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1905, pp. 84-85.

WE SHOULD BE EXAMPLES TO OUR FAMILIES. When I think of our mothers,
the mothers of our children, and realize that under the inspiration
of the gospel they live virtuous, pure honorable lives, true to their
husbands, true to their children, true to their convictions of the
gospel, oh, how my soul goes out in pure love for them how noble and
how God-given, how choice, how desirable and how indispensable they
are to the accomplishment of God's purposes and the fulfilment of his
decrees! My brethren, can you mistreat your wives, the mothers of your
children? Can you help treating them with love and kindness? Can you
help trying to make their lives as comfortable and happy as possible,
lightening their burdens to the utmost of your ability, making life
pleasant for them and for their children in their homes? How can you
help it? How can any one help feeling an intense interest in the mother
of his children, and also in his children? If we possess the Spirit of
God, we can not do otherwise. It is only when men depart from the right
spirit, when they digress from their duty, that they will neglect or
dishonor any soul that is committed to their care. They are bound to
honor their wives and children. Intelligent men, men of business, men
of affairs, men who are involved constantly in the labors of life, and
have to devote their energies and thought to their labors and duties,
may not enjoy as many comforts with their families as they would like,
but if they have the Spirit of the Lord with them in the performance
of their temporal duties, they will never neglect the mothers of
their children, nor their children. They will not fail to teach them
the principles of life and set before them a proper example. Don't
do anything yourselves that you would have {358} to say to your boy,
"Don't do it." Live so that you can say, "My son, do as I do, follow
me, emulate my example." That is the way fathers should live, every one
of us; and it is a shame, a weakening, shameful thing for any member of
the Church to pursue a course that he knows is not right, and that he
would rather his children should not follow.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, pp.
6-7.

THE TRUEST GREATNESS. After all, to do well those things which
God ordained to be the common lot of all man--kind, is the truest
greatness. To be a successful father or a successful mother is greater
than to be a successful general or a successful statesman. One is
universal and eternal greatness, the other is ephemeral. It is true
that such secondary greatness may be added to that which we style
commonplace; but when such secondary greatness is not added to that
which is fundamental, it is merely an empty honor, and fades away from
the common and universal good in life, even though it may find a place
in the desultory pages of history. Our first care, after all, brings
us back to that beautiful admonition of our Savior: "Seek ye first the
kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all these things shall be
added unto you." (Matt. 6:33.)

We should never be discouraged in those daily tasks which God has
ordained to the common lot of man. Each day's labor should be
undertaken in a joyous spirit and with the thought and conviction
that our happiness and eternal welfare depend upon doing well that
which we ought to do, that which God has made it our duty to do. Many
are unhappy because they imagine that they should be doing something
unusual or something phenomenal. Some people would rather be the
blossom of a tree and be admiringly seen than be an enduring part of
the tree and live the commonplace life of the tree's existence.

Let us not be trying to substitute an artificial life for the true
one. He is truly happy who can see and appreciate {359} the beauty
with which God has adorned the commonplace things of life.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 40, pp. 752-3, Dec. 15, 1905.

PARENTS RESPONSIBLE FOR THEIR CHILDREN. The parents in Zion will be
held responsible for the acts of their children, not only until they
become eight years old, but, perhaps, throughout all the lives of their
children, provided they have neglected their duty to their children
while they were under their care and guidance and the parents were
responsible for them.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1910, p. 6.

THE FATHER THE PRESIDING AUTHORITY OF THE FAMILY. There is no higher
authority in matters relating to the family organization, and
especially when that organization is presided over by one holding the
higher priesthood, than that of the father. The authority is time
honored, and among the people of God in all dispensations it has been
highly respected and often emphasized by the teachings of the prophets
who were inspired of God. The patriarchal order is of divine origin
and will continue throughout time and eternity. There is, then, a
particular reason why men, women and children should understand this
order and this authority in the households of the people of God,
and seek to make it what God intended it to be, a qualification and
preparation for the highest exaltation of his children. In the home
the presiding authority is always vested in the father, and in all
home affairs and family matters there is no other authority paramount.
To illustrate this principle, a single incident will perhaps suffice.
It sometimes happens that the elders are called in to administer to
the members of a family. Among these elders there may be presidents
of stakes, apostles, or even members of the first presidency of the
Church. It is not proper under these circumstances for the father
to stand back and expect the elders to direct the administration of
this important ordinance. The father is there. It is his right and
it is his duty {360} to preside. He should select the one who is to
administer the oil, and the one who is to be mouth in prayer, and he
should not feel that because there are present presiding authorities
in the Church that he is therefore divested of his rights to direct
the administration of that blessing of the gospel in his home. (If the
father be absent, the mother should request the presiding authority
present to take charge.) The father presides at the table, at prayer,
and gives general directions relating to his family life whoever may
be present. Wives and children should be taught to feel that the
patriarchal order in the kingdom of God has been established for a wise
and beneficent purpose, and should sustain the head of the household
and encourage him in the discharge of his duties, and do all in their
power to aid him in the exercise of the rights and privileges which God
has bestowed upon the head of the home. This patriarchal order has its
divine spirit and purpose, and those who disregard it under one pretext
or another are out of harmony with the spirit of God's laws as they
are ordained for recognition in the home. It is not merely a question
of who is perhaps the best qualified. Neither is it wholly a question
of who is living the most worthy life. It is a question largely of law
and order, and its importance is seen often from the fact that the
authority remains and is respected long after a man is really unworthy
to exercise it.

This authority carries with it a responsibility and a grave one, as
well as its rights and privileges, and men can not be too exemplary
in their lives, nor fit themselves too carefully to live in harmony
with this important and God-ordained rule of conduct in the family
organization. Upon this authority certain promises and blessings
are predicated, and those who observe and respect this authority
have certain claims on divine favor which they cannot have except
they respect and observe the laws that God has established for the
regulation and authority of the home. "Honor thy {361} father and thy
mother: that thy days may be long upon the land which the Lord thy God
giveth thee," was a fundamental law to ancient Israel, and is binding
upon every member of the Church today, for the law is eternal.

The necessity, then, of organizing the patriarchal order and authority
of the home rests upon principle as well as upon the person who holds
that authority, and among the Latter-day Saints family discipline,
founded upon the law of the patriarchs, should be carefully cultivated,
and fathers will then be able to remove many of the difficulties that
now weaken their position in the home, through unworthy children.

The principles here set forth are of more importance than many parents
have heretofore attached to them, and the unfortunate position today
in the homes of many of the elders of Israel is directly traceable to
a want of appreciation of their truthfulness.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 37, p. 148, March 1, 1902.

DUTIES OF FATHERS. May the fathers in Israel live as they should
live; treat their wives as they should treat them; make their homes
as comfortable as they possibly can; lighten the burden upon their
companions as much as possible; set a proper example before their
children; teach them to meet with them in prayer, morning and night,
and whenever they sit down to partake of food, to acknowledge the mercy
of God in giving them the food that they eat and the raiment that
they wear, and acknowledge the band of God in all things. This is our
duty, and if we do not do it the Lord will be displeased, for he has
said so. He is only pleased with those who acknowledge his hand in all
things._--Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 9; Doc. and Cov. 59: 7, 21.

MOTHERHOOD THE FOUNDATION OF HOME AND NATION. Motherhood lies at the
foundation of happiness in the home, and of prosperity in the nation.
God has laid upon men and women very sacred obligations with respect to
motherhood, {362} and they are obligations that cannot be disregarded
without invoking divine displeasure. In I Timothy 2:13-15, we are told
that "Adam was first formed, then Eve. And Adam was not deceived, but
the woman being deceived was in the transgression. Notwithstanding she
shall be saved in childbearing, if they continue in faith and charity
and holiness with sobriety." Can she be saved without child-bearing?
She indeed takes an awful risk if she wilfully disregards what is a
pronounced requirement of God. How shall she plead her innocence when
she is not innocent? How shall she excuse her guilt when it is fastened
upon her?

The question of parental obligation in the matter of children is not
generally denied. A failure to fulfill the obligation, however, is too
frequently excused.

"Children," we are told, "are a heritage of the Lord;" they are also,
the Psalmist tells us, "his reward." If children are cut off from their
birthright, how shall the Lord be rewarded? They are not a source of
weakness and poverty to family life, for they bring with them certain
divine blessings that make for the prosperity of the home and the
nation. "As arrows are in the hand of a mighty man; so are children of
the youth. Happy is the man that hath his quiver full of them: they
shall not be ashamed, but they shall speak with the enemies in the
gate." (Psalm 127:4, 5)

What answer shall men and women make in excuse of conduct which
contravenes the commandments of God? Those whose hearts are in touch
with God's most sacred laws will make great sacrifices honestly to
fulfil them.

There has, however, of late arisen a condition in our social life
that is working against the divine requirements of motherhood. Men
and women plead the enormous increase in the cost of child-bearing.
The requirements for motherhood in matters of doctor's fees, nurses'
bills and hospital charges, are so great as to discourage men and
women of {363} slender means. The burden of such expenses is certainly
becoming great, and if they are likely to stand directly in the way
of God's requirement, something should be done either to remove them
or mitigate them, and some means should be provided that will protect
the family and the nation against destruction. It is a problem well
worthy the attention of our law-makers, who appropriate generously in
matters that are insignificant when compared with the health, wealth
and physical prosperity of the nation that encourages the birth of
children.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 50, pp. 290, 291, May, 1915.

HUSBAND'S SUCCESS DEPENDENT UPON WIFE'S FITNESS. There is no
organization or government in the world so perfectly planned for the
education of men and women to executive responsibilities as is the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. Government in the home
and in the Church constitutes an important part in the lives of the
people, and the government in the home is the basis of all successful
government in church or state. In the home the mother is the principal
disciplinarian in early child life, and her influence and discipline
determine in a great measure the ability of her children to assume in
manhood and womanhood the larger governments in church and state.

In addition, however, to home government, women often stand with their
husbands in responsible places and share in some measure the success or
failure which characterizes their husbands' administration of affairs.
In selecting men to occupy responsible positions in the Church, it not
infrequently happens that a useful and competent man is barred from
consideration because of the deplorable want of fitness in the wife,
and though a wife may not always bar a husband's opportunities, she
may, nevertheless, prove a great hindrance to him in the discharge of
the duties that belong to his office. If our sisters could only realize
how helpful they might be to their husbands who hold responsible {364}
positions in the Church, and if they would only take pride and pleasure
in their husbands' administration of affairs, the conduct of men in
public office would in many instances be very greatly improved.

The word and the law of God are as important for women who would reach
wise conclusions as they are for men; and women should study and
consider the problems of this great latter-day work from the standpoint
of God's revelations, and as they may be actuated by his Spirit,
which it is their right to receive through the medium of sincere and
heartfelt prayer. A woman without heartfelt devotion for the things
of God is not prepared to stand at her husband's side and enjoy his
confidence in the graver responsibilities that devolve upon him in
the government of the Church. Husbands are justified in withholding
their confidence from and in refusing to be influenced by wives whose
worldly ambitions and want of appreciation of divine things lead them
to contend for personal advantages and selfish gains. Wives of leaders
should have a generous feeling for all that relates to the affairs
over which their husbands preside. Such women should not be exclusive
in their social relations, and should avoid the evils that frequently
come from yielding to the influence and views of a small coterie that
may have selfish aims and personal advantages to serve.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ _Vol._ 38, pp. 371, 372, 1903.

DUTY OF PARENTS. It is the duty of Latter-day Saints to teach their
children the truth, to bring them up in the way they should go, to
teach them the first principles of the gospel, the necessity of baptism
for the remission of sins, and for membership in the Church of Christ;
teaching them the necessity of receiving the gift of the Holy Ghost by
the laying on of hands, which will lead them into all truth, and which
will reveal to them things that have passed and things which are to
come, and show to them more clearly those things which are present with
them, that they may comprehend {365} the truth, and that they may walk
in the light as Christ is in the light; that they may have fellowship
with him and that his blood may cleanse them from all sin.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1912, p. 135.

WATCH YOUR CHILDREN. Some people have grown to possess such unlimited
confidence in their children that they do not believe it possible for
them to be led astray or to do wrong. They do not believe they could
do wrong, because they have such confidence in them. The result is
they turn them loose, morning, noon and night, to attend all kinds of
entertainments and amusement, often in company with those whom they
know not and do not understand. Some of our children are so innocent
that they do not suspect evil, and, therefore, they are off their guard
and are trapped into evil.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 4.

DUTY TO TEACH CHILDREN. Another great and important duty devolving upon
this people is to teach their children, from their cradle until they
become men and women, every principle of the gospel, and endeavor,
as far as it lies in the power of the parents, to instil into their
hearts a love for God, the truth, virtue, honesty, honor and integrity
to everything that is good. That is important for all men and women
who stand at the head of a family in the household of faith. Teach
your children the love of God, teach them to love the principles of
the gospel of Jesus Christ. Teach them to love their fellowmen, and
especially to love their fellow members in the Church that they may be
true to their fellowship with the people of God. Teach them to honor
the priesthood, to honor the authority that God has bestowed upon his
Church for the proper government of his Church.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915,
pp. 4, 5.

WHAT TO TEACH YOUR CHILDREN. We are a Christian people, we believe in
the Lord Jesus Christ, and we feel that it is our duty to acknowledge
him as our Savior and Redeemer. Teach it to your children. Teach them
that the {366} Prophet Joseph Smith had restored to him the priesthood
that was held by Peter and James and John, who were ordained under the
hands of the Savior himself. Teach them that Joseph Smith, the prophet,
when only a boy, was chosen and called of God to lay the foundations
of the Church of Christ in the world, to restore the holy priesthood,
and the ordinances of the gospel, which are necessary to qualify men
to enter into the kingdom of heaven. Teach your children to respect
their neighbors. Teach your children to respect their bishops and the
teachers that come to their homes to teach them. Teach your children
to respect old age, gray hairs, and feeble frames. Teach them to
venerate and to hold in honorable remembrance their parents, and to
help all those who are helpless and needy. Teach your children, as you
have been taught yourselves, to honor the priesthood which you hold,
the priesthood which we hold as elders in Israel. Teach your children
to honor themselves, teach your children to honor the principle of
presidency by which organizations are held intact and by which strength
and power for the well-being and happiness and upbuilding of the people
are preserved. Teach your children that when they go to school they
should honor their teachers in that which is true and honest, in that
which is manly and womanly, and worth while; and also teach them to
avoid the bad examples of their teachers out of school, and the bad
principles of men and women who are sometimes teachers in schools.
Teach your children to honor the law of God and the law of the state
and the law of our country. Teach them to respect and hold in honor
those who are chosen by the people to stand at their head and execute
justice and administer the law. Teach them to be loyal to their
country, loyal to righteousness and uprightness and honor, and thereby
they will grow up to be men and women choice above all the men and
women of the world.--_Apr C. R.,_ 1917, pp. 5, 6.

WHAT CHILDREN SHOULD BE TAUGHT. I pray you, my {367} brethren and
sisters, who have children in Zion, and upon whom rests the greater
responsibility, teach them the principles of the gospel, teach them to
have faith in the Lord Jesus Christ, and in baptism for the remission
of sins when they shall reach the age of eight years. They must be
taught in the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ by their
parents, or the blood of the children will be upon the skirts of those
parents. It seems to me so plain a duty and so necessary for them to
see to it that their children avail themselves of the opportunities
that are afforded them in having them taught and instructed in these
principles in the Sunday schools that are established in the Church
and conducted Sunday after Sunday for the benefit of their children.
I should feel contemptible, I was going to say, in my own mind, in my
own feelings, if I had children who were neglected by their parents in
regard to these matters. Our little ones are only too anxious to go to
Sunday school, no matter what may occur, whether it rains or is cold or
pleasant, or what not; whether they are sick or well, they cannot be
kept from the Sunday school unless there is great cause for it.--_Apr.
C. R.,_ 1903, p. 81.

TRAINING OF CHILDREN AT HOME AND IN SUNDAY SCHOOL. It does not
need argument to convince our minds that our children will be
just about what we make them. They are born without knowledge or
understanding--the most helpless creatures of the animal creation born
into the world. The little one begins to learn after it is born, and
all that it knows greatly depends upon its environment, the influences
under which it is brought up, the kindness with which it is treated,
the noble examples shown it, the hallowed influences of father and
mother, or otherwise, over its infant mind. And it will be largely what
its environment and its parents and teachers make it.

The child of the lowest of our native tribes born in a wigwam and
the child born in luxury start out almost equal, {368} so far as the
possibilities of learning are concerned. A great deal depends upon the
influence under which it is brought up. You will observe that the most
potent influence over the mind of a child to persuade it to learn, to
progress, or to accomplish anything, is the influence of love. More can
be accomplished for good by unfeigned love, in bringing up a child,
than by any other influence that can be brought to bear upon it. A
child that cannot be conquered by the lash, or subdued by violence, may
be controlled in an instant by unfeigned affection and sympathy. I know
that is true; and this principle obtains in every condition of life.

The Sunday school teacher should govern the children, not by passion,
by bitter words or scolding, but by affection and by winning their
confidence. If a teacher gets the confidence of a child it is not
impossible to accomplish every desired good with that child.

I would have it understood that I believe that the greatest law and
commandment of God is to love the Lord our God with all our mind, might
and strength, and our neighbors as ourselves, and if this principle is
observed at home the brothers and sisters will love one another; they
will be kind and helpful to one another, showing forth the principle
of kindness and being solicitous for one another's good. Under these
circumstances the home comes nearer being a heaven on earth, and
children brought up under these influences will never forget them, and
though they may be in trying places, their memories will revert to the
homes where they enjoyed such hallowed influences, and their better
natures will assert themselves no matter what the trials or temptations
may be.

Brethren and sisters of the Sunday school, I implore you to teach and
control by the spirit of love and forbearance until you can conquer.
If children are defiant and difficult to control, be patient with them
until you can conquer {369} by love, and you will have gained their
souls, and you can then mould their characters as you please.

Sometimes children do not like their teachers, and the teachers are
impatient with the children, and complain of them as being very
uncouth, uncontrollable and bad. The children in their turn tell their
parents how they despise their teachers, and say they don't want to go
to school any more because the teacher is so cross. I have heard of
these things and know them to be true. On the other hand, if children
say to father and mother, "We think we have the best teacher in the
world, in our Sunday school," or, "We have the best teacher in our
district school that ever lived," it proves that those teachers have
won the affections of the children, and the little ones are as clay in
the hands of the potter to be moulded in any shape desired. This is the
position you teachers should occupy, and if you get their affections
this will be the report the children will make regarding you.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1902, pp. 92, 93.

TEACH CHILDREN THE GOSPEL. It is the duty of parents to teach their
children the principles of the gospel and to be sober-minded and
industrious in their youth. They should be impressed from the cradle
to the time they leave the parental roof to make homes and assume the
duties of life for themselves, that there is a seed time and harvest,
and as man sows, so shall he reap. The sowing of bad habits in youth
will bring forth nothing better than vice, and the sowing of the seeds
of indolence will result invariably in poverty and lack of stability in
old age. Evil begets evil, and good will bring forth good.

I have heard people say, "We pass this way but once, and we might as
well have a good time and make the most of it while life lasts." This
is in keeping with the prediction in the Book of Mormon: "And there
shall be many which shall say, Eat, drink, and be merry, for tomorrow
we die; and it shall be well with us. * * * Yea, and {370} there shall
be many which shall teach after this manner, false, and vain, and
foolish doctrines, and shall be puffed up in their hearts, and shall
seek deep to hide their counsels from the Lord; and their works shall
be in the dark." (II Nephi 28:7-9)

Let the parents in Zion give their children something to do that
they may be taught the arts of industry, and equipped to carry
responsibility when it is thrust upon them. Train them in some useful
vocation that their living may be assured when they commence in life
for themselves. Remember, the Lord has said that "the idler shall not
eat the bread of the laborer," but all in Zion should be industrious.
Neither should they be given to loud laughter, light and foolish
speeches, worldly pride and lustful desires, for these are not only
unbecoming, but grievous sins in the sight of the Lord. And, we read
that the wages of sin is death, and death is banishment from the Spirit
and presence of the Lord.

And above all else, let us train our children in the principles of the
gospel of our Savior, that they may become familiar with the truth and
walk in the light which it sheds forth to all those who will receive
it. "He that seeketh me early," the Lord has said, "shall find me, and
shall not be forsaken." It behooves us, therefore, to commence in early
life to travel in the straight and narrow path which leads to eternal
salvation.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 52, pp. 19, 20, January, 1917;
Rom. 6:23; Prov. 8:17.

TEACH CHILDREN THE STORY OF JESUS' DEATH. Should the little children
of the kindergarten be taught the events leading up to and culminating
in the death of our Savior? It is a principle widely accepted that
it is not desirable to teach these little ones those things that are
horrifying to childish natures. And what may be said of children
is equally true in all stages of student life. But death is not an
unmixed horror. With it are associated some of the profoundest and most
important truths of human life. Although {371} painful in the extreme
to those who must suffer the departure of dear ones, death is one of
the grandest blessings in divine economy; and we think children should
be taught something of its true meaning as early in life as possible.

We are born that we may put on mortality, that is, that we may clothe
our spirits with a body. Such a blessing is the first step toward an
immortal body, and the second step is death. Death lies along the road
of eternal progress; and though hard to bear, no one who believes
in the gospel of Jesus Christ, and especially in the resurrection,
would have it otherwise. Children should be taught early in life that
death is really a necessity as well as a blessing, and that we would
not and could not be satisfied and supremely happy without it. Upon
the crucifixion and the resurrection of Jesus, one of the grandest
principles of the gospel depends. If children were taught this early in
life, death would not have the horrifying influence that it does have
over many childish minds.

Children are sure to be brought into some acquaintanceship with the
incident of death, even during the kindergarten period; and it would
be a great relief to the puzzled and perplexed conditions of their
minds if some intelligent statements of the reason for death were
made to them. No explanation of death to a child's mind can anywhere
be found that is more simple and convincing than is the death of
our Master, connected as it is and ever must be with the glorious
resurrection.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 40, p. 336, June 1, 1905.

WISE GIVING TO CHILDREN. It is very gratifying to parents to be able
to respond to the desires of their children, but it is undoubtedly a
cruelty to a child to give it everything it asks for. Children may
wisely be denied things which even in themselves are harmless. Our
pleasures depend often more upon the qualities of our desires than
{372} upon the gratification. A child may be ladened with gifts which
afford him little or no pleasure, simply because he has no desire
for them. The education then of our desires is one of far-reaching
importance to our happiness in life; and when we learn that there is
an education of our intellects and we are set about that education
with prudence and wisdom, we shall do much to increase not only our
happiness but also our usefulness in the world.

God's ways of educating our desires are, of course, always the most
perfect, and if those who have it in their power to educate and direct
the desires of children would imitate his prudence, the children
would be much more fortunate in combating the difficulties that beset
men everywhere in the struggle for existence. And what is God's way?
Everywhere in nature we are taught the lessons of patience and waiting.
We want things a long time before we get them, and the fact that we
wanted them a long time makes them all the more precious when they
come. In nature we have our seed-time and harvest; and if children
were taught that the desires that they sow may be reaped by and by
through patience and labor, they will learn to appreciate whenever a
long-looked-for goal has been reached. Nature resists us and keeps
admonishing us to wait; indeed, we are compelled to wait.

A man has a much greater capacity to enjoy that for which he has
labored for a number of years than one who has a similar object given
to him. It is, therefore, most unfortunate for children when their
parents greatly weaken or almost wholly destroy the children's capacity
for the enjoyment of some of the most wholesome pleasures of life. The
child who has everything he wants and when he wants it is really to be
pitied, for he has no ability to enjoy it. There may be a hundred times
more pleasure in a dollar piece for one child than for another.

Our desires are the strongest motives which incite us {373} to energy
and which make us productive and creative in life. If they are weak,
our creations are likely to be puny and worthless. Money that a boy
works for has a value upon his life and an actual purchasing power
greatly in excess of the money that has been given to him. And what is
true of boys is in a large measure true of girls. The girl who earns
something, who works persistently and patiently that she may have
money she can call her own has a capacity for enjoying the objects of
her desires greatly in excess of the girl who never learned to earn a
dollar. She also knows and appreciates the value of a dollar more than
the girl who never had to wait until she earned it. It is a mistake for
parents to suppose that a daughter ought never to be required to earn
anything. Every effort by which we seek the fulfilment of our desires
gives strength and character to manhood and womanhood. The man who
builds a house has vastly more enjoyment in its occupation than the man
who has had a house given to him.

It is just as wrong systematically to give a child everything he
desires as to deny the child everything. When indulgent parents fancy
that they are adding to the pleasure of their children's lives by
giving to them whatever they wish, such parents are in fact destroying
the capacity of their children to enjoy the gratification of desires
weakened and perverted by over-indulgence. The ability to give to
children wisely is indeed a rare attainment, and is acquired only by
a thoughtful and prudent exercise of the highest sense of duty which
parents can feel for their children. Duty is always preferable to
indulgence.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ p. 400, July 1, 1903.

DO NOT PLACE CHILDREN UNDER PLEDGES. We believe it is questionable
wisdom to put children under a pledge of any kind. We ourselves do not
put our children under pledges, and we see no reason why we should
permit others to do it. Instructions can be given to children warning
them {374} against the use of strong drinks and tobacco just as well
without their being pledged as by placing that responsibility upon
them. No man or set of people should be permitted to call our children
together for the purpose of joining a temperance society, without they
first obtain the consent of the parents or guardians of those children;
and we take it for granted that no such consent would be given. We also
take it for granted that boards of education could not consistently,
without such permission, allow such a thing to be done in the public
schools.

It should be understood that we, the Latter-day Saints, teach
temperance and morality as part of our religion, and that we ourselves
are competent to do this kind of work among our own children without
the aid of outside temperance societies.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol.
37, p. 720, Dec. 1, 1902.

CHILDREN HAVE EQUAL RIGHTS WITH ELDERS IN THE HOUSE OF THE LORD. Our
children should be taught also that they have rights in the house of
the Lord equal to their parents and equal to their neighbors or anybody
else.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 88.

DON'T MORTGAGE YOUR HOUSES. My brethren, see to it that you do not put
a mortgage upon the roof that covers the heads of your wives and your
children. Don't do it. Don't plaster your farms with mortgages, because
it is from your farms that you reap your food, and the means to provide
your raiment and your other necessaries of life. Keep your possessions
free from debt. Get out of debt as fast as you can, and keep out of
debt, for that is the way in which the promise of God will be fulfilled
to the people of his Church, that they will become the richest of all
people in the world. But this will not happen while you mortgage your
homes and your farms, or run into debt beyond your ability to meet your
obligations; and thus, perhaps, your name and credit be dishonored
because you over-reached {375} yourselves. "Never reach further than
you can gather," is a good motto.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 11.

NO SUBSTITUTE FOR THE HOME. The growing tendency throughout the country
to abandon the home for the hotel and for the nomadic life with its
ever-shifting and restless spirit, manifests itself here and there
among the Latter-day Saints. A word of warning at this time may not be
inappropriate to those who imagine that there is some charm as well as
benefit in moving about the world in quest of pleasure and novelties
that come from changing frequently one's habitation.

There is no substitute for the home. Its foundation is as ancient as
the world, and its mission has been ordained of God from the earliest
times. From Abraham sprang two ancient races represented in Isaac and
Ishmael. The one built stable homes, and prized its land as a divine
inheritance. The other became children of the desert, and as restless
as its ever-shifting sands upon which their tents were pitched. From
that day to the present, the home has been the chief characteristic
of superior over inferior nations. The home then is more than a
habitation, it is an institution which stands for stability and love in
individuals as well as in nations.

There can be no genuine happiness separate and apart from the home, and
every effort made to sanctify and preserve its influence is uplifting
to those who toil and sacrifice for its establishment. Men and women
often seek to substitute some other life for that of the home; they
would make themselves believe that the home means restraint; that the
highest liberty is the fullest opportunity to move about at will.
There is no happiness without service, and there is no service greater
than that which converts the home into a divine institution, and which
promotes and preserves family life.

Those who shirk home responsibilities are wanting in an {376}
important element of social well-being. They may indulge themselves in
social pleasures, but their pleasures are superficial and result in
disappointment later in life. The occupations of men sometimes call
them from their homes; but the thought of home-coming is always an
inspiration to well doing and devotion. When women abandon the home
and its duties, the case is a more deplorable one. The evil effects
are not confined to the mother alone. The children are robbed of a
sacred right, and their love is bereft of its rallying place around
the hearthstone. The strongest attachments of childhood are those that
cluster about the home, and the dearest memories of old age are those
that call up the associations of youth and its happy surroundings.

The disposition among the Saints to be moving about ought to be
discouraged. If communities must swarm, let the young go, and let the
old homes be transmitted from generation to generation, and let the
home be erected with the thought that it is to be a family abiding
place from one generation to another, that it is to be a monument to
its founder and an inheritance of all that is sacred and dear in home
life. Let it be the Mecca to which an ever-increasing posterity may
make its pilgrimage. The home, a stable and pure home, is the highest
guaranty of social stability and permanence in government.

A Latter-day Saint who has no ambition to establish a home and give
it permanency has not a full conception of a sacred duty the gospel
imposes upon him. It may be necessary at times to change our abode;
but a change should never be made for light or trivial reasons, nor
to satisfy a restless spirit. Whenever homes are built the thought
of permanency should always be present. Many of the Saints live in
parts of the country that are less productive than others, that
possess few natural attractions, yet they cherish their homes and
their surroundings, and the more substantial men and women of such
communities are the last {377} to abandon them. There is no substitute
in wealth or in ambition for the home. Its influence is a prime
necessity for man's happiness and well-being.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 38, pp. 145, 146, March 1, 1903.

WORSHIP IN THE HOME. We have in the gospel the truth. If that is the
case, and I bear my testimony that so it is, then it is worth our every
effort to understand the truth, each for himself, and to impart it in
spirit and practice to our children. Far too many risk their children's
spiritual guidance to chance, or to others rather than to themselves,
and think that organizations suffice for religious training. Our
temporal bodies would soon become emaciated, if we fed them only once a
week, or twice, as some of us are in the habit of feeding our spiritual
and religious bodies. Our material concerns would be less thriving, if
we looked after them only two hours a week, as some people seem to do
with their spiritual affairs, especially if we in addition contented
ourselves, as some do in religious matters, to let others look after
them.

No; on the other hand, this should be done every day, and in the
home, by precept, teaching and example. Brethren, there is too little
religious devotion, love and fear of God, in the home; too much
worldliness, selfishness, indifference and lack of reverence in the
family, or these never would exist so abundantly on the outside. Then,
the home is what needs reforming. Try today, and tomorrow, to make
a change in your home by praying twice a day with your family; call
on your children and your wife to pray with you. Ask a blessing upon
every meal you eat. Spend ten minutes in reading a chapter from the
words of the Lord in the Bible, the Book of Mormon, the Doctrine and
Covenants, before you retire, or before you go to your daily toil. Feed
your spiritual selves at home, as well as in public places. Let love,
and peace, and the Spirit of the Lord, kindness, charity, sacrifice for
others, abound in your families. {378} Banish harsh words, envyings,
hatreds, evil speaking, obscene language and innuendo, blasphemy, and
let the Spirit of God take possession of your hearts. Teach to your
children these things, in spirit and power, sustained and strengthened
by personal practice. Let them see that you are earnest, and practice
what you preach. Do not let your children out to specialists in these
things, but teach them by your own precept and example, by your own
fireside. Be a specialist yourself in the truth. Let our meetings,
schools and organizations, instead of being our only or leading
teachers, be supplements to our teachings and training in the home.
Not one child in a hundred would go astray, if the home environment,
example and training, were in harmony with the truth in the gospel of
Christ, as revealed and taught to the Latter-day Saints. Fathers and
mothers, you are largely to blame for the infidelity and indifference
of your children. You can remedy the evil by earnest worship, example,
training and discipline, in the home.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 7, Dec.,
1904, p. 135.

THE BASIS OF A TRUE HOME. A home is not a home in the eye of the
gospel, unless there dwell perfect confidence and love between the
husband and the wife. Home is a place of order, love, union, rest,
confidence, and absolute trust; where the breath of suspicion of
infidelity can not enter; where the woman an the man each have implicit
confidence in each other's honor and virtue.--_Second Sunday School
Convention_.

THE IDEAL HOME. What then is an ideal home--model home, such as it
should be the ambition of the Latter-day Saints to build; such as a
young man starting out in life should wish to erect for himself? And
the answer came to me: It is one in which all worldly considerations
are secondary. One in which the father is devoted to the family with
which God has blessed him, counting them of first importance, {379}
and in which they in turn permit him to live in their hearts. One
in which there is confidence, union, love, sacred devotion between
father and mother and children and parents. One in which the mother
takes every pleasure in her children, supported by the father--all
being moral, pure, God-fearing. As the tree is judged by its fruit,
so also do we judge the home by the children. In the ideal home true
parents rear loving, thoughtful children, loyal to the death, to father
and mother and home! In it there is the religious spirit, for both
parents and children have faith in God, and their practices are in
conformity with that faith; the members are free from the vices and
contaminations of the world, are pure in morals, having upright hearts
beyond bribes and temptations, ranging high in the exalted standards
of manhood and womanhood. Peace, order, and contentment reign in the
hearts of the inmates--let them be rich or poor, in things material.
There are no vain regrets; no expressions of discontent against father,
from the boys and girls, in which they complain: "If we only had this
or that, or were like this family or that, or could do like so and
so!"--complaints that have caused fathers many uncertain steps, dim
eyes, restless nights, and untold anxiety. In their place is the loving
thoughtfulness to mother and father by which the boys and girls work
with a will and a determination to carry some of the burden that the
parents have staggered under these many years. There is the kiss for
mother, the caress for father, the thought that they have sacrificed
their own hopes and ambitions, their strength, even life itself to
their children--there is gratitude in payment for all that has been
given them!

In the ideal home the soul is not starved, neither are the growth
and expansion of the finer sentiments paralyzed for the coarse and
sensual pleasures. The main aim is not to heap up material wealth,
which generally draws further and further from the true, the ideal,
the spiritual life; but it is {380} rather to create soul--wealth,
consciousness of noble achievement, an outflow of love and helpfulness.

It is not costly paintings, tapestries, priceless bric-a-brac,
various ornaments, costly furniture, fields, herds, houses and lands
which constitute the ideal home, nor yet the social enjoyments and
ease so tenaciously sought by many; but it is rather beauty of soul,
cultivated, loving, faithful, true spirits; hands that help and hearts
that sympathize; love that seeks not its own, thoughts and acts that
touch our lives to finer issues--these lie at the foundation of the
ideal home.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 8, 1904-05, pp. 385-388.

FOUNDATION OF ALL GOOD IN HOME. The very foundation of the kingdom of
God, of righteousness, of progress, of development, of eternal life
and eternal increase in the kingdom of God, is laid in the divinely
ordained home; and there should be no difficulty in holding in the
highest reverence and exalted thought, the home, if it can be built
upon the principles of purity, of true affection, of righteousness
and justice. The man and his wife who have perfect confidence in each
other, and who determine to follow the laws of God in their lives
and fulfil the measure of their mission in the earth, would not be,
and could never be, contented without the home. Their hearts, their
feelings, their minds, their desires would naturally trend toward
the building of a home and family and of a kingdom of their own; to
the laying of the foundation of eternal increase and power, glory,
exaltation and dominion, worlds without end.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 51, p. 739.

SECURE HOMES. In my judgment it would be prudence and wisdom for the
young people to secure lands near the homes of their parents and near
the body of the Church, where they can have the advantage of Sunday
schools and the gatherings of the Saints, and in so doing they will be
building for themselves, instead of permitting the stranger to come
in and take the lands--strangers with whom in many instances {381} we
could not affiliate. We all know there are classes who come in here
who up to date have not proved desirable neighbors to affiliate with,
and it is just as well for our own young people to stay in the land of
their birth and build them homes. I will say that we do not approve
of the disposition of some to go afar off where life, property and
liberty are not safe. We wish them to remain together, so that if it is
necessary or desirable that the Saints should colonize, they might do
it in order.

I do not want to be understood as saying or thinking that one little
state is big enough to contain all the young people, and I think it is
wisdom and necessary for the Latter-day Saints to take every advantage
in this respect that is possible. I think our young people should get
homes in Utah, Idaho, Wyoming and Colorado--in our own state and in
adjoining states--in blessed America, under this grand and glorious
government where life and property, and the liberties of men are safe
and protected, where mob violence and revolutionary spirit do not stalk
forth as in some countries of the world.

Another thing. In the old times an effort was made to co-operate and
combine together and establish home industries for the production of
the things that were needful for consumption of the people and to
produce a revenue as well. Today we have allowed the home industry
spirit to perish almost from amongst us, and we do not witness the
same loyalty among the people to those things which are produced at
home that there should be. There are too many people who would rather
patronize some "cheap John" and buy shoddy goods, just because they can
get them a few pence cheaper, than to sustain home industry, and get
all wool and a yard wide. We should not encourage foreign capital to
the exclusion of our own, and patronize foreign labor against our own,
but we should build up our home institutions.--_From a Sermon,_ given
in Logan, April 7, 1910.

{382} OWN YOUR HOMES. It was early the rule among the Latter-day Saints
to have the lands so divided that every family could have a spot of
ground which could be called theirs; and it has been the proud boast
of this people that among them were more home owners than among any
other people of like numbers. This condition had a good tendency,
and whatever men said of us, the home among this people was a first
consideration. It is this love of home that has made the Saints famous
as colonizers, builders of settlements, and redeemers of the deserts.
But in the cities there appears now to be coming into vogue the
idea that renting is the thing. Of course, it may be necessary as a
temporary makeshift, but no young couple should ever settle down with
the idea that such a condition, as far as they are concerned, shall be
permanent. Every young man should have an ambition to possess his own
home. It is better for him, for his family, for society, for the state,
and for the Church. Nothing so engenders stability, strength, power,
patriotism, fidelity to country and to God as the owning of a home--a
spot of earth that you and your children can call yours. And besides,
there are so many tender virtues that grow with such ownership that the
government of a family is made doubly easy thereby.

Let us continue, as a people, to be unlike the world in this regard.
I hope the Saints will ever be a home owning people, and never become
roamers, roomers and renters. We should no more follow the prevailing
notions in this than in some other things. The people of Zion have
a higher destiny than being led by the nose, as it were, by the
prevailing whims. We do not purpose being led by evil tendencies, but
rather glory in being leaders ourselves in all that makes for the
welfare and happiness of the home, the advancement of the Church, the
prosperity of the state.--_Improvement Era,_ Aug., 1904, Vol. 7, p. 796.

DO NOT MORTGAGE YOUR HOMES. Whenever a panic {383} comes, or there is
severe financial depression because of monetary conditions, the people
have before them a painful object lesson on the evils of mortgaging,
especially of their homes and places of business.

Men owe it to their wives and children to be prudent and conservative
when business considerations touch the home, and it is doubtful whether
they really have a moral right to expose helpless wives and children to
the mercies of the money lender. The evils are too abundantly manifest
to permit of mortgaging homes that should be sacred to the needs of
those who are dependent upon them.

The Latter-day Saints have often been warned and are now earnestly
admonished not to hazard their homes, and with them their wives and
children, upon the altar of financial speculations.

What was taught in the early days of our history in this intermountain
region is equally true today, and it is the duty of every Latter-day
Saint, so far as it is possible, to own his home, to possess an earthly
inheritance. It has been our pride that among the people of all the
world nowhere can a greater percentage be found of those who have title
to the homes in which they live. Instead of declining year by year in
the total number of homes owned by the Latter-day Saints of Salt Lake
City, and other large cities, there should be an increase. The matter
of the Saints possessing title to their homes is something more than a
question of whether it pays best to rent or to own. It is a question
of vital importance to our future position, and relative strength in
a land to which by every rule of equity and prudence we are entitled.
There is a virtue and an assurance and a certainty in the ownership of
one's home that are never felt by those who are shifting from place
to place without any landed possession. The influence upon child life
that comes from the possession and ownership of the family home is of
itself a sufficient reason to guard it against the repeated evils {384}
of mortgaging. The Latter-day Saints owe it to themselves and they
owe it to their God to be steadfast in the possession of the lands to
which they hold titles, either by purchase or settlement. The evil of
mortgaging homes to eastern firms, to men and companies who have no
other motive than to secure their pound of flesh, is growing among the
people, and especially among those in the larger cities. Against such
evils the people have in the past been abundantly warned. If necessity
compels the husband to place a mortgage upon the home, let it come,
if possible, through a friend and not through those who may be the
enemies of the people. If the Latter-day Saints will give heed to the
prudent admonitions and lessons of the past, they will hesitate in the
presence of the alluring temptations which are now everywhere held out,
to mortgage their homes, their places of business, the canals, and the
farms, for the means with which to speculate and grow rich. It is to be
hoped, therefore, that where the Saints have mortgages upon their homes
they will be persistent in their endeavors to remove them, and they are
advised to keep intact and beyond menace the titles to their lands.

The admonitions here given are directed especially to those disposed to
mortgage for the purpose of speculation, and not to those who may find
it necessary through building societies or otherwise to secure homes by
monthly or other periodical payments. The latter practice may lead to
economic habits, while speculations too frequently create a spirit of
extravagance.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 36, pp. 722-723.

EVILS OF MORTGAGING. What a blessed condition would result in Zion if
the evil of going into debt, of mortgaging the home, could be made very
clear to every Latter-day Saint, young and old! Well, indeed, would it
be if some of the burdens of the mortgage and its accompanying sorrows,
could be felt and understood by every man who has in contemplation the
pawning of his home and land for money--that {385} he might comprehend
its slavery and terror--as thoroughly prior to the deed as he is sure
to feel it after. In that event, he might be warned in time to avoid
the fatal step, and awake as from a horrid dream to rejoice in his
deliverance. With few exceptions mortgages on private property end in
disaster to the giver. * * * What should we think of men who would
jeopardize the position and place of the people of Zion! The land of
Zion is an inheritance, and every man who mortgages his part of that
inheritance places in jeopardy the land, thus not only disinheriting
himself, but committing a crime against the whole community and the
intelligence and wisdom that should characterize every true Latter-day
Saint. The result of such action is appalling, and its contemplation
something fearful to every lover of the people of God, the more so when
one possesses a knowledge of how widespread is the evil.

Mortgaging, then, looked upon in its true light, is not only a private
burden and detriment, in which a man's family is thrown out of house
and home, and his own abilities, happiness and talents are destroyed or
sadly diminished, but it is positively a public crime in a community
like ours. Disposing of inheritances in Zion partakes of the nature of
such action as individuals pulling up and selling for money the gold
bricks from the streets of the Celestial City. It is intolerable, when
looked upon in the right light! The old proverb: "Who goes a borrowing
goes a sorrowing," and "Lying rides on debt's back," should appeal
directly to every man who contemplates mortgaging. But if personal
appeal is not strong enough, let him remember that his home or farm
is likely to go for half of its value to satisfy his debt, and that
his family who depend upon him will be left without adequate shelter
and support. But if neither reason is strong enough to hold him back,
let him remember Zion and his inheritance therein, and let her cause
cry aloud to him to bring him to a realizing sense of the triple crime
that he is {386} about to commit, in order that his hand may be stayed,
and he saved the humiliation, worry, anxiety and sorrow that must
inevitably overtake him, unless he repent.--_Improvement Era,_ Dec.,
1901, Vol. 5, p. 147.

OUR FIRST DUTY TO OUR HOUSEHOLD. I want to tell you that we will be
honest with you; we feel that it is the first duty of Latter-day Saints
to take care of themselves and of their poor; and then, if we can
extend it to others, and as wide and as far as we can extend charity
and assistance to others that are not members of the Church, we feel
that it is our duty to do it. But first look after the members of our
own household. The man who will not provide for his own house, as one
of old has said, is worse than an infidel._--Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 10.

UNCHASTITY, A DOMINANT EVIL. The character of a community or a nation
is the sum of the individual qualities of its component members. To
say so is to voice at once an ordinary platitude and an axiom of
profound import. The stability of a material structure depends upon
the integrity of its several parts and the maintenance of a proper
correlation of the units in harmony with the laws of forces. The same
may be said of institutions, systems, and organizations in general.

Not alone is it fundamentally proper and in strict accord with both the
spirit and the letter of the Divine Word, but absolutely essential to
the stability of the social order that the marriage relation shall be
defined and regulated by secular law. Parties to the marriage contract
must be definitely invested with the responsibilities of the status
they assume; and for fidelity to their obligations they are answerable
to each other, to society, and to their God.

Sexual union is lawful in wedlock, and if participated in with right
intent is honorable and sanctifying. But without the bonds of marriage,
sexual indulgence is a debasing sin, abominable in the sight of Deity.

{387} Infidelity to marriage vows is a fruitful source of divorce,
with its long train of attendant evils, not the least of which are the
shame and dishonor inflicted on unfortunate though innocent children.
The dreadful effects of adultery cannot be confined to the erring
participants. Whether openly known or partly concealed under the cloak
of guilty secrecy, the results are potent in evil influence. The
immortal spirits that come to earth to tabernacle in bodies of flesh
have the right to be well born, through parents who are free from the
contamination of sexual vice.

It is a deplorable fact that society persists in holding women to
stricter account than men in the matter of sexual offense. What shadow
of excuse, not to speak of justification, can be found for this
outrageous and cowardly discrimination? Can moral defilement be any the
less filthy and pestilential in man than in woman? Is a male leper less
to be shunned for fear of contagion than a woman similarly stricken?

So far as woman sins it is inevitable that she shall suffer, for
retribution is sure, whether it be immediate or deferred. But in so far
as man's injustice inflicts upon her the consequence of his offenses,
he stands convicted of multiple guilt. And man is largely responsible
for the sins against decency and virtue, the burden of which is too
often fastened upon the weaker participant in the crime. The frightful
prevalence of prostitution, and the tolerance and even condonation with
which the foul traffic is treated by so-called civilized society, are
black blots on the pages of current history. * * *

Like many bodily diseases, sexual crime drags with itself a train
of other ills. As the physical effects of drunkenness entail the
deterioration of tissue, and disturbance of vital functions, and
so render the body receptive to any distemper to which it may be
exposed, and at the same time lower the powers of resistance even to
fatal deficiency, so {388} does unchastity expose the soul to divers
spiritual maladies, and rob it of both resistance and recuperative
ability. The adulterous generation of Christ's day were deaf to the
voice of truth, and through their diseased state of mind and heart,
sought after signs and preferred empty fable to the message of
salvation.

We accept without reservation or qualification the affirmation of
Deity, through an ancient Nephite prophet: "For I, the Lord God,
delight in the chastity of women. And whoredoms are an abomination
before me; thus saith the Lord of Hosts." (Jacob 2:28.)

We hold that sexual sin is second only to the shedding of innocent
blood in the category of personal crimes; and that the adulterer shall
have no part in the exaltation of the blessed.

We proclaim as the word of the Lord: "Thou shalt not commit adultery."

"He that looketh on a woman to lust after her, or if any shall commit
adultery in their hearts, they shall not have the Spirit, but shall
deny the faith."--_Improvement Era,_ June, 1918, Vol. 20, p. 738; Doc.
and Cov. 63:16.

DEGREES OF SEXUAL SIN. There are said to be more shades of green than
of any other color, so also we are of the opinion there are more grades
or degrees of sin associated with the improper relationship of the
sexes than of any other wrongdoing of which we have knowledge. They
all involve a grave offense--the sin against chastity, but in numerous
instances this sin is intensified by the breaking of sacred covenants,
to which is sometimes added deceit, intimidation or actual violence.

Much as all these sins are to be denounced and deplored, we can
ourselves see a difference both in intent and consequence between the
offense of a young couple who, being betrothed, in an unguarded moment,
without premeditation {389} fall into sin, and that of the man, who
having entered into holy places and made sacred covenants, plots to rob
the wife of his neighbor of her virtue either by cunning or force, and
accomplishes his vile intent.

Not only is there a difference in these wrongs, judging from the
standpoint of intent, but also from that of the consequences. In the
first instance the young couple who have transgressed can make partial
amends by sincere repentance and by marrying. One reparation, however,
they cannot make. They cannot restore the respect that they previously
held for each other; and too often as a consequence of this loss of
confidence their married life is clouded or embittered by the fear that
each has for the other, having once sinned, may do so again. In the
other case, others are most disastrously involved, families are broken
up, misery is forced upon innocent parties, society is affected, doubt
is thrown upon the paternity of children, and from the standpoint of
gospel ordinances, the question of descent is clouded and pedigrees
become worthless; altogether, wrongs are committed both to the living
and the dead, as well as to the yet unborn, which it is out of the
power of the offenders to repair or make right.

Sometimes an argument is advanced to limit the provisions of the law
of God, as given in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, both with
regard to punishment and to forgiveness to those who have entered the
House of the Lord and received their endowments. This is not possible,
as so many of these provisions were given in revelations published
several years before the Saints were permitted to receive these holy
ordinances, indeed, before any temple was built. The law as given, we
believe to be general, applying to all the Saints. But undoubtedly
when, in addition to the actual offense against the laws of chastity,
covenants are broken, then the punishment for the double offense will,
either in this life or that which is to come, be correspondingly
greater {390} and more severe.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Nov. 15, 1902,
Vol. 37, p. 688.

PURITY. There is something in man, an essential part of his mind, which
recalls the events of the past, and the words that we have spoken on
various occasions. Words which we spoke in our childhood we can readily
bring to mind. Words that we heard others speak in our infancy, we can
recall, though we may be advanced in years. We recall words that were
spoken in our youth and in our early manhood, as well as words that
were spoken yesterday. May I say to you that in reality a man cannot
forget anything? He may have a lapse of memory; he may not be able
to recall at the moment a thing that he knows, or words that he, has
spoken; he may not have the power at his will to call up these events
and words; but let God Almighty touch the mainspring of the memory,
and awaken recollection, and you will find then that you have not even
forgotten a single idle word that you have spoken. I believe the word
of God to be true, and therefore, I warn the youth of Zion, as well as
those who are advanced in years, to beware of saying wicked things, of
speaking evil, and taking in vain the name of sacred things and sacred
beings. Guard your words, that you may not offend even man, much less
offend God.

We believe that God lives, and that he is a judge of the quick and the
dead. We believe that his eye is upon the world, and that he beholds
his groveling, erring and weak children upon this earth. We believe
that we are here by his design, and not by choice; that we are here to
fulfil a destiny, and not to fulfil a whim, or for the gratification of
mortal lusts. We believe that we are immortal beings. We believe in the
resurrection of the dead, and that as Jesus came forth from the grave
to everlasting life, his Spirit and body uniting again never more to be
separated, so has he opened the way for every son and daughter of Adam,
{391} whether living or dead, to come forth from the grave to a newness
of life, to become immortal souls, body and spirit, united, never to be
severed any more. We raise our voices against prostitution, and against
all forms of immorality. We are not here to practice immorality of any
kind. Above all things, sexual immorality is most heinous in the sight
of God. It is on a par with murder itself, and God Almighty fixed the
penalty of the murderer at death: "Whoso sheddeth man's blood, by man
shall his blood be shed." Furthermore, he said that whosoever committed
adultery should be put to death. Therefore, we raise our voices against
sexual immorality, and against all manner of obscenity.

Then, we say to you who have repented of your sins, who have been
buried with Christ in baptism, who have been raised from the liquid
grave to newness of life, born of the water and of the Spirit, and
who have been made the children of the Father, heirs of God and joint
heirs with Jesus Christ--we say to you, if you will observe the laws of
God, and cease to do evil, cease to be obscene, cease to be immoral,
sexually or otherwise, cease to be profane, cease to be infidel, and
have faith in God, believe in the truth and receive it, and be honest
before God and man, that you will be set up on high, and God will
put you at the head, just as sure as you observe these commandments.
Whoso will keep the commandments of God, no matter whether it be you
or any other people, they will rise and not fall, they will lead and
not follow, they will go upward and not downward. God will exalt them
and magnify them before the nations of the earth, and he will set the
seal of his approval upon them, will name them as his own. This is my
testimony to you.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, p. 501, May, 1903.

THREE THREATENING DANGERS. There are at least three dangers that
threaten the Church within, and the authorities need to awaken to the
fact that the people should be {392} warned unceasingly against them.
As I see these, they are flattery of prominent men in the world, false
educational ideas, and sexual impurity.

But the third subject mentioned--personal purity, is perhaps of greater
importance than either of the other two. We believe in one standard of
morality for men and women. If purity of life is neglected, all other
dangers set in upon us like the rivers of waters when the flood gates
are opened.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 17, No. 5, p. 476. March, 1914.

THE GOSPEL THE GREATEST THING. One of the most important duties
devolving upon the Latter-day Saints is the proper training and rearing
of their children in the faith of the gospel. The gospel is the
greatest thing in all the world. There is nothing to compare with it.
The possessions of this earth are of no consequence when compared with
the blessings of the gospel. Naked we came into the world, and naked we
will go out of the world, so far as earthly things are concerned; for
we must leave them behind; but the eternal possessions which are ours
through obedience to the gospel of Jesus Christ do not perish--the ties
that God has created between me and those whom he has given to me, and
the divine authority which I enjoy through the holy priesthood, these
are mine throughout all eternity. No power but sin, the transgression
of the laws of God, can take them from me. All these things are mine,
even after I leave this probation.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, pp.
102, 103, December, 1917.

DUTY OF HUSBAND TO WIFE. If there is any man who ought to merit the
curse of Almighty God it is the man who neglects the mother of his
child, the wife of his bosom, the one who has made sacrifice of her
very life, over and over again for him and his children. That is,
of course, assuming that the wife is a pure and faithful mother and
wife.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 105, December, 1917.

WIVES AND HUSBANDS IN ETERNITY. We expect to {393} have our wives
and husbands in eternity. We expect our children will acknowledge
us as their fathers and mothers in eternity. I expect this: I look
for nothing else. Without it I could not be happy. The thought or
belief that I should be denied this privilege hereafter would make
me miserable from this moment. I never could be happy again without
the hope that I shall enjoy the society of my wives and children in
eternity. If I had not this hope, I should be of all men most unhappy;
"for if in this life only we have hope in Christ, we are of all men
most miserable." All who have tasted of the influence of the Spirit of
God, and have had awakened within them a hope of eternal life, cannot
be happy unless they continue to drink of that fountain until they are
satisfied, and it is the only fountain at which they can drink and be
satisfied.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 33, p. 131, 1884.

IMPORTANCE OF FILIAL AFFECTION. Do not add to their burdens by neglect,
by extravagance or by misconduct. Rather suffer that your right hand be
cut off, or your eye plucked out than that you would bring sorrow or
anguish to your parents because of your neglect of filial affection to
them. So children, remember your parents. After they have nurtured you
through the tender years of your infancy and childhood, after they have
fed and clothed and educated you, after having given you a bed to rest
upon and done all in their power for your good, don't you neglect them
when they become feeble and are bowed down with the weight of their
years. Don't you leave them, but settle down near them, and do all in
your power to minister to their comfort and well-being.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 21, p. 105, December, 1917.

FAMILY GOVERNMENT BY LOVE. I learned in my childhood, as most children,
probably, have learned, more or less at least, that no love in all the
world can equal the love of a true mother.

{394} I did not think in those days, and still I am at a loss to know,
how it would be possible for anyone to love her children more truly
than did my mother. I have felt sometimes, how could even the Father
love his children more than my mother loved her children? It was life
to me; it was strength; it was encouragement; it was love that begat
love or liking in myself. I knew she loved me with all her heart.
She loved her children with all her soul. She would toil and labor
and sacrifice herself day and night, for the temporal comforts and
blessings that she could meagerly give, through the results of her own
labors, to her children. There was no sacrifice of self--of her own
time, of her leisure or pleasure, or opportunities for rest--that was
considered for a moment, when it was compared with her duty and her
love to her children.

When I was fifteen years of age, and called to go to a foreign country
to preach the gospel--or to learn how, and to learn it for myself--the
strongest anchor that was fixed in my life, and that helped to hold my
ambition and my desire steady, to bring me upon a level and keep me
straight, was that love which I knew she had for me who bore me into
the world.

Only a little boy, not matured at all in judgment, without the
advantage of education, thrown in the midst of the greatest allurements
and temptations that it was possible for any boy or any man to be
subjected to--and yet, whenever these temptations became most alluring
and most tempting to me, the first thought that arose in my soul was
this: Remember the love of your mother. Remember how she strove for
your welfare. Remember how willing she was to sacrifice her life for
your good. Remember what she taught you in your childhood and how she
insisted upon your reading the New Testament--the only book, except a
few little school books, that we had in the family, or that was within
reach of us at that time. This feeling toward my mother became {395}
a defense, a barrier between me and temptation, so that I could turn
aside from temptation and sin by the help of the Lord and the love
begotten in my soul, toward her whom I knew loved me more than anybody
else in all the world, and more than any other living being could love
me.

A wife may love her husband, but it is different to that of the love
of mother to her child. The true mother, the mother who has the fear
of God and the love of truth in her soul, would never hide from danger
or evil and leave her child exposed to it. But as natural as it is for
the sparks to fly upward, as natural as it is to breathe the breath of
life, if there were danger coming to her child, she would step between
the child and that danger; she would defend her child to the uttermost.
Her life would be nothing in the balance, in comparison with the life
of her child. That is the love of true motherhood for children.

Her love for her husband would be different, for if danger should
come to him, as natural as it would be for her to step between her
child and danger, instead, her disposition would be to step behind her
husband for protection, and that is the difference between the love of
mother for children and the love of wife for husband--there is a great
difference between the two.

I have learned to place a high estimate upon the love of mother. I have
often said, and will repeat it, that the love of a true mother comes
nearer being like the love of God than any other kind of love. The
father may love his children, too; and next to the love that the mother
feels for her child, unquestionably and rightfully, too, comes the love
that the father feels for his child. But, as it has been illustrated
here by Brother Edward H. Anderson, the love of the father is of a
different character, or degree, to the love of the mother for her
child; illustrated by the fact he related here of having the privilege
of working with his boy, having him in his presence, becoming more
intimate with him, learning {396} his characteristics more clearly;
becoming more familiar and more closely related to him; the result of
which was that his love for his boy increased, and the love of the boy
increased for his father, for the same reason, merely because of that
closer association. So the child learns to love his mother best, as a
rule, when the mother is good, wise, prudent, and intelligent, because
the child is with her more, they are more familiar with each other and
understand each other better.

Now, this is the thought that I desire to express: Fathers, if you wish
your children to be taught in the principles of the gospel, if you
wish them to love the truth and understand it, if you wish them to be
obedient to and united with you, love them! and prove to them that you
do love them by your every word or act to them. For your own sake, for
the love that should exist between you and--your boys however wayward
they might be, or one or the other might be, when you speak or talk to
them, do it not in anger, do it not harshly, in a condemning spirit.
Speak to them kindly; get them down and weep with them if necessary
and get them to shed tears with you if possible. Soften their hearts;
get them to feel tenderly toward you. Use no lash and no violence, but
argue, or rather reason--approach them with reason, with persuasion
and love unfeigned. With these means, if you cannot gain your boys and
your girls, they will prove to be reprobate to you; and there will be
no means left in the world by which you can win them to yourselves.
But, get them to feel as you feel, have interest in the things in which
you take interest, to love the gospel as you love it, to love one
another as you love them; to love their parents as the parents love the
children. You can't do it any other way. You can't do it by unkindness;
you cannot do it by driving; our children are like we are; we couldn't
be driven; we can't be driven now. We are like some other animals that
we know of in {397} the world. You can coax them; you can lead them, by
holding out inducements to them, and by speaking kindly to them, but
you can't drive them; they won't be driven. We won't be driven. Men are
not in the habit of being driven; they are not made that way.

This is not the way that God intended, in the beginning, to deal with
his children--by force. It is all free love, free grace. The poet
expressed it in these words:

  "Know this, that every soul is free,
  To choose his life and what he'll be;
  For this eternal truth is given,
  That God will force no man to heaven."

You can't force your boys, nor your girls into heaven. You may force
them to hell, by using harsh means in the efforts to make them good,
when you yourselves are not as good as you should be. The man that will
be angry at his boy, and try to correct him while he is in anger, is in
the greatest fault; he is more to be pitied and more to be condemned
than the child who has done wrong. You can only correct your children
by love, in kindness, by love unfeigned, by persuasion, and reason.

When I was a child, somewhat a wayward, disobedient little boy--not
that I was wilfully disobedient, but I would forget what I ought to
do; I would go off with playful boys and be absent when I should have
been at home, and I would forget to do things I was asked to do. Then
I would go home, feel guilty, know that I was guilty, that I had
neglected my duty and that I deserved punishment.

On one occasion I had done something that was not just right, and my
mother said to me: "Now, Joseph, if you do that again I shall have to
whip you." Well, time went on, and by and by, I forgot it, and I did
something similar again; and this is the one thing that I admired more,
perhaps, than any secondary thing in her; it was that when she {398}
made a promise she kept it. She never made a promise, that I know of,
that she did not keep.

Well, I was called to account. She said: "Now, I told you. You knew
that if you did this I would have to whip you, for I said I would. I
must do it. I do not want to do it. It hurts me worse than it does you,
but I must whip you."

Well, she had a little rawhide, already there, and while she was
talking or reasoning with me, showing me how much I deserved it and how
painful it was to her, to inflict the punishment I deserved, I had only
one thought and that was: "For goodness' sake whip me; do not reason
with me," for I felt the lash of her just criticism and admonition a
thousand fold worse than I did the switch. I felt as if, when she laid
the lash on me, I had at least partly paid my debt and had answered for
my wrong doing. Her reasoning cut me down into the quick; it made me
feel sorry to the very core!

I could have endured a hundred lashes with the rawhide better than
I could endure a ten-minutes' talk in which I felt and was made to
feel that the punishment inflicted upon me was painful to her that I
loved--punishment upon my own mother!--Extracts from an address given
at a "Home Evening" meeting in Granite Stake, 1909. _Improvement Era,_
Vol. 13, pp. 276-280.

THE HOME AND THE CHILD. But what are we doing in our homes to train
our children; what to enlighten them? What to encourage them to make
home their place of amusement, and a place where they may invite their
friends for study or entertainment? Have we good books, games, music,
and well-lighted, well-ventilated, warm rooms for their convenience and
pleasure? Do we take personal interest in them and in their affairs?
Are we providing them with the physical knowledge, the mental food, the
healthful exercise, and the spiritual purification, that will enable
{399} them to become pure and robust in body, intelligent and honorable
citizens, faithful and loyal Latter-day Saints?

We frequently neglect giving them any information concerning their
bodily well-being. In our cities we appear to be providing our young
people too much mental exercise, and no physical diversion and work,
while in our country settlements, we seem to be overburdening them
with bodily labor, and in many cases doing little or nothing for their
mental development and recreation. Hence, in the one case they seek
forbidden places and pleasure, on account of too much mental exercise;
and in another, because of too little.

Now then, are we studying their wants as we do our business, and our
farms and our animals? Are we looking after them, and if necessary
bringing them in from the street when absent, and providing them in our
homes with what they lack? Or are we to a great extent neglecting these
things in the home and home training, and considering our children of
secondary value to horses and cattle and lands?

These are important points for consideration, and fathers and mothers
should honestly study them, and as honestly answer them to their own
satisfaction. We may well invest means in the home for the comfort,
convenience, entertainment and training of our children. We may well
give our sons and daughters some time for recreation and diversion, and
some provision in the home for satisfying their longing for legitimate
physical and mental recreation, to which every child is entitled, and
which he will seek in the street or in objectionable places, if it is
not provided in the home. In addition to this, and supplementary to the
training in the home, it is to be hoped that our organizations will as
soon as possible provide every arrangement for legitimate entertainment
and recreation, physical and intellectual, that will tend to attract
our young people, and hold them interested, loyal and contented within
the pale of our own influence and organizations.--_Imp. Era,_ Vol. 11,
pp. 302-3, 1907-8.

{400}



CHAPTER XVII

AMUSEMENTS AND FASHIONS

YOUTH SHOULD LOOK FORWARD. Our youth should not be left to spend their
time almost entirely in the mad whirl of pleasure and amusement,
without a thought of advancing years with the attendant bodily ailments
and physical infirmities which are bound to come. They should be given
to understand that what are generally considered as the pleasures of
youth are on the wing, and will soon pass, leaving in their rear only
sad remembrances of wasted opportunities that cannot be recalled.
They should not be permitted to waste their time and their parents'
substance in frivolous pastime and riotous living, which can only
result in vicious or evil habits being formed.--_Juvenile Instructor,_
Vol. 52, January, 1917, p. 19.

PROPER AMUSEMENTS. Our amusements should be characterized by their
wholesome social environments. We should have proper regard to the
character of those with whom we associate in places of amusement; and
we should be governed by a high sense of responsibility to our parents,
to our friends and to the Church. We should know that the pleasures
which we enjoy are such as have upon them the stamp of divine approval.
They should be endorsed by our parents and by our religious associates,
and by those true principles which should always regulate our
intercourse with one another in Church membership. Amusements which, in
themselves, and in commendable social surroundings, may be proper and
wholesome, should be avoided unless associates are unquestionable and
the places are reputable and are conducted under proper restraints.

There are limits in our recreations beyond which we {401} cannot safely
go. They should be guarded in character and curtailed in frequency to
avoid excess. They should not occupy all, nor even the greater part
of our time; indeed, they should be made incidental to the duties and
obligations of life, and never be made a controlling motive or factor
in our hopes and ambitions. There are so many dangers lurking in those
amusements, and the fascination for them which take hold upon the lives
of our young people, sometimes to the very possession of them, that
they should be carefully guarded and warned against the temptations and
evils that are likely to ensnare them, to their destruction.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 49, June, 1914, pp. 380, 381.

PROPER CHARACTER OF AMUSEMENTS. The character and variety of our
amusements have so much to do with the welfare and character of our
young people that they should be guarded with the utmost jealousy for
the preservation of the morals and stamina of the youth of Zion.

In the first place they should not be excessive; and young people
should be discouraged from giving themselves up to the spirit and
frivolity of excessive mirth. No Latter-day Saint needs to be told
that two or three dances a week for his children are out of all sense
or reason. Too frequent dances are not only injurious to stability of
character, but they are highly detrimental to good health; and wherever
possible other amusements than the ball room should be introduced into
the lives of our young people. They should be trained to appreciate
more and more amusements of a social and intellectual character.
Home parties, concerts that develop the talents of youth, and public
amusements that bring together both young and old, are preferable to
the excessive practice of dancing.

In the second place, our amusements should be consistent with our
religious spirit of fraternity and religious devotion. In too many
instances the ball room is devoid of our supplication for Divine
protection. Our dancing should be, {402} as far as possible, under the
supervision of some Church organization, and we should be scrupulously
careful to open the dance by prayer. * * * The question of amusements
is one of such far-reaching importance to the welfare of the Saints
that the presiding authorities of every ward should give it their most
careful attention and consideration.

In the third place, our amusements should interfere as little as
possible with the work of the school-room. It is very desirable that
the early education of our young people should be carried on with as
little interruption as possible, and frequent dances during the school
season are detrimental both to the body and to the mind.

Lastly, it is to be feared that in many homes, parents abandon all
regulation respecting the amusement of their children, and set them
adrift to find their fun wherever and whenever they can. Parents
should never lose control of the amusements of their children during
their tender years, and should be scrupulously careful about the
companionship of their young people in places of amusements.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 39, March 1, 1904, pp. 144, 145.

SOCIAL DUTIES. The city people have become accustomed to living near
neighbors for years without associating together. There are instances
where good people, well acquainted in business and upon the street,
have lived neighbors for twenty-five or more years, and yet not invited
each other to their homes, to take dinner together, nor to have a
social hour or evening. They live so near each other that they can
almost shake hands, from door to door, yet never call, nor associate
together; they are perfectly exclusive. That is not a wise nor a good
way, especially when, as Latter-day Saints, we should be looking
after the welfare of mankind, by preaching the gospel in word and in
deed. Would it not be much better if we arranged a little dinner, or
invited our neighbor to come and join us in a little social, to become
acquainted and make him feel we are not strangers {403} to him, nor he
to us? And let us remember the definition which Christ sanctioned of
neighbor, as well as the requirement: He that showeth mercy unto me is
my neighbor, and the commandment is: Thou shalt love thy neighbor as
thyself.

I hope we shall do better. But there is really little sociability
among us, and there is an exclusiveness that is not in keeping with
the warmth of the gospel. We do not think enough of each other; we
do not care for each other; we take little or no notice of each
other; and, finally, we pass each other on the street without the
slightest recognition. We scarcely bow to a brother, unless we are
really intimate with him. That is not the spirit that belongs to
"Mormonism." It is contrary to that friendship and sociability that
ought to characterize Latter-day Saints. I believe in the broadest,
most charitable, the kindest and most loving spirit that it is possible
for broadminded and big-souled men to exercise or to possess; and that
this spirit ought to be the spirit possessed and diffused by the Saints
everywhere.

Let us, then, gather in the honest in heart, and treat them and one
another with the spirit of warmth and love characteristic of the
gospel. Then talk about the unfortunate, the drunken, the weak, the
erring! Do not shun them, either. They ought to be saved as well as
everybody else; and, if it is possible, let us save them, too, as well
as the worthy, the good and the pure. Let us save the sinner, and bring
him to a knowledge of the truth, if possible.

Our Mutual Improvement Associations are invited to make a specialty of
this social work; the bishops should lend their aid to the officers
in selecting and setting apart capable and experienced missionaries,
as well as ward teachers, who should devote their energies, among
the people. The indifferent youth, as well as the stranger and
the friendless in our midst, should be made welcome at our {404}
gatherings, and be induced to feel at home among the people of God.
And then, let it be remembered, every family, every person, has a
duty in this line. Because men or women are not ward or association
officers is no good reason why they should be exempt from the common
social amenities of life, nor why they should not be subject to doing
good temporally, spiritually and socially.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 7,
October, 1904, p. 957.

THE DANGER OF PLEASURE HUNTING. In order that a young man may make up
his mind what course in life to take he must pay some thought on where
he is going in the long run; what shall be the condition he would like
to enjoy through life, and particularly the end towards which he would
like to work. Otherwise it will be hard for him to steer his actions
from day to day towards the goal of his ambition.

Calmly viewing the hundreds of sayings to be found in good books, and
hearing also the experiences and warnings of many more wise men who
live in our time and settlements, who are exemplary shepherds of the
people in our many Church organizations, and who are constantly giving
warning against excessive pleasure-seeking, the thoughtful young man
must confess that pleasure is not the goal that he would seek--that the
man would seek who desires to make the best out of life.

The wise man is, therefore, going to steer his course away from the
living death of pleasure-seeking. He is not going into bondage or debt
to buy automobiles and other costly equipages to keep pace with the
rush of fashionable pleasure-seeking, in this respect. He is not going
to borrow money to satisfy the popular craze for traveling in Europe
or in our own country, with no purpose in view but pleasure. He is
not going to grow nervous and gray in a struggle for means that his
wife and daughter, for mere pleasure, may spend the summer at costly,
fashionable resorts, or in distant {405} lands. It is true that there
are many in our community who do not appear to be wise, and who are
doing just these and other foolish acts for so-called pleasure.

The result of this hunt for pleasure and excitement and for keeping
pace with what only the very wealthy can but ought not to do, is that
many are forced to undertake all kinds of illegitimate schemes to
obtain money to gratify the tendency. Hence the growth of financial
immorality. Many underhanded methods are adopted to obtain means,
and even cheating and lying and deceiving friends and neighbors are
frequently resorted to in order that money may be obtained to gratify
the inordinate desire for pleasure. The story is told of one good
lady who got flour at her grocer's on credit, and sold it for cash at
a bargain to get money to go pleasure-seeking. Thus the morals are
corrupted. This applies to rich and poor alike.

You men who are sensible fathers, is this course worth while?

Young men who have a goal in sight, is this the course to take to fit
your purpose and to get the best results out of life?

Without discussing wealth and fame, shall we not call a halt in this
pleasure craze, and go about the legitimate business of true Latter-day
Saints, which is to desire and strive to be of some use in the world?
Shall we not instead do something to increase the genuine joy and
welfare and virtue of mankind as well as our own by helping to bear
the burdens under which the toilers are groaning, by rendering loving,
devoted and unselfish service to our fellow men?--_Improvement Era,_
Vol. 12, July, 1909, p. 744.

HARMFUL EFFECTS OF BAD BOOKS. It would be difficult to estimate the
harmful influences upon the thoughts, feelings, and actions of the
young, brought about by the practice of reading dime novels. Books
constitute a sort of companionship to everyone who reads, and they
create within {406} the heart feelings either for good or for bad. It
sometimes happens that parents are very careful about the company which
their children keep and are very indifferent about the books they read.
In the end the reading of a bad book will bring about evil associates.

It is not only the boy who reads this strange, weird and unnatural
exciting literature who is affected by its influence, but in time he
influences others. This literature becomes the mother of all sorts of
evil suggestions that ripen into evil practices and bring about an
unnatural and debased feeling which is ever crowding out the good in
the human heart and giving place to the bad. It was Shelley who said
that "strange thoughts beget strange deeds," and when our children are
reading books that are creating strange and unusual and undesirable
thoughts in their minds we need not be surprised to learn that they
have committed some unusual, some strange, or unnatural act. It is
in the thoughts and feelings that we have to combat the evils and
temptations of the world, and the purification of our thoughts and
feelings should be made the special effort of every father and mother.
Fuller once wrote, "It seems my soul is like a filthy pond where fish
die soon and frogs live long." It is remarkable how easy it is to learn
sin and how hard it is to forget it.

A story is told of an English officer in India, who one day went to
the book shelf to take down a book. As he reached his hand up over the
volume his finger was bitten by an adder. After a few hours the finger
began to swell. Later on the swelling went into his arm, and finally
the whole body was affected, and in a few days the officer was dead.
There are adders concealed in many a cheap and trashy book, and they
are always common in dime novels. Their effects upon our souls are
poisonous, and in time they are sure to produce a moral and spiritual
death. * * * The influence of these novels is all the more dangerous
{407} because the feelings and thoughts which they engender in the
heart and mind are more or less hidden, and the evil consequences of
such reading frequently does not manifest itself until some overt and
horrible act is the result of months and sometimes years of imagination
and wonderment. Let the Saints beware of the books that enter their
homes, for their influences may be as poisonous and deadly as the
adder which brought death to the English officer in India.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ May 1, 1902, Vol. 37, p. 275.

PROPER READING. There is altogether too much novel reading of that
class of novels which teaches nothing useful, and only tends to the
excitement of the emotions. Excessive novel reading we all know is
detrimental to the intellectual development of those who engage in it,
and the wise and those who seek advancement might well give more time
to useful, educational works--books that would enlighten the reader on
history, biography, religion, and other important subjects which all
well-informed people are expected to understand.

Many of our young people, and some older ones, too, are not familiar
with their own religion nor with the beautiful and striking doctrines
of the gospel with which it is so laden. This class devote more
time to reading useless or sensational books than they do to the
study and contemplation of works that would familiarize them with
the principles of the gospel. If they were better informed in this
line, and understood the saving doctrines and every-day questions of
their religion, more than they do, they would not be trapped by false
teachings, false leaders, and advocates of cults that are false. They
would not be misled as some of them are.--_Improvement Era,_ May, 1909,
Vol. 12, p. 561.

RAFFLING AND GAMBLING. Is it proper to raffle property for the benefit
of missionaries? No; raffling is a game {408} of chance, and hence
leads to gambling; for that reason, if for no other, it should not be
encouraged among the young men of the Church. President Young declared
raffling to be a modified name of gambling; said that "as Latter-day
Saints we cannot afford to sacrifice moral principles to financial
gain," and advised the sisters through the _Woman's Exponent_ not
to raffle. President Lorenzo Snow endorsed and approved of these
sentiments; and I have often expressed my unqualified disapproval of
raffling; the General Sunday School Board have declared against it; and
finally the state law makes it unlawful to raffle with dice; and if it
is unlawful with dice, in principle, is it not just as injurious with
any other device? With all these objections, should it not be clear
to anyone that raffling horses, quilts, bicycles and other property
is not sanctioned by the moral law nor approved by the general Church
authorities? But it continues just the same, and if you do not believe
in it, you should refuse to patronize it, so helping the cause. Now,
how shall we aid the missionary who wishes to sell a horse, or what
not? Let everybody give a dollar, and let the donors decide by vote
to what worthy man, not of their number, the horse shall be given.
No chance about that--it is pure decision, and it helps the people
who wish to buy chances solely for the benefit of the missionary to
discourage the gambling propensities of their natures. However, here is
an additional thought: The element of chance enters very largely into
everything we undertake, and it should be remembered that the spirit in
which we do things decides very largely whether we are gambling or are
entering into legitimate business enterprises.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
6, February, 1903, p. 308.

GAMES OF CHANCE. _To Whom It May Concern:_ Among the vices of the
present age gambling is very generally condemned. Gambling under
its true name is forbidden by law, and is discountenanced by the
self-respecting {409} elements of society. Nevertheless, in numerous
guises the demon of chance is welcomed in the home, in fashionable
clubs, and at entertainments for worthy charities, even within the
precincts of sacred edifices. Devises for raising money by appealing to
the gambling instinct are common accessories at church socials, ward
fairs, and the like.

Whatever may be the condition elsewhere, this custom is not to be
sanctioned within this Church; and any organization allowing such is in
opposition to the counsel and instruction of the general authorities of
the Church.

Without attempting to specify or particularize the many objectionable
forms given to this evil practice amongst us, we say again to the
people that no kind of chance game, guessing contest, or raffling
device can be approved in any entertainment under the auspices of our
Church organizations.

The desire to get something of value for little or nothing is
pernicious; and any proceeding that strengthens that desire is an
effective aid to the gambling spirit, which has proved a veritable
demon of destruction to thousands. Risking a dime in the hope of
winning a dollar in any game of chance is a species of gambling.

Let it not be thought that raffling articles of value, offering prizes
to the winners in guessing-contests, the use of machines of chance, or
any other device of the kind is to be allowed or excused because the
money so obtained is to be used for a good purpose. The Church is not
to be supported in any degree by means obtained through gambling.

Let the attention of stake and ward officers, and those in charge of
auxiliary organizations of the Church be directed to what has been
written on this subject and to this present reminder. An article
over the signature of the President of the Church was published in
the _Juvenile Instructor,_ October 1, 1902 (Volume 37, p. 592), in
which {410} were given citations from earlier instruction and advice
to the people on this subject. For convenience, part of that article
is repeated here. In reply to a question as to whether raffling and
games of chance are justifiable when the purposes to be accomplished
are good, this was said: "We say emphatically, No. Raffle is only a
modified name of gamble."

President Young once said to Sister Eliza R. Snow: "Tell the sisters
not to raffle. If the mothers raffle, the children will gamble.
Raffling is gambling." Then it is added: "Some say, What shall we
do? We have quilts on band--we cannot sell them, and we need means
to supply our treasury, which we can obtain by raffling for the
benefit of the poor. Rather let the quilts rot on the shelves than
adopt the old adage, 'The end will sanctify the means.' As Latter-day
Saints, we cannot afford to sacrifice moral principle to financial
gain."--_Improvement Era,_ December, 1908, Vol. 12, p. 143.

THE EVIL OF CARDS. But, you say, we must have recreation; what shall
we do? Turn to domestic enterprises, and to the gaining of useful
knowledge of the gospel. Let the love of reading good and useful books
be implanted in the hearts of the young, let them be trained to take
pleasure and recreation in history, travel, biography, conversation
and classic story. Then there are innocent games, music, songs, and
literary recreation. What would you think of the man who would argue
for whisky and beer as a common beverage because it is necessary for
people to drink? He is perhaps little worse than the man who would
place cards in the hands of my children--whereby they would foster the
spirit of chance and gambling leading down to destruction--because they
must have recreation. I would call the first a vicious enemy, and refer
him to water to drink; and the latter an evil spirit in the guise of
innocence, and refer him {411} to recreation containing no germs of
spiritual disease leading to the devil!

Let our evenings be devoted to innocent amusements in the home, and let
all chance games be banished from our families, and only recreation
indulged in that is free from gambling and the gambling spirit. And
let excessive card-playing, and the person who strolls about among
neighbors at all hours of the night and day encouraging this evil, be
put far from us. Just as sure as we encourage this evil it will bring
other grievous troubles in its wake, and those who indulge excessively
will lose the spirit of the gospel, and go to temporal and spiritual
ruin.

Young people in their recreations should strive to form a love for that
which will not be injurious. It is not true that only that recreation
can be enjoyed that is detrimental to the body and spirit. We should
train ourselves to find pleasure in that which invigorates, not
stupefies and destroys the body; that which leads upward and not down;
that which brightens, not dulls and stunts the intellect; that which
elevates and exalts the spirit, not that clogs and depresses it. So
shall we please the Lord, enhance our own enjoyment, and save ourselves
and our children from impending sins, at the root of which, like the
evil genius, lurks the spirit of cards and gaming.--_Improvement Era,_
Vol. 14, June, 1911, pp. 735-8.

WASTING TIME WITH CARDS. It is no uncommon thing for women, young and
middle-aged, to spend whole afternoons, and many of them, evenings
as well, in playing cards, thus wasting hours and days of precious
time in this useless and unprofitable way. Yet those same people,
when approached, declare they have no time to spend as teachers in
the Sabbath schools, and no time to attend either Sunday schools or
meetings. Their church duties are neglected for lack of time, yet they
spend hours, day after day, at cards. They have thereby encouraged and
become possessed of a {412} spirit of indolence, and their minds are
filled with the vile drunkenness, hallucination, charm and fascination,
that take possession of the habitual card-player to the exclusion of
all spiritual and religious feeling. Such a spirit detracts from all
sacred thought and sentiment. These players at length do not quite know
whether they are Jews, Gentiles, or Saints, and they do not care a fig.

While a simple game of cards in itself may be harmless, it is a fact
that by immoderate repetition it ends in an infatuation for chance
schemes, in habits of excess, in waste of precious time, in dulling
and stupor of the mind, and in the complete destruction of religious
feeling. These are serious results, evils that should and must be
avoided by the Latter-day Saints. Then again, there is the grave danger
that lurks in persistent card playing, which begets the spirit of
gambling, of speculation and that awakens the dangerous desire to get
something for nothing.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, August, 1903, p. 779.

CARD PLAYING. One's character may be determined in some measure
by the quality of one's amusements. Men and women of industrious,
business-like, and thoughtful habits care little for frivolous
pastimes, for pleasures that are sought for their own sake. It is not
easy to imagine that leading men in the Church would find any pleasure
that was either inspiring or helpful at the card table; indeed the
announcement that a president of a stake, bishop of a ward, or other
leading official of the Church was fond of card playing would be a
shock to every sense of propriety even among young people who are not
seriously inclined to the duties and responsibilities of life. Such
a practice would be looked upon as incompatible with the duties and
responsibilities of a religious life. Even business men, as a rule, are
distrustful of business associates whose inclinations engage them in
frequent card playing.

{413} But it may be said that the same objections do not hold good in
respect to young people who do not take life so seriously; but the evil
is that young people who indulge in the frivolous and vicious pastime
of card playing are never likely to take life seriously unless they
forsake such questionable pleasures early in life. It is the serious
and thoughtful man and woman who are most likely to assume the higher
and nobler responsibilities of life, and their tastes and pleasures are
never satisfied by means of a deck of cards.

Card playing is an excessive pleasure; it is intoxicating and, there,
fore, in the nature of a vice. It is generally the companion of the
cigarette and the wine glass, and the latter lead to the poolroom and
gambling hall. Few men and women indulge in the dangerous pastime of
the card table without compromising their business affairs and the
higher responsibilities of life. Tell me what amusements you like
best and whether your amusements have become a ruling passion in your
life, and I will tell you what you are. Few indulge frequently in card
playing in whose lives it does not become a ruling passion.

Cards are the most perfect and common instrumentalities of the gambler
that have been devised, and the companionship of cards, unlike the
companionship of most other games, is that of the gambling den and the
saloon. But cards do not stand alone in their enticement to evil. Any
game that ultimately leads to questionable society, because it is the
chief pleasure of such society, should be excluded from the home. There
are innocent games enough to satisfy the required pleasures of the home
without encouraging card playing.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38,
September 1, 1903, p. 529.

STOP CARD PLAYING. I am told that the prevalence of card parties in
the homes of the Latter-day Saints is much greater than is supposed
by those whom society people never think of inviting to make the
card table the source of an {414} evening's pastime. The presiding
authorities are not invited to the card parties, and, as a rule, are
not permitted to witness them, simply because those who give such
parties feel that a deck of cards in the hands of a faithful servant of
God is a satire upon religion.

I have heard that some who are called to officiate in holy ordinances
have, when absent from the House of the Lord, or when tardy in
arriving, excused themselves because of the time occupied in giving
or attending a card party. Those who thus indulge are not fit to
administer in sacred ordinances. They are no more worthy than others
who violate good morals in any respect. They should be excused.

I am told that young people offer as an excuse for such questionable
pastime the accusation that cards are played in the homes of certain
leading men in the Church. Bishops, however, ought never to be
deterred in their efforts to suppress the evil by counter complaints
of this kind. The bishop has the same right to inquire, through the
means of his teachers, into the pleasures of the homes of the highest
authorities of the Church as he has into those of its most humble
members. If it be true that card playing is prevalent in the Church,
the bishops are charged with the responsibility for the evil and it
is their duty to see that it is abolished, or that men and women who
encourage it be brought to account before their brethren and sisters
for the pernicious example they are setting before the youth of Zion.
Certainly no bishop can report his ward in good condition where such a
practice prevails.

Presidents of stakes are not without their responsibility in this
matter, and at the general priesthood meetings of the stakes they
should make searching inquiry of the bishops concerning card parties
in the homes of the Saints. It is an easy matter for every bishop to
know through the medium of the ward teachers, whether there are any
practices in the homes of the people inconsistent with the mission of
"Mormonism," {415} and card playing is certainly inconsistent with that
mission. No man who is addicted to card playing should be called to
act as a ward teacher, such men cannot be consistent advocates of that
which they do not themselves practice.

The card table has been the scene of too many quarrels, the birthplace
of too many hatreds, the occasion of too many murders to admit one word
of justification for the lying, cheating spirit which it too often
engenders in the hearts of its devotees.

My frequent and emphatic expressions on this subject are the result
of the alarm I have felt over the well founded reports that have come
to me concerning the prevalence of card playing in the homes of some
who profess to be Latter-day Saints. Upon every officer in the Church
responsible in any way for the dangers of the card table is placed,
and placed heavily, the duty of doing all that he or she possibly can
in prayerful and earnest manner to eradicate the evil. Let us be fully
conscious of the old adage which says that "The devil likes to souse
whatever is wet," and stop card playing in the home before it reaches
the gambler's table.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, Sept. 15, 1903,
p. 561.

PERNICIOUS NATURE OF CARD PLAYING. Card playing is a game of chance,
and because it is a game of chance it has its tricks. It encourages
tricks; its devotees measure their success at the table by their
ability through devious and dark ways to win. It creates a spirit of
cunning and devises hidden and secret means, and cheating at cards is
almost synonymous with playing at cards.

Again, cards have a bad reputation and they are the known companions of
bad men. If no other reason existed for shunning the card table, its
reputation alone should serve as a warning. It may be conceded that
superb skill is often acquired in this game of chance, but this skill
itself endangers {416} the moral qualities of the possessor and leads
him on to questionable practices.

Such games as checkers and chess are games more of fixed rules, whose
application are open and freer from cunning devices. Such games do
not intoxicate like cards and other games of chance.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 38, October 1, 1903, p. 591.

CARDS IN THE HOME. But if cards are played in the home and under the
eye of an anxious and loving parent, what harm can come from it all?
is asked. Most vices in the beginning take on attractive and innocent
appearing garbs, and a careful examination of the career of many an
unfortunate man will reveal the first step of his misfortune in some
"innocent pastime" whose vice rarely manifests itself in its infancy.
There are different spirits in the world and the gambling spirit is one
of them, and cards have been from time immemorial the most common and
universal means of gratifying that spirit. An "innocent game of cards"
is the innocent companion of an innocent glass of wine and the playmate
of tricksters.

Again, all amusements become pernicious when pursued excessively. No
game in the world has been played a thousandth part of the time, aye
all the games in the world have not consumed a thousandth part of the
time, that cards have taken. The game itself leads to excessiveness;
it is the enemy of industry; it is the foe of economy and the boon
companion of the Sabbath-breaker. The best possible excuse that any one
can render for playing cards is that there is a possible escape from
the dangers to which it leads; and the best explanation that people can
give for such a vice is the adventurous spirit of man that delights in
that which is hazardous to his physical and moral safety.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 38, Oct. 1, 1903, p. 593.

EVIL FASHIONS. In my sight the present-day fashions {417} are
abominable, suggestive of evil, calculated to arouse base passion
and lust, and to engender lasciviousness, in the hearts of those who
follow the fashions, and of those who tolerate them. Why? Because women
are imitating the very customs of a class of women who have resorted
to that means to aid them to sell their souls. It is infamous, and I
hope the daughters of Zion will not descend to these pernicious ways,
customs and fashions, for they are demoralizing and damnable in their
effect.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 8.

IMPROPER FASHIONS. Please set the example before your sisters that God
would have them follow. When we teach people to observe the laws of God
and to honor the gifts that are bestowed upon them in the covenants
of the gospel of Jesus Christ, we don't want you teachers to go out
and set an example before your sisters that will destroy their faith
in our teachings. I hope you will take that to heart, for it has a
meaning to it. I am talking to the teachers among the sisters. We hear
it reported, from time to time, that some of the teachers that are sent
out among our sisters not only do not set the example that they ought
to set, but they set the example they should not set for our sisters;
they teach them by example to break the word of wisdom, rather than
to keep it. They teach them to mutilate their garments, rather than
to keep them holy and undefiled, by setting the example before them,
and we can tell you the names if you want to know. I am not scolding;
I don't want it to be understood that I am finding fault. I am only
telling a solemn truth, and I am sorry that I have it to say, but I
want it to be distinctly understood. We see some of our good sisters
coming here to the temple occasionally decorated in the latest and most
ridiculous fashions that ever disgraced the human form divine. They
do not seem to realize that they are coming to the house of God, and
we have to forbid them entrance, or find fault with them, and they go
away grieved and say sometimes, "We don't want to go there any more."
{418} Why? Because they come unprepared, like the man who was found at
the feast without the wedding garment, who also had to be turned out.
(Matt. 22:1-14) We have to turn them out occasionally, because they
will not hearken to the counsel that has been given to them.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1914, p. 130.

EXCLUSIVE CLUBS AMONG CHURCH MEMBERS. There is no need of exclusive
clubs among the Latter-day Saints. The many auxiliary organizations
should be made to supply every legitimate public, and social amusement
of the young people, and, in addition to the regular Church and quorum
meetings, should meet every religious and ethical educational need of
our community.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 12, February, 1909, p. 313.

A LESSON FOR THE BOYS. Self-respect requires, among other things, that
one shall behave like a true gentleman, in a house of worship. No
self-respecting person will go to a house devoted to the service of
God to whisper, gossip and visit; rather, it is one's duty to put on
self-restraint, to give one's undivided attention to the speaker, and
concentrate the mind upon his words that his thoughts may be grasped to
one's benefit and profit.

Among the strong helps to gain self-respect are personal purity and
proper thoughts which are the bases of all proper action. I wish that
all young men could appreciate the value there is in this practice,
and in giving their youthful days to the service of the Lord. Growth,
development, progress, self-respect, the esteem and admiration of men
naturally follow such a course in youth. The Savior set a striking
example in this matter, and was early about his Father's business. He
did not leave it until his older years, but even as early as twelve
he had developed so far in this line that he was able to teach men of
wisdom and doctors of knowledge in the temple. Samuel, the prophet,
had so prepared himself by a pure, self-respecting childhood that he
{419} was perfectly attuned to the whisperings of God. The shepherd
youth David was chosen above his older brethren to serve in high
places in the Master's cause. Other great characters in history were
also selected early in life; and the best men in all ages gave their
young manhood to the service of God who honored them abundantly
with commendation and approval. In more modern times the Lord chose
Joseph Smith in early youth to be the founder of the new and glorious
dispensation of the gospel. Brigham Young was but a youth when he
determined to devote his life to the Church; John Taylor, Wilford
Woodruff, and in fact all the early founders of the Church devoted
their youth and manhood to the cause of Zion. You may look around
today, and who are the leaders among the people but those who early and
zealously devoted themselves to the faith? And you may foretell who
are to be the leaders by observing the boys who show self-respect and
purity and who are earnest in all good works. The Lord will not choose
men from any other class of his people and exalt them into prominence.
The opposite course, waiting to serve the Lord until the wild oats of
youth are sown, is reprehensible. There is always something lacking
in the man who spends his youth in wickedness and sin, and then turns
to righteousness in later years. Of course, the Lord honors his
repentance, and it is better far that a man should late turn from
evil than to continue in sin all his days, but the fact is clear that
the best part of his life and strength is wasted, and there remains
only poor, broken service to offer the Lord. There are regrets and
heartburnings in repenting late in life from the follies and sins of
youth, but there are consolation and rich reward in serving the Lord in
the vigorous days of early manhood.

Self-respect, deference for sacred things, and personal purity are the
beginnings and the essence of wisdom. The doctrines of the gospel, the
Church restraint, are like school-masters {420} to keep us in the line
of duty. If it were not for these schoolmasters, we would perish and
be overcome by the evil about us. We see men who have freed themselves
from Church restraint and from the precious doctrines of the gospel,
who perish about us every day! They boast of freedom, but are the
slaves of sin.

Let me admonish you to permit the gospel schoolmaster to teach you
self-respect and to keep you pure and free from secret sins that bring
not only physical punishment, but sure spiritual death. You cannot bide
the penalty which God has affixed to them--a penalty often worse than
death. It is the loss of self-respect, it is physical debility, it
is insanity, indifference to all powers that are good and noble--all
these follow in the wake of the sinner in secret, and of the unchaste.
Unchastity, furthermore, not only fixes its penalty on the one who
transgresses, but reaches out unerring punishment to the third and
fourth generation, making not only the transgressor a wreck, but
mayhap involving scores of people in his direct line of relationship,
disrupting family ties, breaking the hearts of parents, and causing a
black stream of sorrow to overwhelm their lives.

Such a seeming simple thing, then, as proper conduct in a house of
worship leads to good results in many respects. Good conduct leads
to self-respect, which creates purity of thought and action. Pure
thought and noble action lead to a desire to serve God in the strength
of manhood and to become subservient to the schoolmasters, Church
restraint, and the doctrines of the gospel of Christ.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 9, 1905-6, pp. 337-339.

{421}



CHAPTER XVIII

LOVE YOUR ENEMIES

WE ARE NOT DISCOURAGED. We are not disheartened, we are not
discouraged, we are not faint-hearted. We believe in the Lord and
we know that he is mighty to save, that he has guided the destinies
of this people from the first moment until the present, and that it
is not in consequence of the wisdom of men that we have escaped the
plots, schemes and machinations of our enemies, and that we have been
permitted to live and grow in the land, to become what we are, but
it is through the wisdom, mercy and blessing of Him who rules the
destinies not only of men but of nations. We owe all to God; we extend
our thankfulness and gratitude to him for the manifestations of his
love and care and protection.--_Oct., C. R.,_ 1906, p. 2.

I FORGIVE ALL MEN. I feel in my heart to forgive all men in the broad
sense that God requires of me to forgive all men, and I desire to love
my neighbor as myself; and to this extent I bear no malice toward any
of the children of my Father. But there are enemies to the work of the
Lord, as there were enemies to the Son of God. There are those who
speak only evil of the Latter-day Saints. There are those--and they
abound largely in our midst--who will shut their eyes to every virtue
and to every good thing connected with this latter-day work, and will
pour out floods of falsehood and misrepresentation against the people
of God. I forgive them for this. I leave them in the hands of the just
judge. Let him deal with them as seemeth him good, but they are not
and cannot become my bosom companions. I cannot condescend to that.
While I would not harm a hair of their heads, while I would not throw a
straw in their path, to hinder {422} them from turning from the error
of their way to the light of truth; I would as soon think of taking a
centipede or a scorpion, or any poisonous reptile, and putting it into
my bosom, as I would think of becoming a companion or an associate of
such men.

These are my sentiments, and I believe that they are correct. If you
can throw yourself in the way of the sinner to stop him in his downward
course, and become an instrument in the hand of the Lord of turning him
from the way of vice, iniquity, or crime, into the way of righteousness
and uprightness, you are justified, and that is demanded of you. You
should do this. If you can save a sinner from his wickedness, turn the
wicked from the course of death that he is pursuing, to the way of
life and salvation, you will save a soul from death, and you will have
been an instrument in the hand of the Lord of turning the sinner unto
righteousness, for which you will receive your reward. Some of our good
Latter-day Saints have become so exceedingly good (?) that they cannot
tell the difference between a Saint of God, an honest man, and a son of
Beelzebub, who has yielded himself absolutely to sin and wickedness.
And they call that liberality, broadness of mind, exceeding love. I do
not want to become so blinded with love for my enemies that I cannot
discern between light and darkness, between truth and error, between
good and evil, but I hope to live so that I shall have sufficient
light in me to discern between error and truth, and to cast my lot on
the side of truth and not on the side of error and darkness. The Lord
bless the Latter-day Saints. If I am too narrow with reference to these
matters, I hope that the wisdom of my brethren and the Spirit of Light
from the Lord may broaden my soul.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, pp. 5, 6.

WE LEAVE OUR ENEMIES IN GOD'S HANDS. We thank God for his mercies and
blessings; and I do not know but {423} what we owe in small degree
gratitude to those who have bitterly opposed the work of the Lord; for
in all their opposings and bitter strife against our people, the Lord
has developed his power and wisdom, and has brought his people more
fully into the knowledge and favor of the intelligent people of the
earth. Through the very means used by those who have opposed the work
of God, he has brought out good for Zion. Yet it is written, and I
believe it is true, that although it must needs be that offenses come,
woe unto them by whom they come; but they are in the hands of the Lord
as we are. We bring no railing accusation against them. We are willing
to leave them in the hands of the Almighty to deal with them as seemeth
him good. Our business is to work righteousness in the earth, to seek
for the development of a knowledge of God's will and of God's ways,
and of his great and glorious truths which he has revealed through the
instrumentality of Joseph, the prophet, not only for the salvation of
the living but for the redemption and salvation of the dead.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1908, p. 2.

LEAVE RESULTS IN GOD'S HANDS. God will deal with them in his own time
and in his own way, and we only need to do our duty, keep the faith
ourselves, to work righteousness in the world ourselves, and leave the
results in the hands of him who overruleth all things for the good of
those who love him and keep his commandments.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 6.

OUR DEBT TO OUR ENEMIES. I was going to say that we did not owe
anything to our enemies; that was the first thought that sprang into
my mind, but I will hold that back. I think we owe something to our
enemies, too, for the advancement of the cause of Zion, for up to date
everything that has been done to thwart the purposes of God and to
frustrate his designs has been overruled for the good of Zion and for
the spread of truth. And that will continue {424} to be the case until
the end, for they are fighting God's work, and not mine nor that of any
other man.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1906, p. 2.

A PRAYER FOR OUR ENEMIES. Let the Lord God have mercy upon those who
seek to hurt the cause of Zion. O God, pity the misguided, the erring,
the foolish, the unwise. Put thy Spirit in their hearts, turn them
from the error of their ways and from their follies, and bring them
back into the way of righteousness and into thy favor. I ask mercy
for my enemies--those who lie about me and slander me, and who speak
all manner of evil against me falsely. In return, I beseech God my
heavenly Father to have mercy upon them; for those who do it, not
knowing what they are doing, are only misguided, and those who are
doing it with their eyes open certainly need, most of all, the mercy,
compassion and pity of God. May God pity them. May he have mercy upon
them. I would not harm a hair of their heads, for all I am worth in
the world. I would not throw a block in their way to prosperity. No;
and I beseech my brethren that they keep hands off the enemies of our
people and those who are paving their own road to destruction and will
not repent, who are sinning with their eyes open, who know that they
are transgressing the laws of God and vilifying and lying against the
servants of the Lord. Have mercy upon them. Do not touch them; for that
is just what they would like. Let them alone. Let them go. Give them
the liberty of speech they want. Let them tell their own story, and
write their own doom. We can afford it. They do not hurt us, and if it
affords them any amusement, I am sure they are welcome to it.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1905, p. 95.

THE GOLDEN RULE. We need mercy; then let us be merciful. We need
charity; let us be charitable. We need forgiveness; let us forgive.
Let us do unto others what we would that they should do unto us. Let
us welcome the new {425} year and dedicate to it our best efforts, our
loyal service, our love and fellowship, and our supplication for the
welfare and happiness of all mankind.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 46,
January, 1911, p. 16.

WHY THE WORLD DOES NOT LOVE US. "If ye were of the world, the world
would love its own; but because ye are not of the world, but I have
chosen you out of the world, therefore the world hateth you." (John
15:19) The followers of Jesus were his chosen people, and because they
were chosen by him, the world hated them. The Jews were the chosen
people of God, and because they were his chosen people the world hated
them. Nowhere in the world today is the word Jew wholly disassociated
with the feeling of contempt. The feelings may differ greatly in
degree, but they are all of one kind. The word "Mormon," or Latter-day
Saint, is everywhere likewise associated with feelings of contempt.
Contempt is the heritage of a chosen people. Ought we therefore to
court the contempt of the world? By no means. On the other hand, we
should not be discouraged because it comes to us unsought. Some of our
friends--mostly in the Church, some few out of it--would lift us out of
the contempt of the world, and keep us out of it, if we would simply
be governed by their counsels. The truth is, we are not strangers to
hatred; and the contempt of the world has been our lot so much that
we have no reason to be discouraged when it comes, even in violent
forms. The danger lies not so much in our own peculiarity as in the
disposition of many of our people to court popularity at all costs, as
if it were something devoutly to be wished for. There is too often a
timid submission before the indignation storms that occasionally sweep
over the country.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 39, August, 1904, p. 464.

LOVE ONE ANOTHER. Let us, brethren, love one another, and exercise
patience and forbearance, avoiding judgment, except when called upon
to render it, and then tempering {426} the law with a father's love.
The Latter-day Saints must be promoters of both law and religion, as
exemplified in the justice and mercy of God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
6, 1903, p. 550.

KEEP ALOOF FROM THE WICKED. We should keep ourselves aloof from the
wicked; the dividing line should be distinctly drawn between God and
Belial, between Christ and the world, between truth and error, and
between right and wrong. We ought to cleave to the right, to the good,
to the truth, and forsake the evil.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 31,
1882, p. 674.

THE ENEMIES TO FEAR. For my part I do not fear the influence of our
enemies from without, as I fear that of those from within. An open and
avowed enemy, whom we may see and meet in an open field, is far less to
be feared than a lurking, deceitful, treacherous enemy hidden within
us, such as are many of the weaknesses of our fallen human nature,
which are too often allowed to go unchecked, beclouding our minds,
leading away our affections from God and his truth, until they sap the
very foundations of our faith and debase us beyond the possibility or
hope of redemption, either in this world or that to come. These are the
enemies that we all have to battle with, they are the greatest that we
have to contend with in the world, and the most difficult to conquer.
They are the fruits of ignorance, generally arising out of unrebuked
sin and evil in our own hearts. The labor that is upon us is to subdue
our passions, conquer our inward foes, and see that our hearts are
right in the sight of the Lord, that there is nothing calculated to
grieve his Spirit and lead us away from the path of duty.

{427}



CHAPTER XIX

EDUCATION AND INDUSTRIAL PURSUITS

WE ARE EVER LEARNING. We are not "ever learning and never coming to a
knowledge of the truth." On the contrary, we are ever learning and are
ever drawing nearer to a proper comprehension of the truth, the duty
and the responsibility that devolve upon members of the Church who
are called to responsible positions in it. Not only does this apply
to those members who are called to act in responsible positions, but
it applies to those who may be termed "lay members," if we may use
such a term with reference to members of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints.

Who is there, under the circumstances that exist around us, that is not
growing? Who is there of us that is not learning something day by day?
Who is there of us that is not gaining experience as we pass along, and
are attending to the duties of membership in the Church, and to the
duties of citizens of our state, and citizens of our great and glorious
nation? It seems to me that it would be a very sad comment upon the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints and her people to suppose
for a moment that we are at a standstill, that we have ceased to grow,
ceased to improve and to advance in the scale of intelligence, and in
the faithful performance of duty in every condition in which we are
placed as a people and as members of the Church of Christ.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1915, p. 2.

ADDRESS ON IGNORANCE. The subject which has been dwelt upon is a broad
one: "What can be done to stem the tide of evil that is sweeping
through the land?" I apprehend that one of the greatest evils existing,
that is "sweeping through the land," is that of ignorance, coupled
with indifference. {428} I presume that if the ignorant were not
so indifferent to these facts and to their condition they might be
prompted to learn more than they do. The trouble with men and women
is that they too frequently close their eyes to the facts that exist
around them, and it seems to be very difficult for many of the people
to learn and adapt to their lives those simple truths that should be in
fact the household words and precepts of every Latter-day Saint, and of
every home of a Latter-day Saint. How shall we stem the tide of this
evil, this indifference, this consequent ignorance? It appears to me
that the only way to do it is to wake up and become interested, or to
interest ourselves in those things which are so important and necessary
to the happiness and well-being of the children of men, especially
that which is so needful for the happiness and well-being of ourselves
individually.

It isn't all that is necessary, to learn the truth or to cease to be
ignorant. Following that comes the application of the understanding and
knowledge that we gain, to those works and things that are needful for
our protection and for the protection of our children, our neighbors,
our homes, our happiness.

I see occasionally, as I walk out in the evening, crowds of little
girls and boys who seem to me from their appearance as not yet having
reached their teens, little boys and little girls perhaps from ten to
fourteen, and perhaps some of them older, in defiance of the curfew
law, playing in the streets, loitering together in shady nooks, in
alleys, in the recesses about their homes or the homes of somebody
else. This I apprehend is an evil, a very serious evil. How will you
stem it? How can it be prevented?--M. I. A. Conference, 1910; _Young
Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 21, pp. 403-406.

THE VALUE OF PRACTICAL EDUCATION. I have often thought of the
undesirableness of the young men of our community seeking for light
employments, and lucrative positions, {429} without regard to manual
and mechanical skill, and knowledge and ability in agriculture.

None can deny that there is too great a tendency among the young men,
especially in our larger cities, to seek the lighter employments.
Politics, law, medicine, trade, clerking, banking, are needful and good
in their place, but we need builders, mechanics, farmers, and men who
can use their powers to produce something for the use of man.

Salaried positions, in which little responsibility is required, are
well enough for young men who are making a beginning, but it should be
the ambition of all to get out and take upon themselves responsibility,
and to become independent, by themselves becoming producers, and
skilful workers.

If life is valuable in comparison with the experience we obtain,
every youth will increase the worth of his life in proportion to the
new obstacles that he is able to conquer. In a routine, there are no
difficulties to encounter; neither is there profit to the mind or body
in the sameness of dependent positions. But let the man who would grow
and develop, go forth into the practical and productive ways of life.
These will lead to broadmindedness and independence, while the other
road ends in narrowness and dependence.

And here, also, a word to parents who have daughters. Are you fitting
them for the practical duties of mother and wife, that they may
in due time go out and make homes what they should be? Or are you
training your daughters to play the lady by making them accomplished
in flourishes, and expert in ostentatious embellishments? Is mother
doing all the work? If you say yes to the last two questions, you are
not doing your full duty to your child. For, while accomplishment and
polished grace, attainments in music and art, and a knowledge of the
sciences, are good and useful in their place, it is not intended that
these shall replace the common labors of life. Where children are so
trained, their {430} parents have done them a positive injustice, of
which both the children and the parents may live to be ashamed.

While we are educating our children in all that may be termed the
beautiful in science and art, we should not fail to insist that they
shall learn to do practical things, and that they do not despise the
common labors of life. Any other course toward them is an injustice
to the boys and girls, as well as to ourselves and the community in
general.

I believe the morals of the people will improve as skill in workmanship
and productive labors is acquired. Parents, too, will find it easier
to govern and control their children, if these are trained in useful
manual labor. We shall not then witness the sad spectacle of young men
loafing about our cities hunting for some easy place that just suits
their notions of work, which, if they can not find, they will not labor
at all, but go without in idleness. Mischief and devilment, frequently
so common because the hands are unemployed, will decrease and better
order will prevail.

Thus, while not decrying education in the aesthetic sense, I think it
is a serious duty devolving upon parents and those who have educational
matters in hand to provide a supplemental if not a coordinate course
in practical labor for every boy and girl, which shall make them
proficient in handiwork, and enable them to expend their powers in
the production of something for the material use and benefit of
man.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, January, 1903, p. 229.

PRACTICAL EDUCATION ADVOCATED. I desire again to say that I would be
pleased to see more of our young men learning trades instead of trying
to learn professions, such as the profession of law, or of medicine, or
other professions. I would rather a man would become a good mechanic, a
good builder, a good machinist, a good surveyor, a good farmer, a good
blacksmith, or a good artisan of any kind than to see him follow these
other kinds of professions. We need, however, those who are capable
of teaching in the {431} schools, and I would like to see a greater
interest manifested by our young men and women in normal training, that
they might become proficient teachers and look forward to following
this profession, because it is a most important one, and great results
will follow the faithful performance of the duties and labors of
those who are engaged in it. I would like to see the giving of proper
instruction to those who are seeking education, as well as the creating
of facilities in our midst for all who desire not only the common
branches of education, but the higher branches, that they may obtain
these privileges and benefits at home instead of being compelled to go
abroad to complete their education.

Some of our friends took very grievous offense at what I said in
respect to some of these things last April, I believe. I was sorry to
bear what they said in relation to this. Why, bless your soul, the
counsel that I gave last April in relation to these matters was in
the interest of all parties and of all professions. I did not speak a
disrespectful word of any profession. I simply advised, and I still
advise, the young men of Zion to become artisans rather than to become
lawyers. I repeat it; and yet I would to God that every intelligent
man among the Latter-day Saints was able to read law and to be his own
lawyer. I wish that every young man could and would study and become
familiar with the laws of his state and with the laws of his nation
and with the laws of other nations. You cannot learn too much in these
directions; but I think there are too many trying to be lawyers, for
the good of that profession. They are eating one another up, to some
extent. Not long ago a young man who had studied law and hung out his
shingle here, after waiting for business, trying to stir up business
for some length of time, came so near starving himself and family that
he came and wanted to know what to do. He could not make a living in
the profession of law. I asked him if he knew how to do anything else.
He said yes, he was a good printer. Well, {432} then, I said, abandon
the profession of law and take up the profession of printing; do
something that you can do and that you can make a living at. If he had
any practice at all in law, my counsel to him, if he obeyed it--and he
did--would have been a benefit to those who remained in the profession.
There are some men, most honorable, most genuine, and most intelligent,
who are following the profession of the law. I wish I could say that
much of all.

Then, my brethren and sisters, get out of debt. My young friends, learn
to become skilful in the arts and in mechanics and in something that
will be material, useful in building up the commonwealth where we live
and where all our interests are centered.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1903, pp. 5,
6.

BOYS SHOULD BE TAUGHT THE ARTS OF INDUSTRY. One of the things that I
think is very necessary is that we should teach our boys mechanism,
teach them the arts of industry, and not allow our sons to grow up
with the idea that there is nothing honorable in labor, except it
be in the professions of law, or in some other light, practically
unproductive, and I was going to say, unremunerative employment, but I
know of scarcely any employment more remunerative than is the practice
of law to those, at least, who are proficient. But what do they do to
build up the country? What do they produce to benefit the world? There
may be a few of them who have farms; there may be a few of them who
have manufactories; there may be a few of them who may be interested
and engaged in other productive labor, something that will build up
the country and the people and establish permanence, stability and
prosperity in the land; but the vast majority of them are leeches
upon the body politic and are worthless as to the building up of any
community. There are a good many of our boys who feel that they could
not be farmers, and that the pursuit of farming and stock--raising is
beneath their dignity. There are some who think it is {433} menial and
low for them to engage in building enterprises as masons, carpenters,
or builders in general.

There are but a few of our boys who take to the hammer and to the anvil
and to those pursuits of labor that are essential to the permanence
of any community in the world and that are necessary to build up the
country.

I say that we are remiss and slack in relation to these things, that we
are not instilling them sufficiently in the minds of our children, and
that we are not giving them the opportunity that they should enjoy of
learning how to produce from the earth and the materials that are on
the face of it or in the bowels of it, that which is necessary for the
advancement and prosperity of mankind. Some of us have the idea that
it is degrading for our daughters to learn how to cook, how to keep
house, or to make a dress, apron or bonnet, if necessary. No; daughters
in families that are blessed with plenty of means are taught to play
the piano, to sing, to go out in society and spend their time in
idle, useless pleasure, instead of being taught how to be economical,
industrious and frugal, and how to become good housewives. That is
degrading! I would like to say to this congregation, and to the world,
that if I possessed millions of dollars I would not be satisfied or
content in my mind unless my boys knew how to do something that would
bring them in a living, how to handle a pitchfork, or to run a mowing
machine or reaper, or how to plow the ground and sow the seed; nor
would I be satisfied if my daughters did not know how to keep a house.
I would be ashamed of my children if they did not know something of
these things.

We need manual training schools instead of so much book-learning and
the stuffing of fairy tales and fables which are contained in many of
our school books of today. If we would devote more money and time,
more energy and attention to teaching our children manual labor in our
{434} schools than we do, it would be a better thing for the rising
generation.

There are many subjects of this character, in addition to the
principles of the gospel of eternal truth and the plan of life and
salvation, that can be dwelt upon with profit by those who may speak to
us.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1903, pp. 2, 3.

MANUAL TRAINING AND AGRICULTURE. We want to make these valleys of the
mountains teem with the products of our own labor, and skill, and
intelligence. I believe it to be suicidal for us to patronize those
who are at a distance from us, when we should and could go to work and
organize our labor and produce everything at home; we might thereby
give employment to everybody at home, develop the intelligence and the
skill of our children, instead of letting them hunt after these fancy
occupations that so many young people desire above manual labor. The
schools of the Latter-day Saints and some of the state schools are
beginning to introduce manual labor. Some of our boys are learning how
to make tables, chairs, sofas, book-cases, bureaus and all that sort
of thing--all good as far as it goes; but if we want a mason to lay
brick, we have to look mostly to some man who has come from England or
Germany, or from somewhere else, to lay our brick. Why? Because our
boys do not like to lay brick. If we want a good blacksmith, we must
hunt up some foreigner who has learned the trade in his mother country,
and who has come here with a knowledge of blacksmithing; we must find
such a man before we can get blacksmithing done, because boys do not
like to be blacksmiths. They don't like even to be farmers; they would
rather be lawyers or doctors than to be farmers. This is the case with
too many of our boys, and it is a great mistake. I hope the time will
come when the children of the Latter-day Saints will learn that all
labor that is necessary for the happiness of themselves and of their
neighbors, or of mankind in general, is honorable; and that no man is
degrading {435} himself because he can lay brick, or carry on carpentry
or blacksmithing, or any kind of mechanism, no matter what it is, but
that all these things are honorable, and are necessary for the welfare
of man and for the building up of the commonwealth.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1909, p. 8.

AGRICULTURE AND MECHANIC ARTS IN CHURCH SCHOOLS. We have sought to
encourage in our Church schools the establishment of departments of
mechanic arts and manual training; and, so far as I know, everything
possible is being done, at least in the principal schools, for the
training of our youth, not only in the regular mechanic arts, but also
in the art of agriculture. An agricultural course has recently been
started in the Brigham Young University, and one of our most proficient
scientists has been called to take charge of the class. I am happy to
say that some of our oldest farmers are delighted with the information
that they have obtained by attending this class. I heard a brother who
had been farming for many years say that he had always been under the
impression that when a man could not do anything else, all he had to
do was to turn his attention to the plow and cultivate the soil, for
anybody could be a farmer, but he had found out since attending this
class that it required intelligence and intelligent application to be a
good farmer, as well as to be a good artisan. In connection with this
I may state a circumstance that came under my own observation years
ago. A certain brother had lived upon his farm for some fourteen or
fifteen years. He had cultivated it every year the best he could, but
it had become so impoverished that he could not make a living off it
any longer, and he became so disgusted with the country, especially
with his farm, that he concluded, if he could only trade the farm off
for a team and wagon that would take him out of the country, he would
be glad to go. By and by, his man came along, and he sold his farm
for a team and wagon, in which he put his wife and children and moved
to some other country. {436} The purchaser took possession of this
worn-out farm, and within three years, by intelligent operation, he
was able to gather from that farm forty bushels of wheat to the acre,
and other products in proportion. The nutriment of the soil had been
exhausted, and it needed resuscitation; so he went to work, gave it the
nourishment it required, and reaped a bountiful harvest as a result of
his wisdom. There are too many of our farmers who think it does not
need any skill to be a farmer; but this good brother in Provo, to whom
I alluded, found it did. So we are teaching agriculture in our schools,
as well as the mechanic arts. The Brigham Young College is putting up
a building now wherein are to be taught all sorts of industries; where
our youth will be able to learn carpentry, blacksmithing, domestic
arts, and other trades that will be useful to them. Yet we find it a
drag to induce anybody possessed of means to contribute very largely to
it. Some of our wealthiest men felt they were doing their utmost when
they donated perhaps a hundred dollars towards a building that will
cost eight or ten thousand dollars, if not more.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1906,
pp. 5, 6.

WE SHOULD STUDY AGRICULTURE. In connection with this matter, I think
it is wisdom for us, as agriculturists, to study agriculture and to
become able to produce out of an acre of ground as much as the "heathen
Chinee," or as much as any other people can produce from the same
ground. I do not see why we cannot learn to cultivate the soil as
intelligently and as profitably as any other class of people in the
world; and yet it is a well known fact that up to the present we have
not devoted that attention, care, thoughtfulness, or that intelligence
to agriculture in our country that we should have done and that we
are now learning to do, by the aid of schools where men who desire
to follow agriculture may learn the nature of the soil and all the
other conditions necessary to produce the largest results for their
labor.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1910, p. 4.

{437} DIGNITY OF AGRICULTURE. I believe there is no labor on earth more
essential to the well-being of a community or more honorable than the
labor which is necessary to produce food from mother earth. It is one
of the most noble occupations. And next to it is the tending of the
flocks of sheep and cattle. This is another noble occupation, if it
is only carried on properly and righteously. These are the foundation
of the prosperity of every community in the world. When the farming
community is prosperous, when the Lord blesses the earth and makes it
fruitful, then the blacksmith, the carpenter, and those who follow
other pursuits, will also be prosperous. But when the earth refuses to
yield of its strength for the good of mankind, then all other business
is stagnant and will languish. Therefore, let us till the earth; let us
cultivate the soil; let us produce our own living out of the earth, by
the blessing of God, as far as we possibly can, always keeping in mind
that we have entered into solemn covenant with God, which is an eternal
covenant, and from which he cannot depart or be moved, and in which
we can only fail by ourselves transgressing that new and everlasting
covenant and turning away from it.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, p. 70.

ENCOURAGE FORESTRY. Professor Fernow, of the Department of Forestry, at
Washington, declares that at the present rate of consumption our supply
of timber suitable for manufactured lumber will not last thirty years.
If it were true that our lumber supply was likely to be exhausted
within the next hundred years, it would still be a matter of alarming
concern to the people of this country. The use of lumber is not the
only serious question involved. Our trees aid the precipitation of
moisture and store it away for its gradual distribution during the hot
summer months.

The time is not distant in Utah when people will be compelled to grow
their own lumber, just as they grow other products of the farm. What
would we do without Oregon and the Sierras of Nevada? Oregon timber
may {438} now be very plentiful and rainfall ample, but some day the
Oregonians will demand a cessation of their forest destruction.

It is the business of presiding authorities in the stakes and wards of
the Church to study thoughtfully and to forward the interests of the
people. It is to be hoped that these authorities will look into the
matter of establishing the forestry industry, and see if something can
be done in their sections of the country to inaugurate the planting of
trees on private estates for the supply of lumber in years to come. It
would be commendable in the highest degree to the Latter-day Saints if
they would set apart here and there a small acreage of their land to
tree culture. If this matter is taken up in priesthood meetings and
some united action agreed upon, future disaster may be averted.

The Latter-day Saints ought not to be governed by purely selfish
motives in the use of their landed inheritances. The number among us
who have converted a single acre of our farms into forestry must be
extremely small, and yet it is a duty which we owe to ourselves and
to those who have the right to rely upon us to give this matter our
earnest consideration. The cultivation of timber lands will in time be
remunerative; but we are so accustomed to look for immediate returns
that we insist upon an early harvest for all that we do. The policy of
living for today is not only destructive of our material interests,
but it begets a selfishness harmful to religion and discreditable to
patriotism.

No ward or branch of the Church can long remain free from a public
interest without endangering its spiritual life and the spirit of
progress. Public interests are necessary to protect us against the
elements of social and material decay. Evidences of the truth of
these principles are abundantly manifest in those communities where
public spirit has been wanting and public improvements have not been
undertaken {439} for years. The wise and active president of a stake
or bishop of a ward will not fail to appreciate the value of a public
spirit and a united effort in the accomplishment of some necessary
and commendable public undertaking; and if there is not something
immediately at hand, he will look about to discover, if he can, a means
for calling out in a united and patriotic way the energies of the
people. We here therefore suggest that one of the public duties which
every Latter-day Saint owes to the Church and to his country is the
extension of valuable timber forests upon both private lands and public
domains.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, August 1, 1903, p. 466.

YOUNG WOMEN SHOULD HAVE PRACTICAL PREPARATION FOR LIFE. I, too, think
it is very important that young women should early form some design,
some definite purpose in life. Let that resolve be a noble one, a good
one; something with a view of benefiting others as well as one's self.
Perhaps your sphere may be in the household; if so, let every member
feel that you are indispensable to the comfort of home, by your good
works and your love and patience. You may be a stay and a comfort and
a help to your mother, though you may not be called to herculean tasks
or heroic sacrifices. Fix in your minds noble thoughts, cultivate
elevated themes, let your aims and aspirations be high. Be in a
certain degree independent; to the degree of usefulness, helpfulness
and self-reliance, though no human beings can be said truly to be
independent of their fellow beings, and there is no one reckless
enough to deny our utter dependence on our heavenly Father. Seek to
be educated in the highest meaning of the term; get the most possible
service out of your time, your body and brains, and let all your
efforts be directed into honorable channels, that no effort shall be
wasted, and no labor result in loss or evil.

Seek the very best society; be kind, polite, agreeable, seeking to
learn whatever is good, and comprehend the {440} duties of life that
you may be a blessing to all those with whom you associate, making the
very most and best of your lot in life. * * * *

It does not matter how wealthy the Latter-day Saints become; so long as
they are worthy of that name they will teach their sons and daughters
the dignity of labor and how grand it is to be practical in the duties
and responsibilities of life. One of the speakers during the general
conference remarked that if his children could not cultivate but one
set of faculties, rather than theoretical, he would choose practical
labor. It is very important to the welfare, usefulness, happiness, and
comfort of our daughters (in view of certain circumstances) that they
learn some branch of industry that could be turned to practical account
in the way of making a living, should circumstances require it. Mothers
should see to it that their daughters do this, and that when she is no
longer by them, they may be capable of providing themselves with the
necessaries of life.

There are people fond of saying that women are the weaker vessels. I
don't believe it. Physically, they may be; but spiritually, morally,
religiously and in faith, what man can match a woman who is really
convinced? Daniel had faith to sustain him in the lion's den, but
women have seen their sons torn limb from limb, and endured every
torture satanic cruelty could invent because they believed. They are
always more willing to make sacrifices, and are the peers of men in
stability, Godliness, morality and faith. I can not understand how a
man can be unkind to any woman, much less to the wife of his bosom,
and the mother of his children, and I am told that there are those
who are absolutely brutal, but they are unworthy the name of men. I
believe that most women are very devoted to their children, desiring
for them most ardently all that is good, and I loathe with every fibre
of my soul the son who turns against the mother who gave him birth. I
cannot tolerate the young lady who appears {441} well in society at the
expense of the comfort of her mother at home. Do not fear to divide
the burdens, and to do all in your power to brighten the lot of your
mother, and you will find blessings that are never discovered in the
path of selfishness.

And I exhort you young sisters to sustain those who are placed over
you, to improve all your opportunities, and refrain from evil; and,
mark me, you will attain to a high standard of character and the
honors of life, and become potent factors in forming your communities.
Maintain your dignity, integrity, and virtue at the sacrifice of life.
Take this course, and although you may be ignorant of many things,
you will be esteemed as of the noblest types of womanhood. With such
virtues for her adornment, no man could help loving such a young
lady.--_Young Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 3, 1891-1892, pp. 142-144.

OBJECT OF CHURCH SCHOOLS. The object, I may say almost the only
purpose, for the maintenance of Church schools is that true religion
and undefiled before God the Father, may be inculcated in the minds
and hearts of our children while they are getting an education, to
enable the heart, the soul and the spirit of our children to develop
with proper teaching, in connection with the secular training that they
receive in schools.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1915, p. 4.

VALUE OF CHURCH SCHOOLS. In my opinion the Church schools are laying
the foundation for great usefulness among the people of God, and they
should be sustained by the people and by the Church. The Church is
sustaining them, and as we acquire more means and become more free from
obligations which have been resting upon the Church for years, we will
be more free-handed to administer to the needs of our Church schools,
as well as other requirements of that nature.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1906, p. 6.

PURPOSE OF CHURCH SCHOOLS. The purpose of our Church schools is the
harmonious development of our young {442} people in all that relates
to their future well-being and progress; and eternal progress can be
enjoyed only when the principles of eternal life are associated with
their daily existence. Whatever hinders upward progression deadens the
sensibilities and real enjoyments of this world's life. And education
that has for its highest ideals the pursuit of worldly ambitions is
wanting in that free and unrestrained flow of the spirit which makes
for higher freedom and a more wholesome life. As we ripen in years and
in experience, our spiritual lives have more and more to do with our
real happiness. Our thoughts are more frequently turned inward as we
contemplate the approaching end of this life and the unfolding of the
greater life to come.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 47, November, 1912,
p. 630.

THE CHURCH AMPLE FOR ALL NECESSARY ORGANIZATION. The Church is provided
with so many priesthood organizations that only these can be recognized
therein. No outside organization is necessary. There is no call for
individuals to organize clubs, or special gatherings in social,
educational, or national capacity, in order to express wishes or
desires for reforms that can always be expressed in the organizations
that already exist in the Church. There is enough to do in the general
ward organizations, under Church control, to fill requirements, to
satisfy all righteous ambitions, and to develop the latent talent of
the people. It is neither proper nor necessary to establish further
public organizations under individual leadership, unsanctioned by the
Church authorities. If further public organizations are required,
they will be founded by proper authority, when it can be proved that
there is indeed any need for them. Such separate action leads to
clannishness, conflict and disunion, and is not pleasing in the sight
of God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, Dec., 1902, p. 150.

DEVELOP FACULTIES IN CHURCH ORGANIZATIONS. Where men are ambitious to
show their ability and fitness {443} as leaders, teachers, organizers,
champions of a righteous cause, or saviors of men, let them develop
these qualities in the many suitable organizations now existing in the
Church, which are waiting, yea, often crying aloud, for men with just
such superior ability. This course, pursued with the right spirit,
will do good, and meet the blessings of the Lord, while the other,
by playing upon their pride of nationality, their natural desire to
conquer, and their sectional clannishness, will lead to schisms among
the people that will finally cause them to lose the spirit of the
gospel.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, Dec., 1902, p. 151.

THE FOUNDATION OF PROSPERITY. The very foundation of all real
prosperity is home industry and home manufacture. This lies at the
foundation of the prosperity of every permanently prosperous community.
It is the source of wealth. I think, therefore, we ought to encourage
home manufacture and every home industry. We ought to co-operate
together, if there is any kind of business in which there is a profit,
let us co-operate together and let us have the benefit of that profit
among ourselves instead of giving it to strangers.--_Deseret Weekly
News,_ Vol. 33, 1884, p. 446.

THE OBJECT OF CO-OPERATION. Co-operation is a principle that President
Young was very much concerned about, and that he endeavored, with
his brethren, to impress upon the minds of the people throughout the
land. Under his administration our co-operative institutions were
established, and by his efforts, many of the people, especially in
the southern part of Utah and in Arizona, became united together in
organizations that were called "the United Order." The object was
co-operation, that the principle of union in labor as well as in
faith might be developed to its fullest extent in the midst of the
Saints.--_Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 33, 1884, p. 466.

{444}



CHAPTER XX

MISSIONARIES

HOW MISSIONARIES ARE CALLED. No person but the President of the Church
has the authority to call missionaries to preach the gospel; others may
suggest or recommend, but they do so to him, and he issues the call.
We draw attention to this fact as it occasionally happens that some
brother is spoken to about going on a mission by one of the general
authorities, by the president of the stake or by his bishop, and he at
once goes to work and begins to prepare to leave, sometimes going so
far as to rent his farm, sell his belongings or lease his property.
Then, when no date is appointed for his departure and no field of
labor assigned him, he feels disappointed and aggrieved.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 37, February, 1902, p. 82.

REQUIREMENTS OF PROSPECTIVE MISSIONARIES. In accordance with the
present regulations of the First Presidency, brethren are not now
sent on missions who have not themselves a testimony of the truth of
the work of the Lord. It is deemed inconsistent to send men out into
the world to promise to others through obedience to the gospel that
which they have not themselves received. Neither is it considered
proper to send men out to reform them. Let them first reform at home
if they have not been strictly keeping the commandments of God. This
applies to the Word of Wisdom as well as to all other laws of heaven.
No objection is offered to men being called who in earlier years may
have been rough or wayward, if in later years they have lived a godly
life and brought forth the precious fruits of repentance. Neither
should men be sent who are not in good health; a sickly elder is able
to do but little {445} good himself and often impedes the work of his
companion; and, too frequently, has to be sent home after a short
absence entailing suffering on himself and expense to the people or the
Church.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 37, February, 1902, p. 82.

THE KIND OF MEN WANTED FOR MISSIONARIES. We do not want boys that have
been in saloons, that have been in houses of ill-fame, that have been
gamblers, that have been drunkards, that have been infamous in their
lives--we do not want such to go into the ministry of this holy gospel
to represent the Son of the living God and the power of redemption
to the world. We want young men who have been born or adopted in the
covenant, who have been reared in purity, who have kept themselves
unspotted from the world, and can go into the nations of the earth
and say to men, "Follow me, as I follow Christ." Then we would like
to have them know how to sing, and to pray. We expect them to be
honest, virtuous, and faithful unto death to their covenants, to their
brethren, to their wives, to their fathers and mothers, to their
brothers and sisters, to themselves and to God. Where you get men like
this to preach the gospel to the world, whether they know much to begin
with or not, the Lord will put his Spirit into their hearts, and he
will crown them with intelligence and power to save the souls of men.
For the germ of life is in them. It has not been vitiated or corrupted;
it has not been driven away from them.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, pp. 72-3.

NECESSARY QUALIFICATIONS OF MISSIONARIES. Another thing--one of the
indispensable qualifications of the elders who go out into the world to
preach is humility, meekness and love unfeigned, for the well-being and
the salvation of the human family, and the desire to establish peace
and righteousness in the earth among men. We can not preach the gospel
of Christ without this spirit of humility, meekness, faith in God and
reliance upon his promises {446} and word to us. You may learn all the
wisdom of men, but that will not qualify you to do these things like
the humble, guiding influence of the Spirit of God will. "Pride goeth
before destruction, and an haughty spirit before a fall."

It is necessary for the elders who go out into the world to preach to
study the spirit of the gospel, which is the spirit of humility, the
spirit of meekness and of true devotion to whatever purpose you set
your band or your mind to do. If it is to preach the gospel, we should
devote ourselves to the duties of that ministry, and we ought to strive
with the utmost of our ability to qualify ourselves to perform that
specific labor, and the way to do it is to live so that the spirit of
God will have communion and be present with us to direct us in every
moment and hour of our ministry, night and day.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 191 5,
p. 138.

FURTHER QUALIFICATIONS OF MISSIONARIES. There are many excellent
men but very few really good missionaries. The characteristics of a
good missionary are: A man who has sociability--whose friendship is
permanent and sparkling--who can ingratiate himself into the confidence
and favor of men who are in darkness. This cannot be done offhand. You
must get acquainted with a man, learn him and gain his confidence and
make him feel and know that your only desire is to do him good and
bless him; then you can tell him your message, and give him the good
things you have for him, kindly and lovingly. Therefore, in selecting
missionaries, choose such as have sociability, who have friendship and
not enmity towards men; and if you have not any such in your ward,
train and qualify some young men for this work. Some men can never make
good missionaries, and you should not select such. In the very first
place, a missionary should have in himself the testimony of the Spirit
of God--the witness of the Holy Ghost. If he has not this, he has
nothing to give. Men are {447} not converted by eloquence or oratory;
they are convinced when they are satisfied that you have the truth and
the Spirit of God.--_Improvement Era,_ also _Digest of Instructions,_
Y. M. M. I. A., 1904.

WHAT MISSIONARIES SHOULD TEACH. Our elders are instructed here, and
they are taught from their childhood up, that they are not to go out
and make war upon the religious organizations of the world when they
are called to go out to preach the gospel of Jesus Christ, but to go
and bear with them the message which has been given to us through the
instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph, in this latter dispensation,
whereby men may learn the truth, if they will. They are sent out to
offer the olive branch of peace to the world, to offer the knowledge
that God has spoken from the heavens once more to his children upon
the earth; that God has in his mercy restored again to the world the
fulness of the gospel of his Only Begotten Son, in the flesh, that God
has revealed and restored to mankind the divine power and authority
from himself, whereby they are enabled and authorized to perform
the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ necessary for their
salvation; and their performance of these ordinances must of necessity
be acceptable unto God who has given to them the authority to perform
them in his name. Our elders are sent out to preach repentance of sin,
to preach righteousness, to preach to the world the gospel of life, of
fellowship, and of friendship among mankind, to teach men and women
to do that which is right in the sight of God and in the presence of
all men, to teach them the fact that God has organized his Church, a
Church of which he, himself, is the author and the founder--not Joseph
Smith, nor President Brigham Young, not the Twelve Apostles, that have
been chosen in this dispensation--to them does not belong the honor of
establishing the Church. God is its author, God is its founder, and we
are sent out, and we send out our elders, to make this proclamation
{448} to the world, and leave it to their own judgment and discretion
as to whether they will investigate it, learn the truth for themselves,
and accept it, or whether they will reject it. We do not make war upon
them; if they do not receive it, we do not contend with them; if they
fail to benefit themselves by receiving the message that we give to
them for their own good, we only pity. Our sympathy goes out to those
who will not receive the truth and who will not walk in the light when
the light shines before them; not hatred, not enmity, not the spirit
of condemnation; it is our duty to leave condemnation in the hands of
Almighty God. He is the only real, true, righteous, impartial judge,
and we leave judgment in his hands. It is not our business to proclaim
calamities, judgments, destruction, and the wrath of God upon men, if
they will not receive the truth. Let them read the word of God, as
recorded in the New and the Old Testaments; and, if they will receive
it, let them read the word that has been restored through the gift and
power of God to Joseph the prophet, as contained in the Doctrine and
Covenants and in the Book of Mormon. Let them read these things, and
they will learn here, themselves, the promises that God has made to
those who will not hearken when they hear the truth, but will close
their ears and their eyes against the light. We need not repeat these
things and try to impose upon the feelings and judgments of men by
threatening them or by warning them against the dangers and evils that
may come upon the ungodly, the disobedient, the unthankful, and those
who will not yield to the truth. They will learn it soon enough, if we
do not mention it to them at all.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1915, pp. 3-4.

WHAT AND HOW TO TEACH. The question often arises in the minds of young
men who find themselves in the mission field, "What shall I say?" And
another follows closely upon it, "How shall I say it?" To those who
go out in earnestness and who have made a partial study of the {449}
principles of the gospel at home, the first question will soon be
solved even if they have failed to make the very best use of their time
and opportunities in our schools, associations, and religious meetings.
They will soon find attraction in the principles of truth, and as they
find time, by close application, become familiar with the teachings
set forth in the gospel of Jesus Christ, as revealed to and taught by
the Latter-day Saints. But the second question, involving the best
method of delivering the message which the missionary has gone out to
proclaim, that is not always so readily solved. And yet, the success
or failure of a mission largely depends upon the false or accurate
solution of this problem.

While no specific rule may be given, experience has taught that
the simplest way is the best. Having learned the principles of the
gospel, through a prayerful spirit and by careful study, these should
be presented to men in humility, in the simplest forms of speech,
without presumption or arrogance and in the spirit of the mission of
Christ. This cannot be done if a young missionary waste his effort in
a vain-glorious attempt to become a noisy orator. This is the point
I wish to impress upon the elders, and to advise that all oratorical
effort be confined to appropriate times and places. The mission field
is not the place for such effort. The gospel is not successfully taught
by ostentatious display of words and argument, but rather is expressed
by modest and rational statements of its simple truth, uttered in a
way that will touch the heart and appeal, as well, to reason and sound
sense.

It isn't the rounded period, but the thought which it contains that
is of value; nor is it the faultless sentence so much as the spirit
accompanying the speaker that awakens life and light in the soul.
The spirit must first be with the missionary, if he shall succeed in
awakening its response in his hearers; and this is true whether the
words be spoken in conversation, face to face, or in public gatherings.
The {450} spirit will not manifest itself in the person who devotes his
time to deliver what he has to say in pompous words or with display of
oratory. He hopes to please artificially, and not effectively through
the heart.

It is, therefore, of great importance that the gospel should be
preached in the simplest and most intelligible way. This does not
mean that the language should not be choice, nor that all the
refinement possible should not be employed, but that there should be no
affectation, nothing "put on." There is enough in the gospel to occupy
our earnest time and language, without devoting our time to artificial
effects. By earnestness and simplicity the missionary will not only
establish himself in the truth, but his testimony will convince others.
He will also learn to stand for himself with God as his helper; he will
touch the hearts of the people and will have the pleasure of seeing
them come to an understanding of his message. The spirit of the gospel
will shine forth from his soul and others will partake of his light
and rejoice therein. The other course will be ineffectual, serving no
useful purpose, either to the missionary himself or to those who hear
him, but rather leading to vanity, emptiness and futility.

In the mission field, as in our daily lives, it is best to be
natural, rational--neither given to exaggeration of spiritual gifts
nor to destructive affectation in act or language. It is best to
develop simplicity of speech, earnestness of manner, humility of
spirit, and a feeling of love for our fellows, thereby cultivating
that well--balanced common sense in our lives that shall command the
respect and admiration of the honest in heart, and insure the continual
presence and aid of the Spirit of God.

NOT ALL MEN READY TO ACCEPT THE GOSPEL. I was struck by a remark made
by one of the brethren with respect to the many people who saw and
heard the Prophet Joseph Smith and yet didn't believe that he was a
prophet of God, or {451} a man raised up by the Almighty to lay the
foundations of this great latter-day work. It was said that the Lord
had not revealed it unto them. Now, I do not dispute that statement,
nor call it in question; but it occurred to me that there are thousands
of men who have heard the voices of the inspired servants of God, unto
whom the Almighty has borne record of the truth, and yet they have
not believed it. It is my opinion that the Lord bears record to the
testimonies of his servants unto those who hear those testimonies,
and it is left with them whether or not they will harden their hearts
against the truth and not listen to it, and abide the consequences. I
believe the Spirit of the Almighty God is upon most of the elders who
go out into the world to proclaim the gospel. I believe their words are
accompanied by the testimony of the Spirit of God. But all men are not
open to receive the witness and the testimony of the Spirit. And the
responsibility will rest with them. Yet it may be possible the Lord
withholds his Spirit from some, for a wise purpose in him, that their
eyes are not opened to see and their minds not quickened to comprehend
the word of truth. As a rule, however, it is my opinion that all men
who are seeking after the truth and are willing to receive it, will
also receive the witness of the Spirit which accompanies the words and
testimonies of the servants of the Lord; while those whose hearts are
hardened against the truth and will not receive it when it is borne
record of to them, will remain ignorant and without a comprehension of
the gospel. I believe there are tens of thousands of people who have
heard the truth and have been pricked in their hearts, but they are
seeking every refuge they possibly can to hide themselves from their
convictions of the truth. It is among this class that you will find
the enemies of the cause of Zion. They are opposing the truth in order
to hide themselves from their convictions of the truth. There are men,
possibly within the sound of my voice--certainly {452} within the
limits of this city--who have read our books, who have listened to the
discourses of the elders, and who are familiar with the doctrines of
the Church; but they will not acknowledge--openly, at least--the truth
of this gospel and the divinity of this work. Well, the responsibility
rests with them. God will judge them and deal with them in his own way
and time. Many of them, through their efforts to bring reproach upon
the cause of Zion, are awakening the attention of people in the world
to "Mormonism," and thus unwittingly advancing the cause of Zion, while
they know it not. I thank God my Father that he brings good out of the
evil designed against his people by their enemies. And he will continue
to do this. The clouds may gather over our heads, and, as in the past,
it may seem impossible for us to penetrate them; yet there can be no
clouds so dark, so gloomy or so heavy, but God will roll them away in
his own time and will bring good out of threatening evil. He has done
it in the past, he will do it in the future; for it is his work, not
the work of man.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1899, pp. 40-41.

OUR PEOPLE GENEROUS TO MISSIONARIES. I believe I can confidently say
that the Latter-day Saints, as a rule, are among the most hospitable,
generous and kindhearted people that can be found upon the earth. Not
long ago one of our elders returned from a mission in the South. There
had been a question raised in his mind as to whether the Latter-day
Saints in Zion would be as open-handed, as hospitable, as kindhearted
and as willing to receive and entertain a stranger as were the people
of the South, and he determined to put the matter to the test. The
story of his visits to some of our people here is published in the
Improvement Era, No. 6, Vol. 1, p. 399. I cannot give it to you in
detail, but will only attempt a brief outline. Representing himself as
a minister of the gospel from the state of Tennessee, traveling without
purse or scrip, as the elders of {453} the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints were generally doing, he called upon Brother B. Y.
Hampton, of the Hampton House, and asked for entertainment without
charge. Bro. Hampton readily consented to take care of him. He next
called at the Temple Barber Shop, with a similar representation, and
asked for a "shave and shingle," on the same terms, which was readily
complied with, and he was asked to "come again." He next called upon
Brother Henry Dinwoodey, and presenting himself as before, asked for
means to pay his fare on the railroad, going north, whereupon Brother
Dinwoodey handed him out the money. Needing a mainspring in his watch,
he called upon Brothers John Daynes & Son, and introduced himself as
before, and they cheerfully repaired his watch. He then called upon
Thomas G. Webber, of Z. C. M. I., and in the same guise asked for a
pair of shoes, which Col. Webber generously gave him. Having a tooth
which needed filling, he called at the dental parlors of Dr. Fred
Clawson, whom he convinced, after some difficulty, that he was not
an old friend and school mate, but really a minister of the gospel
from Tennessee, having a similar name; the doctor readily consented
to filling his tooth without money or price. Thus it was proven that
the Latter-day Saints were as generous, as kindhearted, as ready to
help the stranger of another religion, as were the good people of the
Southern States, and for that matter of any other country. Having put
these people to the test, in other words, having weighed them in the
balance and found them not wanting in each case, he fully explained
his motive and who he was, to their mutual delight. And when the elder
returned their gifts or declined to receive the favors granted him
without proper remuneration in each case, as I understand, the brethren
insisted that what they had done was in good faith on their part, and
he was welcome to the same, believing that an elder who had spent two
years and upwards on a mission, {454} laboring without purse or scrip,
would be likely to stand almost as much in need of such help as would
the strange minister whom he had personated.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1898, pp.
46-7.

ADVICE TO MISSIONARIES. The missionary labor accomplished by the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints is a subject of growing
comment and marvel among people of the world who come to learn of its
extent and results. This feeling of wonder is blended with admiration
in the minds of those who study the details of our missionary system,
and who are able to appreciate the self-sacrifice, enduring faith,
and God-fearing reliance by which the missionaries of the Church are
distinguished. The fact that those of our people who go forth on
missions do so at their own expense, unsalaried, indeed, without hope
of pecuniary reward, spending years away from home--usually years of
early manhood--the years that are regarded as most valuable in shaping
the individual's course and position in life--this fact, indeed, may
well arouse the surprise and admiration of the world.

Many of our devoted missionaries are valiantly striving to do their
best, and to make their best better, day by day; great is and greater
yet shall be their reward. Others are lacking in energy and effort;
their work is done, if at all, in a half-spirited way, and their
thoughts are ever running ahead to the time of their release and return.

To those of the first class the days are all too short and the months
too few for the exalted labors in which they find such genuine
satisfaction and happiness. To the others the days drag and the weeks
are burdensome.

The individual elder is left largely to the guidance of the spirit of
his calling, with which he should be imbued. If he fail to cultivate
that spirit, which is the spirit of energy and application, he will
soon become torpid, indolent and unhappy. Every missionary should
strive to devote part of {455} each day to study and prayerful
thought on the principles of the gospel and the theology of the
Church. He should read and reflect and pray. True, we are opposed
to the preparing of set sermons to be delivered with the thought of
oratorical effect and rhetorical display; yet when an elder arises
to address a congregation at home or abroad, he should be thoroughly
prepared for his sermon. His mind should be well stored with thoughts
worth uttering, worth hearing, worth remembering; then the spirit of
inspiration will bring forth the truths of which his auditors are in
need, and give to his words the ring of authority.

Brethren--you to whom these words of admonition apply, for your
own sakes, if not for the sake of those whose welfare is your
charge--beware of indolence and neglect. The adversary is only too
eager to take advantage of your apathy, and you may lose the very
testimony of which you have been sent to bear record before the world.

We would recommend to conference presidents and other presiding
officers in the various branches of the Church, that where
possible, they have the elders in their charge follow regularly and
systematically a study of the standard works and other approved
publications of the Church, thus more fully equipping themselves as
teachers to the world.

There is little excuse for the idle man in any walk of life; work is
abundant for every one who will labor; but least of all is there excuse
or palliation in the case of a listless or idle missionary pretending
to be busy in the service of his Lord.

It is to be earnestly recommended that elders abroad on missions, as
indeed Latter-day Saints in general, avoid contentious argument and
debate regarding doctrinal subjects. The truth of the gospel does not
depend for its demonstration on heated discussion; the message of
truth is most effectively {456} delivered when expressed in words of
simplicity and sympathy.

The history of our missionary work already written proves the futility
of public debate and argument between our elders and their opponents;
and this in spite of the fact that in the great majority of such
undertakings the forensic victory has been won by our representatives.
A testimony of the truth is more than a mere assent of the mind, it is
a conviction of the heart, a knowledge that fills the whole soul of its
recipient.

Missionaries are sent forth to preach and teach the first principles of
the gospel, Christ and him crucified, and practically nothing more in
the way of theological doctrine. They are not commissioned to expound
their own views on intricate questions of theology, nor to mystify
their hearers with a show of profound learning. Teachers they are and
must be, if they meet in any degree the responsibilities of their high
calling; but they should teach as nearly as they can after the manner
of the Master--seeking to lead by love for their fellows, by simple
explanation and persuasion; not trying to convince by force.

Brethren, leave these themes of profitless discussion alone; keep
closely to the teachings of the revealed word, as made plain in the
standard works of the Church and through the utterances of the living
prophets; and let not a difference of views on abstruse matters of
doctrine absorb your attention, lest thereby you become estranged from
one another and separated from the Spirit of the Lord.

The standard works of the Church and other approved writings should be
carefully studied and commented on by the brethren; every Latter-day
Saint, and particularly every elder in the field, should seek to become
learned in the gospel; but let it not be forgotten that to understand
the inspired writings aright the reader must himself have the {457}
spirit of inspiration; and this spirit will never impel one to hostile
discussion or wordy contests.

Seek first the Kingdom of God and his righteousness, and all else that
is desirable, including the knowledge for which you yearn, shall be
given unto you.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, October 15, 1903, p.
624.

MISSIONARIES AND THE WORD OF WISDOM. Young men cannot hope to be
successful missionaries who violate the Word of Wisdom. Its observance
is necessary to the spiritual fervor and assurance which carry
conviction to the hearts of those who receive the words of the elders.
The absolute necessity of the observance of the Word of Wisdom in the
missionary field makes it desirable that all who violate this important
law to the people, reform before they can hope to accomplish anything
helpful to others, either by precept or example.

There is no thoughtful Latter-day Saint who does not look forward with
some pleasure to the time when his son will be called on a mission.
No greater honor can come to a home than a call to represent the
work of the Lord among the nations; yet parents are too frequently
indifferent about the preparation their sons receive prior to the call
to fill a mission. Fundamental in that preparation is the observance
of the Word of Wisdom. So important do I esteem this subject that at
a recent conference in the Beaver stake I was led to speak upon it
at considerable length. The extracts that follow from that discourse
should be of interest and deep concern to every reader of the _Juvenile
Instructor_:

"Now, I do wish with all my heart--not because I say it, but because
it is written in the word of the Lord--that you would give heed to
this Word of Wisdom. It was given unto us 'not by commandment'; but by
the word of President Brigham Young, it was made a commandment unto
the Saints. It is written here for our guidance, for our happiness and
advancement in every principle that pertains to {458} the kingdom of
God, in time and throughout eternity, and I pray you to observe it.
It will do you good; it will ennoble your souls; it will free your
thoughts and your hearts from the spirit of destruction; it will make
you feel like God, who sustains even the sparrow, that it does not
fall to the ground without his notice; it will bring you nearer to the
similitude of the Son of God, the Savior of the world, who healed the
sick, who made the lame to leap for joy, who restored hearing to the
deaf and sight to the blind, who distributed peace, joy, and comfort to
all with whom he came in contact, and who cured and destroyed nothing,
save it was the barren fig tree, and that was to show forth his power
more than anything else:

"'And all saints who remember to keep and do these sayings, walking in
obedience to the commandments, shall receive health in their navel, and
marrow to their bones.

"'And shall find wisdom and great treasures of knowledge, even hidden
treasures;

"'And shall run and not be weary, and shall walk and not faint;

"'And I, the Lord, give unto them a promise, that the destroying angel
shall pass by them, as the children of Israel, and not slay them.'
(Doc. and Cov. 89:18-21.)

"Are these glorious promises not sufficient to induce us to observe
this Word of Wisdom? Is there not something here that is worthy our
attention? Are not 'great treasures' of knowledge, even 'hidden
treasures,' something to be desired? But when I see men and women
addicting themselves to the use of tea and coffee, or strong drinks, or
tobacco in any form, I say to myself, here are men and women who do not
appreciate the promise God has made unto them. They trample it under
their feet, and treat it as a thing of naught. They despise the word
of God, and go contrary to it in their actions. Then when affliction
overtakes them, they are almost ready to curse God, because he {459}
will not hear their prayers, and they are left to endure sickness and
pain.

"And among the least things that we should do is to keep the Word
of Wisdom. Brethren and sisters, do not be so weak! I recollect a
circumstance that occurred three years ago in a party that I was
traveling with. There were one or two who persisted in having their tea
and coffee at every place they stopped. I preached the Word of Wisdom
right along; but they said, 'What does it matter? Here is So-and-so,
who drinks tea and coffee.' Thus the act of one woman or one man
nullified not only all that I or my brethren said in relation to it,
but also the word of God itself. I said at one time, 'Oh, yes, you
say it is a good thing to drink a little tea or coffee, but the Lord
says it is not. Which shall I follow? The Lord says that if we will
observe the Word of Wisdom we shall have access to great treasures of
knowledge, and hidden treasures; we shall run and not be weary, we
shall walk and not faint; and the destroying angel shall pass us by, as
he did the children of Israel, and not slay us. But the class of men
of whom I speak say, in effect, 'We don't care what the Lord says or
promises, we will drink tea and coffee anyhow.' Such people will set a
bad example, no matter what others say or what God has said. They will
take the bits in their own mouths, and do as they please, regardless of
the effect upon the Saints. I say, out upon such practices! If I could
not travel with the people of God and observe the laws of God, I would
quit traveling. But if the Lord will give me strength to keep his word,
so that I can teach it conscientiously, from the heart as well as from
the lips, I will visit you, and labor with you, and plead with you. I
will pray for you and earnestly beseech you, my brethren and sisters,
especially the young men of Zion, to cease practicing these forbidden
things, and observe the laws of God, so that you can run and not be
weary, walk and not faint, {460} and have access to great treasures
of knowledge, hidden treasures, and every blessing that the Lord has
promised through obedience."--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 37, December,
1902, p. 721.

CAUTION TO MISSIONARIES. I am sorry to say it, but if these two
boys, recently drowned, had kept away from those rivers, where they
had no special duty, or calling, they would not have been drowned
as they were. I would like it to be understood by the presidents of
missions, and by the elders, that are out in the world, that it is not
a good thing, neither is it at all wise for our elders to go out on
excursions, on dangerous lakes, on streams, or bodies of water, just
for fun. They would better keep away. The Lord will protect them in
the discharge of their duty; and if they are more careful of their
health, there will not be so many of them become a prey to disease.
We know of some incidents that were the cause of the death of some of
our brethren who have passed away in the mission field. They lacked
caution. They did not exercise the best wisdom and judgment. They went
too far for their strength and were not as careful of themselves as
they ought to have been. I do not speak this to blame these brethren.
I have not the least doubt but they have done according to the best
wisdom they possessed; but there is such a thing as overdoing. A man
may fast and pray till he kills himself, and there isn't any necessity
for it; nor wisdom in it. I say to my brethren, when they are fasting,
and praying for the sick, and for those who need faith and prayer, do
not go beyond what is wise and prudent in fasting and prayer. The Lord
can hear a simple prayer offered in faith, in half a dozen words, and
he will recognize fasting that may not continue more than twenty-four
hours, just as readily and as effectually as he will answer a prayer of
a thousand words and fasting for a month. Now, remember it. I have in
mind elders now on missions, anxious to excel their {461} associates.
Each wants to get most "red marks" of credit, and so he will exert
himself beyond his strength; and it is unwise to do it. The Lord
will accept that which is enough, with a good deal more pleasure and
satisfaction than that which is too much and unnecessary. It is good
to be earnest, good to be diligent, to persevere, and to be faithful
all the time, but we may go to extremes in these things, when we do
not need to. The Word of Wisdom dictates that when we become weary we
should stop and rest. When we are threatened with exhaustion through
over exertion, wisdom would caution us to wait, to stop; not to take a
stimulant to urge us on to greater extremes, but go where we can retire
and rest and recuperate according to the laws of nature. That is the
best way to do.

Now, I do not blame my dear brethren who have met with death abroad;
yet, I wish that they could and would have escaped it.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1912, pp. 134-135.

HEALTH OF MISSIONARIES TO BE GUARDED. Presidents of all the missions
are under strict instructions from the Presidency of the Church to
guard carefully the health of the elders who are laboring under their
direction. These presidents of missions are also under instructions to
send home any and all elders whose health or whose other circumstances
may make it necessary for them to return.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 41.

MISSIONARIES IN ILL HEALTH. I would like to exhort the elders who are
upon missions, and those who shall go upon missions in the future,
not to allow the thoughts to enter their hearts that they will be
criticized or be made to suffer in their character or their standing in
the Church because their health will not permit them to fulfil a two
or three years' mission abroad. We would like them rather to feel in
themselves a wholesome aversion to coming home without having filled an
honorable mission, when their health and other conditions will permit
them to do so; and {462} if they have any reluctance about coming home
at all, before completing their missions, it should be based upon this
principle.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1904, p. 42.

CARE OF RETURNED MISSIONARIES. It is also a good thing for the bishops
in all the wards to look after their returned missionaries. It is
a pity that after so many of our boys who go abroad and fill good
missions return home, they should be apparently dropped or ignored by
the presiding authorities of the Church and be permitted to drift away
again into carelessness and indifference, and eventually, perhaps, to
wander entirely away from their Church duties. They should be kept in
the harness, they should be made active in the work of the ministry, in
some way, that they may better keep the spirit of the gospel in their
minds and in their hearts and be useful at home as well as abroad.

There is no question as to the fact that missionary service is required
and is as necessary in Zion, or here at home, as it is abroad. Many
people seem to be careless with reference to the proper training
of their children. We see too many boys that are falling into very
careless, if not into pernicious, ways and habits. Every missionary boy
who returns from his mission full of faith and good desire should take
it upon himself to become a savior as far as possible of his young and
less experienced associates at home. When a returned missionary sees
a boy falling into bad ways and is becoming accustomed to bad habits,
he should feel that it is his duty to take hold of him, in connection
with the presiding authorities of the stake or of the ward in which
he lives, and exercise all the power and influence he can for the
salvation of that erring young man who has not the experience that our
elders abroad have had, and thus become a means of saving many and of
establishing them more firmly in the truth.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, pp.
4-5.

{463} WORK FOR RETURNED MISSIONARIES. Returned missionaries ought to
be in demand where brave hearts, strong minds and willing hands are
wanted. The genius of the gospel is not that of negative goodness--mere
absence of what is bad; it stands for aggressive energy well directed,
for positive goodness--in short, for work.

We hear much of men who are specially gifted, of geniuses in the
world's affairs; and many of us force ourselves to think that we are
capable of little and therefore may as well take life easy, since we
do not belong to that favored class. True, not all are endowed with
the same gifts, nor is every one imbued with the strength of a giant;
yet every son and every daughter of God has received some talent, and
each will be held to strict account for the use or misuse to which it
is put. The spirit of genius is the spirit of hard work, plodding toil,
whole-souled devotion to the labor of the day.

Let no one think that any honorable labor is beneath him; harbor no
dislike for the work of the hands, but let the mind direct them in
skill and energy. The example set by our late beloved President Wilford
Woodruff has often been cited abroad, and held up for the admiration
and emulation of those who are not of us; it is that of most of the
leading men of our Church. Even in his old age he did his share of
physical toil, and rejoiced in his ability to "hoe his row" and hold
his own with his grandchildren on the farm.

"My son, be up and doing, and the Lord will be with thee."--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 38, p. 689.

DUTY OF A PERSON CALLED ON A MISSION. When a man is called to go on a
mission, and a field of labor is assigned to him, he should, I think,
say in his heart, "Not my will be done, but thine, O Lord."--_Deseret
Weekly News,_ Vol. 33, 1884, p. 226.

{464}



CHAPTER XXI

FALSE TEACHINGS

THE DEVIL'S KNOWLEDGE. The devil knows the Father much better than
we. Lucifer, the son of the morning, knows Jesus Christ, the Son of
God, much better than we; but in him it is not and will not redound
to eternal life; for knowing, he yet rebels; knowing, he is yet
disobedient; he will not receive the truth; he will not abide in the
truth; hence he is perdition, and there is no salvation for him. The
same doctrine applies to me and to you and all the sons and daughters
of God who have judgment and knowledge and are able to reason between
cause and effect, and determine the right from the wrong, and the
good from the evil, and who are capable of seeing the light and
distinguishing it from the darkness. Then this is the gospel of Jesus
Christ, to know the only true and living God and his Son whom he has
sent into the world, which knowledge comes through obedience to all his
commandments, faith, repentance of sin, baptism by immersion for the
remission of sins, the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands
by divine authority, and not by the will of man.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1916,
p. 4.

THE ENEMY OF TRUTH ALWAYS ARRAYED AGAINST THIS WORK. From the day that
the Prophet Joseph Smith first declared his vision until now, the
enemy of all righteousness, the enemy of truth, of virtue, of honor,
uprightness, and purity of life, the enemy of the only true God, the
enemy to direct revelation from God and to the inspirations that come
from the heavens to man has been arrayed against this work.--_Apr. C.
R.,_ 1909, p. 4.

WHY THE TRUTH IS HATED. Why should men be embittered against you
because of this, because of your belief in Joseph Smith? Why should
they become your enemies {465} because you declare your faith in a
new revelation from the Father and from the Son to mankind for their
guidance? Why should they? Let me tell you why: for the very same
reason precisely that the embittered and unbelieving Pharisees and
hypocrites of the Savior's time persecuted the Redeemer of earth,
for the very reason that they later put to death the disciples of
Jesus Christ, whom he ordained as apostles and as special witnesses
of himself, who bore testimony of him and of the gospel to all the
nations of the earth. They put them to death one by one, some of them
in the most cruel manner, simply because they preached Jesus Christ,
and him crucified and risen from the dead, and ascended into heaven,
and sitting with all glory and power and majesty and might at the right
hand of his Father, God. The world felt injured by it. Why? Because it
laid the ax at the root of the tree of error, of superstition, and of
tradition, of lack of faith, and unbelief. It laid the ax at the root
of the tree of wickedness, in the world, and of ignorance of God and
his principles, and the plan of life and salvation, and the world hated
the disciples because of it, and they hated the Son of God because of
it, and they crucified him. They hated the disciples because of it,
and they put them to death. That is why they hate you, for the same
reason; that is, those who do hate you, those who have exercised their
power, their will and their thoughts or minds sufficiently to be imbued
with the spirit of persecution and hatred against the light and the
truth.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1911, p. 5.

ONLY THOSE WHO DENY THE FAITH CONTEND. You find the spirit of
contention only among apostates and those who have denied the faith,
those who have turned away from the truth and have become enemies
to God and his work. There you will find the spirit of contention,
the spirit of strife. There you will find them wanting to "argue the
question," and to dispute with you all the time. Their food, their
meat, and their drink is contention which is abominable {466} in the
sight of the Lord. We do not contend. We are not contentious, for if we
were we would grieve the Spirit of the Lord from us, just as apostates
do and have always done.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1908, p. 7.

BEWARE OF FALSE TEACHERS. I know that this is the work of God, and he
is carrying it on. The honor of triumph over error, sin and injustice
will belong to God and not to you or me, or any other man. Some men
there will be who would limit the power of God to the power of men,
and we have some of these among us and they have been among our school
teachers. They would have you disbelieve the inspired accounts of the
Scriptures, that the winds and the waves are subject to the power of
God; and believe the claim of the Savior to cast out devils, raise the
dead, or perform miraculous things, such as cleansing the leper, is
only a myth. They would make you believe that God and his Son Jesus
Christ did not appear in person to Joseph Smith, that this was simply
a myth, but we know better; the testimony of the Spirit has testified
that this is the truth. And I say, beware of men who come to you with
heresies that things come by laws of nature of themselves, and that
God is without power. I am thankful that men who make such claims
are few in number in the world, and I hope they will become fewer
still.--_Logan Journal,_ April 7, 1914.

WHERE TO EXPECT FALSE DOCTRINE. Among the Latter-day Saints, the
preaching of false doctrines disguised as truths of the gospel, may be
expected from people of two classes, and practically from these only;
they are:

First--The hopelessly ignorant, whose lack of intelligence is due
to their indolence and sloth, who make but feeble effort, if indeed
any at all, to better themselves by reading and study; those who are
afflicted with a dread disease that may develop into an incurable
malady--laziness.

Second--The proud and self-vaunting ones, who read by {467} the lamp of
their own conceit; who interpret by rules of their own contriving; who
have become a law unto themselves, and so pose as the sole judges of
their own doings. More dangerously ignorant than the first.

Beware of the lazy and the proud; their infection in each case is
contagious; better for them and for all when they are compelled to
display the yellow flag of warning, that the clean and uninfected may
be protected.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 41, p. 178.

KNOWLEDGE: OF SIN UNNECESSARY. It has been very wisely said that "the
knowledge of sin tempteth to its commission."

It has been said that now and then the morbid curiosity of a missionary
leads him into questionable places, and the only excuse he has for
visiting these dens of vice is that he would like to see the shady
side of life in some of our great cities that he may know thereof for
himself. He wants to see "Paris by night" in order that he may know
something of the actual life of vast numbers of his fellowmen. Such
knowledge can have no beneficial effect upon the thoughts or feelings
of the missionary who seeks it. It does not strengthen him in the
duties of his calling. It is a peculiar sort of knowledge that is
enticing to the feelings and imaginations, and tends in some measure to
degrade the soul.

It is not necessary that our young people should know of the wickedness
carried on in any place. Such knowledge is not elevating, and it is
quite likely that more than one young man can trace the first step of
his downfall to a curiosity which led him into questionable places. Let
the young men of Zion, whether they be on missions or whether they be
at home, shun all dens of infamy. It is not necessary that they should
know what is going on in such places. No man is better or stronger for
such knowledge. Let them remember that "the knowledge of sin tempteth
to its commission," and then avoid those temptations that in time to
come may {468} threaten their virtue and their standing in the Church
of Christ.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 37, May, 1902, p. 304.

RETREAT FROM EVIL. Sometimes in life, we are brought face to face with
an enemy whose evil ways are beyond our power of combat, a victory
over which cannot be hoped for. There is only one escape from moral
annihilation and that is in retreat. The man with accumulated and
unforgiven wrong behind him may find all retreat cut off and his
condition in the world hopeless; and he who recklessly cuts off every
opportunity of retreat by the neglected evils of the past is most
unfortunate.

The daily practice, then, of seeking divine mercy and forgiveness as
we go along, gives us power to escape evils, that can be overcome only
by a safe retreat from them.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 44, August,
1909, p. 339.

THE LAW OF RECOMPENSE. Let me impress it upon you that one never
can hold quite the same relation to a law of God which he has
transgressed, as if one has lived in conformity with its requirements.
It is unreasonable to expect it, and contrary to the laws of nature
to conclude that you can. If a person has determined that sin can
easily be wiped out, and hence, that he will enjoy unlawful pleasures
in youth, repenting in later life, with an idea in his mind that
repentance will blot out completely the results of his sin and
debauchery, and place him on a level with his fellow who has kept in
virtue the commandments, from the beginning--time will wake him up
to his serious and great mistake. He may and will be forgiven, if he
repent; the blood of Christ will make him free, and will wash him
clean, though his sins be as scarlet; but all this will not return to
him any loss sustained, nor place him on an equal footing with his
neighbor who has kept the commandments of the better law. Nor will
it place him in the position where he would have been, had he not
committed wrong. He has lost something which can never be regained,
notwithstanding the perfection, the {469} loving mercy, the kindness
and forgiveness of the Lord God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 7, January,
1904, p. 225.

SYMPATHY WITH CRIMINALS. There is a deplorable tendency among the
people of this nation to sympathize with murderers, bank defaulters,
evil adventurers, and a hundred other classes of criminals who are at
large or who have been arrested or convicted for breaking the law.
Such a tendency is not alone manifest among the people of the various
states and territories of our nation, it is also apparent among the
Latter-day Saints. This sympathy for criminals is entirely abnormal,
and has a tendency to lower and destroy the moral sentiment of any
people who indulge in it. For a Latter-day Saint to sympathize either
with crime or with criminals, is a burning shame, and it is high
time that the teachers of the community should stem such tendency
and inculcate a sentiment that would make it extremely abhorrent to
commit crime. Young men may please God by thinking right, by acting
right, by shunning, as they would destruction, not only every crime,
but the spirit either to see or sympathize with the criminal, or to
hear or read the details of his damnable acts. It is an old saying,
that we are what we think; then, to be a good Latter-day Saint it is
necessary to think pure thoughts, to imbibe pure ideas, and to let the
mind dwell continually upon the noble things, and the good deeds, and
the exalted thoughts of life, discarding all sympathy or interest for
crime and criminals, and all thought of evil. The man or woman who
will resort to the court room, who will visit criminals with flowers,
who will read and constantly discuss every detail of crime, should be
condemned, frowned upon, and their actions should be made detestable in
the eyes of the pure in heart. When a murderer is condemned, he should
be detested, dropped, and forgotten; and so also should criminals of
other classes who sin grievously against law and the commandments of
God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, August, 1902, p. 803.

{470} THE CRIME OF WITCHCRAFT AND OTHER SUPERSTITIONS. After all the
horrors, persecutions, and cruelties that have been brought about by
the senseless belief in witchcraft, it seems strange in this age of
enlightenment that men or women, especially those who have received
the gospel, can be found anywhere who believe in such a pernicious
superstition. The Bible and history alike conclusively brand this
superstition as a child of evil. In ancient times, God required the
Israelites to drive the Canaanites from their land, and witchcraft was
one of the crimes which he laid at the door of the Canaanites, and for
which they were adjudged unworthy of the land which they possessed.

Witchcraft has not infrequently been the last resort of the evil doer.
Men bereft of the Spirit of God, when the voice of the Lord has ceased
to warn them, have frequently resorted to witchcraft, in the endeavor
to learn that which Heaven withheld; and the people of God from very
early days to the present have been troubled with superstitious and
evil-minded persons who have resorted to divination and kindred devices
for selfish purposes, and scheming designs. In the middle ages it
rested like a nightmare upon all Christendom.

Let it not be forgotten that the evil one has great power in the earth,
and that by every possible means he seeks to darken the minds of men,
and then offers them falsehood and deception in the guise of truth.
Satan is a skilful imitator, and as genuine gospel truth is given the
world in ever-increasing abundance, so he spreads the counterfeit coin
of false doctrine. Beware of his spurious currency, it will purchase
for you nothing but disappointment, misery and spiritual death. The
"father of lies" he has been called, and such an adept has he become,
through the ages of practice in his nefarious work, that were it
possible he would deceive the very elect.

Those who turn to soothsayers and wizards for their {471} information
are invariably weakening their faith. When men began to forget the God
of their fathers who had declared himself in Eden and subsequently to
the later patriarchs, they accepted the devil's substitute and made for
themselves gods of wood and stone. It was thus that the abominations of
idolatry had their origin.

The gifts of the Spirit and the powers of the holy priesthood are
of God, they are given for the blessing of the people, for their
encouragement, and for the strengthening of their faith. This Satan
knows full well, therefore he seeks by imitation--miracles to blind
and deceive the children of God. Remember what the magicians of Egypt
accomplished in their efforts to deceive Pharaoh as to the divinity of
the mission of Moses and Aaron. John the Revelator saw in vision the
miracle--working power of the evil one. Note his words. "And I beheld
another beast coming up out of the earth; * * * and he doeth great
wonders, so that he maketh fire come down from heaven on the earth in
the sight of men. And deceiveth them that dwell on the earth, by the
means of those miracles," etc. (Rev. 13:11-14.) Further, John saw three
unclean spirits whom he describes as "the spirits of devils, working
miracles." (Rev. 16:13-14.)

That the power to work wonders may come from an evil source is declared
by Christ in his prophecy regarding the great judgment: "Many will say
to me in that day, Lord, Lord, have we not prophesied in thy name? and
in thy name have cast out devils? and in thy name done many wonderful
works? And then will I profess unto them, I never knew you; depart from
me, ye that work iniquity." (Matt. 7:22-23.)

The danger and power for evil in witchcraft is not so much in the
witchcraft itself as in the foolish credulence that superstitious
people give to the claims made in its behalf. It is outrageous to
believe that the devil can hurt or injure an innocent man or woman,
especially if they are members of the Church of Christ--without that
man or woman has faith {472} that he or she can be harmed by such an
influence and by such means. If they entertain such an idea, then they
are liable to succumb to their own superstitions. There is no power in
witchcraft itself, only as it is believed in and accepted.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 37, p. 560.

SUPERSTITIOUS PRACTICES. It is needless to assert that to those who
are intelligent, and not bound by old notions and superstitions, there
is no truth in what people call witchcraft. Men and women who come
under the influence of a belief therein are bewitched by their own
foolishness, and are led astray by pretenders and mischief-makers who
"peep and mutter." It is really astonishing that there should be any to
believe in these absurdities. No man or woman who enjoys the Spirit of
God and the influence and power of the holy priesthood can believe in
these superstitious notions, and those who do, will lose, indeed have
lost, the influence of the Spirit of God and of the priesthood, and are
become subject to the witchery of Satan, who is constantly striving to
draw away the Saints from the true way, if not by the dissemination of
such nonsense, then by other insidious methods.

One individual can not place an affliction upon another in the way
that these soothsayers would have the people believe. It is a trick of
Satan to deceive men and women, and to draw them away from the Church
and from the influence of the Spirit of God, and the power of his
holy priesthood, that they may be destroyed. These peepstone-men and
women are inspired by the devil, and are the real witches, if any such
there be. Witchcraft, and all kindred evils, are solely the creations
of the superstitious imaginations of men and women who are steeped
in ignorance, and derive their power over people from the devil, and
those who submit to this influence are deceived by him. Unless they
repent, they will be destroyed. There is absolutely no possibility for
a person who enjoys the Holy Spirit of God {473} to even believe that
such influences can have any effect upon him. The enjoyment of the Holy
Spirit is absolute proof against all influences of evil; you never can
obtain that Spirit by seeking diviners, and men and women who "peep
and mutter." That is obtained by imposition of hands by the servants
of God, and retained by right living. If you have lost it, repent and
return to God, and for your salvation's sake and for the sake of your
children, avoid the emissaries of Satan who "peep and mutter" and who
would lead you down to darkness and death.

It is impossible for anyone possessing the spirit of the gospel and
having the power of the holy priesthood to believe in or be influenced
by any power of necromancy.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, September,
1902, pp. 896-899.

THE MESSIAH CRAZE. Your communication has been received. In response,
I send you a few of my reflections on the subject of the so-called
"Messiah craze" among the Lamanites.

Just what these manifestations have been is a matter of some doubt,
in my mind, not as to their evident purpose, judging from the many
newspaper reports of the main features of the manifestations so much
talked about, for it seems clear that the purpose or object thereof
has been to awaken in the benighted minds of these degenerate people a
belief and faith in and ultimately a knowledge of a crucified and risen
Redeemer, and the righteous precepts which he taught.

That God will manifest his purposes to the Lamanites in his own time
and way there can be no doubt in the minds of those who believe in the
divine origin of the Book of Mormon--for in that book this fact is made
unmistakably clear, but just how he will do so in every particular,
and just what agencies he will use to bring about his purposes in
this regard, may be matters of conjecture beyond what has actually
been revealed. One of the agencies, we {474} know will be the Book
of Mormon itself. Through the medium of the holy priesthood, which
has been restored to the earth in these latter times, God will also
operate to accomplish his will. So far, however, but little of good
has been effected through either of these channels, on account of the
extremely benighted condition of the minds, and the wild nomadic habits
of the red men. And for many other sufficient reasons they have not
been susceptible to the impressions of the Holy Spirit, nor capable of
rising to the comprehension of its power.

The time had not come, and is not yet come, for them to receive the
message and the work bequeathed them by their fathers, as designed
of God--but the time will come, and may be nearer at hand than many
anticipate. That these supernatural manifestations, if they indeed are
such, indicate the beginning of that time may without inconsistency be
believed. To suppose that the work will be accomplished in a day--or in
any very brief period--would be folly. God has not heretofore worked,
nor will he be likely to so work among this remnant of his people.
Their fall and degradation came slowly, by degrees, and in like manner
will their redemption, doubtless, come to pass. Yet he will cut his
work short in righteousness, and it behooves the Saints always to be
ready.

That the Lord will hasten their enlightenment by means of dreams,
visions, and heavenly manifestations, when the time shall come, and
that holy messengers may appear to them from time to time, and that
among them shall yet be inspired men of God raised up as teachers to
instruct them in the truth, we cannot doubt, for these things have been
promised in the last times both in the Book of Mormon and in the Bible,
and also in the revelations to Joseph Smith the prophet. But all these
things will come to pass as God has determined, in his own time and
way. And blessed will he be who shall be worthy to bear the message of
good tidings {475} and the offering of peace, the word of God and the
means of redemption to the seed of Joseph, to whom the promises are
made, and woe to him who shall despise and scoff in the day of God's
power.

With reference to who the personage is (one or more) who is claimed
by the Lamanites to have visited them, there appears to me to be room
for grave doubts. From all the reports I have seen upon this subject,
it is not at all conclusive to my mind that he was indeed the Messiah.
Upon this point we must consider the sources of our information; it
has come to us second handed, through interpreters and writers whose
knowledge of the Lamanitish tongues may or may not be very imperfect,
who have absolutely no knowledge of the ancient history of the race,
and of the purposes and promises of God concerning them. That they
know the scriptural account of Jesus, the Son of God, his crucifixion,
resurrection, and ascension on high, with the promise to come again in
like manner as he ascended, and this only, we need not question, but
knowing only this and nothing more respecting this matter, they might
easily be misled by the reports coming from persons far removed from
the actual witnesses.

And yet a latter-day Saint, who knows something of the history of those
people and of the promises made to them by their forefathers, hearing
the same story, would conclude that perhaps one or more of the three
Nephite disciples who tarried, whose mission was to minister to the
remnants of their own race, had made an appearance to Porcupine and
perhaps to many others, and taught them Jesus and him crucified and
risen from the dead, and that he was soon to come again in power and
great glory to avenge them of their wrongs upon the wicked and restore
them to their lands and to the knowledge of their fathers and of the
Son of God.

This would be a very natural conclusion and not at all {476}
inconsistent with the established principles of the gospel and our
knowledge of the manner of God's dealings with the children of men.
While it is more than likely that Christ might send messengers to the
Lamanites to prepare the way for his coming in the fulness of time, it
is highly improbable that Christ himself would appear to a people so
utterly unprepared to receive and comprehend him.

True, the Father and the Son appeared to the boy Joseph in the
beginning of this dispensation, but he was a chosen instrument from
eternity to open up the last dispensation of the gospel, and God had
prepared a chosen band to join him in that work. But Moroni, Peter,
James and John, and divers other messengers were sent to open the way
and prepare the foundations of this great work and restore the records
of the ancient people of this continent to the world. The foundations
of that work having been laid, the authority of God established, the
order of the priesthood and the laws of the Church revealed, shall we
look for these things to be ignored, or for the knowledge of God to
come through the appointed channels?

While they will come in harmony with revealed and established truth,
and not in conflict therewith, nor in conflict with the order of
heaven which exists on the earth, the object to be attained by such
manifestations as the Lamanites claim to have had, admitting the same
to be true and from God, can be no other than to begin the preparation
of the Lamanites to receive a correct knowledge of God and of their
fathers, and of the holy gospel already revealed and established among
men, that they might believe, obey and be saved thereby.

Far be it from me to wish to close the channels of communication
between the Savior of the world himself and the remnants of Lehi. No
one can be more free to admit his perfect right and power to visit whom
he pleases, at his pleasure,--for the channels of communication between
God and {477} man cannot be cut off nor closed by man, nor ever will be
while God has a purpose to accomplish by revealing himself. But that
we may not be deceived, led into error, tossed to and fro by every
wind of doctrine, the foolish vagaries or the cunning craftiness of
men, or follow the false cry of, Lo, here is Christ, or there, God has
instituted the true order of communication between himself and man, and
has established it in his Church, and to this truth all mankind will
do well to take heed, lest they be deceived. That which is in harmony
with this is of God, that which is contrary to it is from beneath.
It is in perfect harmony with the order of heaven for ministering
spirits or messengers from God or Christ to visit the Lamanites or any
other people, as Cornelius of old was visited, and as Christ visited
Saul, and for the same purposes.--Letter to Editor of _Young Woman's
Journal_ in answer to question regarding reported visitations to
Indians.--_Young Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 2, 1890-1891, pp. 268-271.

ONE MIGHTY AND STRONG. In conclusion we would say that the Latter-day
Saints by this time should be so well settled in the conviction that
God has established his Church in the earth for the last time, to
remain, and no more to be thrown down or destroyed; and that God's
house is a house of order, of law, of regularity, that erratic
disturbers of that order of men of restless temperament, who, through
ignorance and egotism, become vain babblers, yet make great pretensions
to prophetic powers and other spiritual graces and gifts, ought not
to have any influence with them, nor ought the Saints to be disturbed
in their spirit by such characters and their theories. The Church of
Christ is with the Saints. It has committed to it the law of God for
its own government and perpetuation. It possesses every means for the
correction of every wrong or abuse or error which may from time to
time arise, and that without anarchy, or even revolution; it can do
it by process of evolution--by development, {478} by an increase of
knowledge, wisdom, patience and charity.

The presiding quorums of the Church will always be composed of such
men, they will be chosen in such manner, that the Saints can be
assured that solid wisdom, righteousness, and conscientious adherence
to duty, will characterize the policy of those who are entrusted with
the administration of the affairs of the Church. While, from time to
time, as the work of the Lord may have need of their services, men of
exceptional talents and abilities will develop among the people of God;
and without disorder or eruption or excitement, they will be called of
the Lord through the appointed agencies of the priesthood and Church
authority, to positions that will afford them opportunity for service.
They will be accepted by the Saints in the regular order, appointed
by the law of the Church, just as Edward Partridge was called and
accepted, and just as the "one mighty and strong" will be called and
accepted when the time comes for his services.

JOSEPH F. SMITH,

JOHN R. WINDER,

ANTHON H. LUND,

First Presidency.

--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 10, 1906-1907, pp. 929-943.

{479}



CHAPTER XXII

AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS

DEFINITIONS OF AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS. I have in mind our auxiliary
organizations; what are they? Helps to the standard organizations of
the Church. They are not independent. I want to say to the Young Men's
and Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations, and to the Relief
Society, and to the Primaries, and to the Sunday Schools, and Religion
classes, and all the rest of the organizations in the Church, that not
one of them is independent of the priesthood of the Son of God, not
any of them can exist a moment in the acceptance of the Lord when they
withdraw from the voice and from the counsel of those who hold the
priesthood and preside over them. They are subject to the powers and
authority of the Church, and they are not independent of them; nor can
they exercise any rights in their organizations independently of the
priesthood and of the Church.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1913, p. 7.

PLACE OF AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS IN THE CHURCH. It is sometimes argued
that the auxiliary organizations of the Church are not councils
of the priesthood. This is admitted, but, on the other hand, the
boards--general, stake and ward--are composed of men holding the
priesthood and, though being called to be an officer in an auxiliary
organization confers no additional office in the priesthood, it takes
none away--the brother still remains a high priest, seventy, or elder
as before. Furthermore, the officers of these organizations are duly
presented at the general or local conferences, as the case may be, and
are there sustained by the vote of the people, and by that vote, these
organizations become recognized institutions of the Church, and as such
the officers should be respected in their callings and given {480}
recognition and support in the performances of their duties in all that
relates to the bodies which they represent.

The principles laid down in the foregoing relating to the Sunday
Schools apply equally to all auxiliary organizations of the
Church.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 39, January 1, 1904, pp. 17-18.

RELATION BETWEEN AUTHORITIES OF WARD AND AUXILIARY ORGANIZATIONS.
Questions are frequently asked touching the relationship that should
exist between the presiding authorities of a ward and the authorities
of an auxiliary organization, such, for example, as the superintendent
of the Sunday School. The organizations of the Church are intended
to promote harmony, and if understood there is no reason why discord
should arise between the bishop and those called upon to act in the
auxiliary organizations. The question is often asked, for instance,
who should select and install a superintendent of a Sunday School, or
what step should be taken in cases where the superintendent of a school
for any reason whatever vacates his office. The first step in case the
superintendent vacates his office is for his first or second assistant,
as the case may be, to request the secretary of the school either to
notify or remind the bishop of the ward of the vacancy, and at the same
time notify the stake superintendent of Sunday Schools; and this notice
or reminder should be given to the bishop and stake superintendent
at the earliest possible convenience in order that all unnecessary
delays may be avoided. The second step in such cases is the selection
of the proper officer or officers to fill the vacancy or vacancies. It
is, of course, within the authority of the bishop of a ward to select
and install the superintendent of the Sunday School in his ward, but
bishops of wards should not take such a step without the co-operation
of the stake superintendent. This last named officer represents the
presidency of the stake in carrying on the work of this auxiliary
organization of the Church. The {481} stake presidency holds the stake
superintendent responsible in a large measure for the character of the
man and the progress of the work of the Sunday Schools throughout the
stake, and the bishop therefore who proceeds to select and install the
ward superintendent without the approval or knowledge of the stake
superintendent, does not show proper respect for him or for the stake
president, who is entitled to be represented in the selection of a
ward superintendent. On the other hand, a stake superintendent is not
authorized to organize the superintendency of a Sunday School without
consulting the bishop of the ward, with whom it is his duty to be in
complete harmony. There is wisdom, as well as order, in the mutual
recognition of these stake and ward authorities. In the first place,
the superintendent, by reason of his experience in Sunday School work,
and his knowledge of the special qualifications required, may be, from
his point of view, well qualified to make suitable recommendations. On
the other band, the bishop is, or at any rate should be, more familiar
than any one else with the character and daily lives of the members of
his ward. After satisfying the special requirements made by a stake
superintendent there may be wanting in the proposed ward superintendent
some indispensable characteristics, or there may be some unworthiness
known only to the bishop. If the stake superintendent, therefore, and
the bishop of the ward approach each other in a spirit of harmony and
mutual helpfulness, there is no reason why they may not be united in
nearly every instance upon the most suitable man. Should a case arise
in which the bishop and stake superintendent find themselves unable to
agree, or both wish to defer to the judgment of some higher authority,
the proper step to take is to submit the matter to the president of the
stake for his judgment or decision, as the case may be. When such an
agreement has been arrived at, it is the duty of the bishop to install
the new superintendent in his office.

{482} In connection with the subject here touched upon a question has
also arisen respecting the propriety of a bishop presiding over a
Sunday School when the superintendent is present. If I were bishop I
should recognize with scrupulous care all the presiding officers in my
ward and should think it discourteous to them to assume the duties to
which they had been called. There are without doubt instances where the
bishops can with propriety offer suggestions that will be helpful to
the superintendent without the least humiliation to him; and there may
be extreme cases in which the bishop would be justified in assuming the
control of a school but it should not be the rule. On the other hand
if I were a school superintendent I would show the greatest deference
to the bishop whenever he was present and aim as far as possible to
satisfy his wishes and make the school all he could desire it should
be.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 39, January, 1904, pp. 16-17.

PURPOSE AND DUTIES OF RELIEF SOCIETY. A word or two in relation to
the Relief Society. This is an organization that was established by
the Prophet Joseph Smith. It is, therefore, the oldest auxiliary
organization of the Church, and it is of the first importance. It has
not only to deal with the necessities of the poor, the sick and the
needy, but a part of its duty--and the larger part, too--is to look
after the spiritual welfare and salvation of the mothers and daughters
of Zion; to see that none is neglected, but that all are guarded
against misfortune, calamity, the powers of darkness, and the evils
that threaten them in the world. It is the duty of the Relief Societies
to look after the spiritual welfare of themselves and of all the female
members of the Church. It is their duty to collect means from those who
have in abundance, and to distribute it wisely unto those in need. It
is a part of their duty to see that there are those capable of being
nurses as well as teachers and exemplars in Zion, and that they have an
opportunity to become thoroughly prepared for {483} this great labor
and responsibility. I have heard of a disposition on the part of some
of our sisters to become a law unto themselves in relation to these
things. I would like to say that it is expected of the Relief Society,
especially the general authorities of that great organization, that
they will have a watchcare over all its organizations among the women
of Zion. They stand at the head of all such; they ought to stand at
the head, and they should magnify their calling, and see to it that
error is not permitted to creep in, that cabals are not formed, that
secret combinations may not get a foothold, to mislead the sisters.
They should see to it that the other organizations of women in the
Church correspond and are in harmony with their organizations. Why
should this be? In order that the women of Zion may be united, that
their interests may be in common, and not conflicting or segregated,
and that the purpose of this organization may be realized and the
organization itself be effective for good in every part of the Church
throughout the world, wherever the gospel is preached. We realize that
it is impossible for men or women possessing physical weaknesses on
account of age or infirmities, to meet every requirement; but we expect
every man and woman entrusted with responsibility in the Church to do
their duty to the utmost of their ability. That we look for; that we
pray for; for that we labor to the best of the ability and strength we
possess.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1906, pp. 3-4.

OBJECTS OF THE RELIEF SOCIETY. Furthermore, I desire to commend the
work of the Relief Society, an organization that was effected by the
Prophet Joseph Smith. The objects of this organization are manifold.
It is not designed to look only after the poor and the needy as to
their bodily necessities, but it is also intended to look after the
spiritual, mental and moral welfare of the mothers and daughters in
Zion, and all who are engaged or interested in female work. I commend
the Relief Societies to the bishops, {484} and say, be friendly to
these organizations, because they are auxiliary organization's and a
great help to the bishops.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1902, p. 88.

DUTIES AND PURPOSE OF THE RELIEF SOCIETY. I will speak of the Relief
Society as one great organization in the Church, organized by the
Prophet Joseph Smith, whose duty it is to look after the interests of
all the women of Zion and of all the women that may come under their
supervision and care, irrespective of religion, color or condition.
I expect to see the day when this organization will be one of the
most perfect, most efficient and effective organizations for good in
the Church but that day will be when we shall have women who are not
only imbued with the spirit of the gospel of Jesus Christ, and with
the testimony of Christ in their hearts, but also with youth, vigor
and intelligence to enable them to discharge the great duties and
responsibilities that rest upon them. Today it is too much the case
that our young, vigorous, intelligent women feel that only the aged
should be connected with the Relief Society. This is a mistake. We want
the young women, the intelligent women, women of faith, of courage and
of purity to be associated with the Relief Societies of the various
stakes and wards of Zion. We want them to take hold of this work with
vigor, with intelligence and unitedly, for the building up of Zion
and the instruction of women in their duties--domestic duties, public
duties, and every duty that may devolve upon them.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1907,
p. 6.

THE RELIEF SOCIETY. I can say the same with reference to the first
and most important auxiliary organization of the Church, that of the
Relief Society. They have been doing the best they could; but now we
have suggested a complete organization of that society, that is, the
general authorities of that organization; and we trust that from this
time forth, they will be able to begin with renewed energy, judgment
and wisdom, the performance of the duties {485} that devolve upon them,
even those who are called to take the oversight of this great work in
Zion, the Relief Society organization.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1911, p. 7.

OBJECT OF SUNDAY SCHOOLS AND CHURCH SCHOOLS. The object of our Sunday
Schools and the object of our Church schools, the great, the paramount
object, is to teach our children the truth, teach them to be honorable,
pure-minded, virtuous, honest and upright, and enable them, by our
advice and counsel and by our guardianship over them, until they reach
the years of accountability, to become the honorable of the earth, the
good and the pure among mankind, the virtuous and the upright, and
those who shall be worthy to enter the house of God and not be ashamed
of themselves in the presence of angels, if they should come to visit
them.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1903, p. 82.

THE TEACHER ESSENTIAL IN SUNDAY SCHOOL WORK. One of the essentials to
a good Sunday School is to have good, pure-minded, intelligent, noble,
true and faithful teachers. If you will have a child develop to what
he should be, he that teaches the child should be developed to what he
ought to be, and until he is developed in intelligence, in faith, in
works of righteousness, in purity of heart and mind and spirit, he is
not in a very good position to elevate others to it.--_Oct. C. R.,_
1903, p. 99.

THE FIRST QUALIFICATION OF A SUNDAY SCHOOL TEACHER. The first
qualification of a teacher in our Sunday Schools is that he be heart
and soul a Latter-day Saint. He must believe in and unreservedly accept
the doctrines of the Church, otherwise his teachings will be subversive
of the very purpose for which these schools are maintained.

It is a self-evident truth, that no one can give what he does not
possess, and the teacher who is lacking a testimony of the gospel can
never inspire such testimony in his pupils.

The measure of personal liberty allowed by our liberal {486} Church
organization in the matter of giving instruction is great; but such
liberty must not be degraded into a license to teach as the doctrines
of the Church what is but the personal belief of the individual. A
teacher finding himself a non-believer in any of the principles or
tenets of the Church, will, if he be truly honorable, voluntarily ask
release from his position. No one can in righteousness be asked to
teach what he does not believe and accept as the truth, nor will one
who is sincere in his convictions attempt to do so; still less will
any teacher who loves the truth dishonor his position by employing
its opportunities to inculcate personal views not in harmony with the
teachings of the Church.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 49, April 1,
1914, p. 210.

THE PRINCIPLE OF SABBATH SCHOOL TEACHING. There is one point that has
rested upon my mind in relation to the Sabbath Schools, and it is this:
I think there is nothing in the Sunday School work more necessary or
essential than that all the teachers of the Sunday Schools should win
the love and the confidence of their pupils. I believe that greater
good can be done in the Sunday Schools by the teachers where they have
the absolute affection and confidence of their pupils than under any
other conditions. You may teach them, you may drill them in concert,
and you may have them commit to memory, and labor in every other way
that you possibly can to accomplish the good that you desire with your
children, but in nothing, in my opinion, can you succeed so well as
when you possess their undivided love and confidence. If a child thinks
a teacher is harsh with him or her, or unkind toward him, or does not
feel a real, genuine love for him, if he feels that the teacher is not
taking a real interest in him as one who loves him, he can never be led
to possess the right spirit; but when he feels that the teacher loves
him, is trying to do him good and to teach him that which will be for
his everlasting welfare, then the teacher has an influence over the
child, that when he studies he will {487} study with a purpose and with
an earnest desire to be benefited and to please the teacher; because
he knows and feels in his little heart that the teacher loves him and
is seeking to do him good. I have entertained this sentiment from the
beginning, in relation to the instruction of the little children. It is
a principle that obtains at the home as well as in the Sunday School.
If you can only convince your children that you love them, that your
soul goes out to them for their good, that you are their truest friend,
they, in turn, will place confidence in you and will love you and seek
to do your bidding and to carry out your wishes with your love. But if
you are selfish, unkindly to them, and if they are not confident that
they have your entire affection, they will be selfish, and will not
care whether they please you or carry out your wishes or not, and the
result will be that they will grow wayward, thoughtless and careless,
and although you may drill them, like a parrot, to repeat verses and
to speak in concert, and all that sort of thing, they will do it
mechanically, without affection, and without its having that effect
upon their souls that you desire it should have.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1902,
pp. 97-98.

THE STAKE SUNDAY SCHOOL BOARD. As the General Sunday School Union
Board represents the First Presidency of the Church and constitutes,
under the direction of the Presidency and Council of the Twelve, the
highest authority in the Church on Sunday School matters, so the Stake
Board, under the direction of the Stake Presidency and General Sunday
School Board, represents the highest authority in Sunday School work
in the stake. If it were not so, there would be no unity.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 43, August, 1908, p. 310.

THE IMPORTANCE OF M. I. A. WORK. I want to say a few words to the
Mutual Improvement Associations. You young men and young women,
officers of the Mutual Improvement Associations, I implore you to go
from this conference {488} and do your duty. Look after the wayward,
the disobedient, the thoughtless, and the indifferent. It is necessary
that they should be guarded and looked after. As it has been expressed
here, time and again, it is better for us to save our own boys who
are being misled at home, than it is for us to go out into the world
and spend years of time and endless means in order to gather in a
few people from the world, while some of our own boys and girls need
redemption as much as they; besides, these people of the world are
so full of the traditions and superstitions of their fathers when
they gather to Zion that it is difficult, if not impossible, for
them entirely to overcome these traditions and get down to a full
comprehension of the gospel and a complete reception of the truth. Yet
a soul saved out in the world is as precious in the sight of God as a
soul saved at home. But we have work to do right at home, at our own
doors; and it will not do for us to neglect the work necessary to be
done at our own thresholds, and then go out into the world to do work
that is no more necessary. Let us do our duty everywhere.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1902, p. 87.

THE FIELD OF THE YOUNG MEN'S MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATION. The
systematic work now being done by the quorums of priesthood provides
our young men with the necessary teachings in formal theology and
trains them in the duties that pertain to their callings in the
priesthood.

There is, however, a strong need among the young men of the Church
to have an organization and meetings which they themselves conduct;
in which they may learn to preside over public assemblies to obtain
a practice necessary to express themselves before the public; and to
enjoy themselves in studying and practicing civil, social, scientific,
religious and educational affairs.

The Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations, therefore, should be
strengthened and their efficiency increased in order to offset and
counteract the tendency now so {489} prevalent to establish private
clubs, secret and social organizations, and select educational
societies.

They may be made to cover all these requirements, and it will be a wise
policy to grant them the fullest liberty, consistent with the order and
policy of the Church, in the selection of their officers, management
and conduct of their associations.

It is of vital importance that not only the young men of our Church but
also the regularly constituted stake and ward officers thereof shall
have a clear understanding as to the place and privileges which the
Mutual Improvement Associations hold among the Latter-day Saints, in
order to promote harmony, union of purpose, and the best interests of
all concerned.

To define this field and to give an understanding to our young people
and all concerned, we deem it expedient that a declarations should be
made at this our June conference, that there is as great opportunity
now as ever before for these organizations, and that increased activity
in other departments should cause no abatement of effort or efficiency
in our associations; but rather that renewed effort should be put forth
by the Improvement workers, and that every facility should be afforded
them by stake and ward authorities to accomplish their glorious mission
among the youth of Zion.

The field to be occupied is religious, social and educational. The
religious work is not to be formally theological in its nature, but
rather to be confined to the limits outlined by President Brigham
Young, when the organizations were first established: "Let the keynote
of your work be the establishment in the youth of an individual
testimony of the truth and magnitude of the great Latter-day work; and
the development of the gifts within them." In other words, to obtain
a testimony of the truth, and to learn to declare and express that
testimony; and to develop all noble gifts within them.

{490} The social includes control of various public and private
amusements; musical, dramatic and other entertainments and festivals;
field sports, athletic tournaments, excursions and other varieties of
social gatherings.

The educational should include regular class work in ethics and
practical religion, literature, science, history, biography, art,
music, civil government--supplemented by debates, oratorical and
musical contests, lectures, essays, writing for publication, reading
and speaking under the auspices of the organization, and if necessary
carried on in departments under instructors capable of specializing in
their particular lines.

We have directed the General Board to appoint committees to have in
charge, under the direction of the whole Board, these various lines,
who have a thorough knowledge of the work, and who are in sympathy with
our young men.

These committees may be sub-divided or added to as the wisdom of the
Board or the exigencies of the work may demand; and like organizations
may be instituted in the various stakes and wards, as far as
practicable or necessary. At the meetings of the Board reports from
these committees will be asked for and given as a regular order of
business.

We believe that this course will promote the welfare of all and a
good feeling among our young people, and prevent their seeking other
organizations and interests to which to devote their time and attention.

There is no mental, social or physical excellence or enjoyment that
the Church does not foster and desire to promote among the young men
of our community, and its purpose in sustaining the Mutual Improvement
Associations and charging them with the care of our young men is to
answer every desire of this nature and to provide among ourselves the
gratification of every legitimate ambition and impulse to excel in
these fields without having to seek opportunities elsewhere.

{491} From the presiding priesthood of the Church in the stakes of
Zion, and in the wards and missions, we therefore ask, in behalf of
our young men, sympathy and support, to sustain and uphold the Young
Men's Mutual Improvement Associations in the field of usefulness herein
briefly outlined, and to provide them with places of meeting and
amusement.

We ask that the associations be permitted to select men of education
and ability for class and special teachers, who are suitable, agreeable
and capable, and who are in love with the young people and in full
sympathy with them and their views.

Granting them the fullest liberty consistent with the order and policy
of the Church will encourage them in the faith, and they will not be
a whit less amenable to the Church authorities, but rather will grow
more enthusiastic in every way for the promotion of the work of the
Lord. The Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations have been from
the first in very deed helps to the priesthood, and in behalf of its
members we pledge ourselves and them to continue in this line in the
future; being certain that no trust or added responsibility imposed
upon our young people will be violated, but they will prove loyal to
the authorities and the work of the Lord.

Respectfully,

JOSEPH F. SMITH,

HEBER J. GRANT,

B.H. ROBERTS,

General Superintendency.

The foregoing Declaration of the Place and Privileges of the Young
Men's Mutual Improvement Association was read and adopted at the Annual
Conference, June 5, 1909.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 12, August, 1909, p.
819.

PURPOSE OF MUTUAL IMPROVEMENT ASSOCIATIONS. Our work is in one sense
primary work, and yet it reaches beyond {492} primary grades. The
first and great object of the organization of the Mutual Improvement
Associations as auxiliary organizations of the priesthood in the Church
was to become instrumental in bringing the youth of Zion to a knowledge
of the truth, and in guiding them into the straight and narrow path.
We have found that there is in some degree a feeling of shyness and of
fear that seizes the minds of some of our youth when the organizations
of the priesthood are mentioned. Some of the children grow up more or
less indifferent, more or less afraid of the responsibilities involved
in the performances of the Church duties. They are like colts that need
training, and it is difficult sometimes to reach them. But through
these auxiliary organizations we have been able to reach out a guiding
hand, and to exert an influence for good over many of our young men and
women, whom it would have been difficult to reach by the organizations
of the priesthood. So far, these organizations have accomplished a
most excellent primary work; for this is in the sense of a primary
work, and I do not know but the necessity of our organizations will
continue as long as we have children growing up amongst us who are
shy of the priesthood, and who are afraid of assuming the duties and
responsibilities that belong to the Church.

Then we have instituted class work, have written manuals, and have
given out subjects for study and improvement by all those who are
connected with these organizations which have been intended to lead
them along into greater experiences and better understanding of the
principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ. For, after all, this is the
great and grand object of these organizations.

The fact is, my brethren and sisters and friends, that the gospel of
Christ is the biggest thing in the world. Very few of us, probably,
comprehend its greatness. The way we are situated in life, engaged
day in and day out, week in and week out, year in and year out, in
the daily vocations of life; {493} struggling to earn bread for our
necessities, and the necessities of those who are dependent upon us,
struggling to build homes for ourselves and our children; struggling
to collect the elements of the earth and subdue them, and to bring
them into subjection to our will; working, toiling, striving day by
day in temporal things, in the cares and thoughts of the world, we
are inclined to give very little thought, very little reflection to
the more important things, those things which shall endure after
mortality shall come to an end. And the most of mankind have come
to the conclusion, judging them by their acts, and their walk and
conversation in life, that the greatest thing in the world is to obtain
wealth. And then, having obtained wealth and the things that wealth
produces, or will bring to them, they feel that the rest of life and
the responsibilities of it are very trifling and unimportant, and they
leave their religion to their priests, if they have any religion at
all. And the great majority of the world today, I believe, that is,
on our hemisphere, are becoming very indifferent toward religion of
any kind. The cheaper it can be found or obtained by them the better
they like it; the less exertion required of them to be members of a
church organization the better it suits them. The less care they are
required to give to religion the better they like it; and if they can
find something that will bring solace and case and relaxation to an
overburdened conscience for having committed crime in the thought that
men possess power to forgive sin, that suits them about as well as
anything else, and a little better. Hence we can see where the world
is drifting today as far as religion is concerned. If they can get
it cheap, if it does not cause them any exertion, they do not mind
having just a little of it. But this is not the case with Latter-day
Saints. Nor is it the case with a living religion. For I want to tell
you that the religion of Christ is not a Sunday religion; it is not a
momentary religion; it is a religion that never ends; and it requires
duties of its devotees on Monday, Tuesday, {494} Wednesday and all of
the days of the week just as sincerely, just as strongly, as it does on
the Sabbath day. And I would not give the ashes of a rye straw, for a
Sunday religion, or for a religion that is manufactured by men, whether
by priests or laymen. My religion is the religion of God. It is the
religion of Jesus Christ, otherwise it would be absolutely worthless
to me, and it would be worthless to all other men, so far as religion
is concerned. If it is not in my soul, if I had not received it in my
heart, or if I did not believe it with all my might, mind and strength
and be it, live it, and keep it secure in my heart all the days of
my life--week days as well as days of rest, in secret as well as in
public, at home and abroad, everywhere the same; then the religion of
Christ, the religion of well doing, the religion of righteousness,
the religion of purity, the religion of kindliness, faith, salvation
from temporal sins, and salvation and exaltation in the kingdom of our
God--my religion would not be the gospel of the Son of God to me. This
is "Mormonism;" and that is the kind of religion we want to teach to
our children. We must receive it ourselves and teach it from our hearts
to their hearts and from our affections to their affections, and we can
then inspire them because of our own faith and our own faithfulness and
convictions of the Church.

These organizations of young men and women are intended to help the
wayward, giddy and wild; to work with those who are at large in the
world, who are not subject to any organization at all; to gather them
in; hunt them up, and get hold of them by love, by kindness, by the
spirit of salvation, the spirit to bring them to a knowledge of the
truth, that they may find the way of life and walk in it; that they may
have light everlasting within themselves through the Spirit of God.

All truth cometh from the Lord. He is the fountain of truth; or in
other words, he is the everlasting spring of life and truth, and from
him cometh all knowledge, all wisdom, {495} all virtue and all power.
When I read books that are scattered broadcast through the world,
throwing discredit upon words and teachings and doctrines of the Lord
Jesus Christ, saying that some of the ideas Jesus uttered, truths that
he promulgated, have been enunciated before by the ancient philosophers
among the heathen nations of the world, I want to tell you that there
is not a heathen philosopher that ever lived in all the world from the
beginning, that had a truth or enunciated a principle of God's truth
that did not receive it from the fountain head, from God himself. God
knew the truth before any heathen philosopher. No man has received
intelligence but has had to come to the Fountain Head. He may not
have known it, may not have realized the source of his knowledge, but
it came from God. God taught the first truth that was ever taught to
man. The Lord has bestowed his truth upon the earth from generation
to generation and he has visited the people in various ways, from age
to age, according to the nearness with which he could draw them to
himself. He has raised up philosophers among them, teachers of men, to
set the example, and to develop the mind and understanding of the human
race in all nations of the world. God did it, but the world do not give
credit to God, but give it to men, to heathen philosophers. They give
credit to them. I give it to God. And I tell you God knew the truth
before they did, and through revelation they got it. If they received
light at all they had it from God, just as Columbus got it from the
Lord. What inspired Columbus with the spirit of unrest, the spirit of
longing, with an intense desire that he could not overcome, to seek
out this western hemisphere? Brethren and sisters, I acknowledge God's
hand in it. It was inspiration that seized Columbus, and he was moved
by it. But men do not acknowledge God's hand in it. In the Book of
Mormon, we learn it was God's Spirit working upon him. The Lord moved
upon Columbus and he could not restrain the influence that was upon him
until he had accomplished {496} the work. The same may be said of any
intelligent man that has enlightened humanity, from the earliest ages
down to the present time.

Let me say to you, my fellow workers in the cause of Zion, do not
forget to acknowledge the band of God in all things. He told the
Jews that he had other sheep that were not of that fold, and that he
must visit them. He did visit them. He came to the sheep of the fold
occupying this continent, dwelling here unknown to the Jews, and he
revealed the principles of the gospel to them. And when he visited
them, he said, "Ye are they of whom I said, Other sheep I have which
are not of this fold; them also I must bring, and they shall hear my
voice; and there shall be one fold, and one shepherd." (III Nephi
15:21.)

Read in the Doctrine and Covenants of a parable in which the kingdom of
God is likened unto a man with twelve servants working in his field,
each having his portion called an allotment. The Lord visited the first
and taught him the truth and cheered him up by his presence and voice
and counsel; then he visited the second, then the third and so on until
the twelfth, each in his time, each in his season, each according to
his necessities. (Doc. and Cov. 88: 51-63.)

And so it has been with God from the foundation of the world. He has
visited all nations, kindred, tongues, and people, and yet the truth
has not been revealed to the world in its fulness, and men have not
been called to do the work that Christ was called to do; nor the work
that Abraham was called to do; nor that which Noah was appointed to
do; nor that appointed to the twelve apostles to preach his name and
proclaim his gospel to the world. They were called like Columbus to do
work God required them to do. Later God revealed the power of steam to
Watt, just as he has inspired every other philosopher and scientist and
great man of the world. I acknowledge the hand of God in it. I give God
the honor, the glory; and I know that it is in accordance {497} with
his purpose that he has inspired these things to be brought to pass. I
believe that Mohammed was an inspired man and the Lord raised him up to
do the work he did.

I believe God raised up Joseph Smith to lay the foundations of the
gospel of Christ in the dispensation of the fulness of times; that it
will remain and no more be broken up; but will continue until God's
promises are accomplished in the world and Christ shall come and reign,
whose right it is to reign in the midst of the earth. This is what I
believe about it, and the Lord's hand was in the raising up of Joseph
Smith to accomplish the work.

Joseph Smith was called to do this work; and he did it. He has been an
instrument in the hands of God by giving each of us the power to obtain
knowledge for ourselves through the mercy and love of God, and to
become teachers of it to the world; teachers not only to our children,
but to nations that are in darkness and know not the truth. And it is a
living, daily religion, an hourly religion. It requires us to do right
today, this hour, this week, this month and this year; and so on from
year to year, to live our religion--which is the religion of Jesus
Christ--of righteousness, of truth, of mercy, of love, forgiveness,
kindness, union and peace on earth and good will to man and all the
world. This is our mission.

May the Lord bless you, my brethren and sisters, and my fellow workers
in the cause of Zion, is my prayer.--_Young Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 18,
1907, pp. 312-315.

THE FOUNTAIN OF TRUTH. We hear frequently of men who throw discredit on
the doctrine of Jesus Christ, our Savior and Redeemer, because some of
the principles, doctrines, and philosophy which he taught are said to
have been spoken before his day by heathen philosophers.

A variety of examples are sometimes quoted to show that Zoroaster
and other ancient philosophers made known truths, and that the Old
Testament, the Avesta, and other {498} writings, contain sentiments,
which were repeated, perhaps in slightly different form, by the Son of
God. He taught nothing new, they say, and so they incline to belittle
his mission, and accuse him of plagiarizing the truth.

It is conceded by a number of competent students that the ideals which
have grown from the doctrines of Christ are a direct development of
what is found in the teachings of the Old Testament, particularly in
the Psalms and in the second part of Isaiah. But, on the other hand,
it is just as certain that these ideals received a finish and an
enrichment, by the touch of the Savior, vastly beyond and above what
they possessed before, and also they are placed on deeper and firmer
foundations. This, let it be said to begin with, is because they were
his before they were ever uttered by man.

Even in the five distinctive and characteristic topics generally
considered by commentators original in the teachings of Jesus, we find
little if anything new, except the enlargement. These are named as the
Fatherhood of God; subjects or members of the Kingdom; the Messiah; the
Holy Ghost; and the Tri-Unity of God.

But the idea of the Fatherhood of God was not unknown either to the
Pagans or to Israel. Zeus from the time of Homer had borne the name
"Father of gods and men." But, both in Jewish and Pagan literature, the
idea was superficial and meant little more than "originator" (Genesis
1:26); and in the old Jewish scripture God is more particularly called
the _Father of his people, Israel._ (Deut. 14:1; Isaiah 63:6) But in
the teachings of Christ there is a fuller embodiment of revelation in
the word Father, and the application which he makes of the Fatherhood
of God invests his life with supreme tenderness and beauty. As an
example: In the old scriptures, we are told, "Like as a father pitieth
his children, so the Lord pitieth _them that fear him;"_ (Psalms
103:13), but by the interpretation of Jesus, the love of God as
Father extends, beyond these limitations {499} even to those who are
unthankful and evil: "But I say unto you, love your enemies, bless them
that curse you, do good to them that hate you, and pray for them which
despitefully use you, and persecute you; that ye may be the children
of our Father which is in heaven; for he maketh his sun to rise on the
evil and on the good, and sendeth rain on the just and the unjust."
(Matt 5:45.) "But love ye your enemies, and do good, and lend, hoping
for nothing again; and your reward shall be great, and ye shall be the
children of the Highest; for he is kind unto the unthankful and to the
evil." (Luke 6:35.)

And so with other doctrines of Christ; while perhaps not new, they were
enriched by the addition of fuller, broader, more loving conceptions
of God and his purposes; in which compulsion was eliminated, and lowly
service, love, and self-sacrifice were substituted and made the true
forces of an acceptable life. Even the answer to the lawyer's question,
often called the eleventh commandment, "Master, which is the great
commandment in the law?" had been given to the children of Israel,
(Lev. 19:18) over two thousand years before its perfected meaning was
impressed upon the learned Pharisee. (Matt. 22:34, 40.)

But what of all this? Are we therefore to discredit the teachings of
the Savior? Verily no. Let it be remembered that Christ was with the
Father from the beginning, that the gospel of truth and light existed
from the beginning, and is from everlasting to everlasting. The Father,
Son, and Holy Ghost, as one God, are the fountain of truth. From this
fountain all the ancient learned philosophers have received their
inspiration and wisdom--from it they have received all their knowledge.
If we find truth in broken fragments through the ages, it may be set
down as an incontrovertible fact that it originated at the fountain,
and was given to philosophers, inventors, patriots, reformers, and
prophets by the inspiration of God. It came from him through his Son
{500} Jesus Christ and the Holy Ghost, in the first place, and from no
other source. It is eternal.

Christ, therefore, being the fountain of truth, is no imitator. He
taught the truth first; it was his before it was given to man. When he
came to the earth he not only proclaimed new thought, but repeated some
of the everlasting principles which had been heretofore only partly
understood and enunciated by the wisest of men. And in so doing he
enlarged in every instance upon the wisdom which they had originally
received from him, because of his superior abilities and wisdom, and
his association with the Father and the Holy Ghost. He did not imitate
men. They made known in their imperfect way what the inspiration of
Jesus Christ had taught them, for they obtained their enlightenment
first from him. He taught the gospel to Adam, and made known his
truths to Abraham and the prophets. He was the inspirer of the ancient
philosophers, Pagan or Israelite, as well as of the great characters of
more modern times. Columbus, in discovery; Washington, in the struggle
for freedom; Lincoln, in emancipation and union; Bacon, in philosophy;
Franklin, in statesmanship and diplomacy; Stephenson, in steam; Watts,
in song; Edison, in electricity; and Joseph Smith, in theology and
religion, found the source of their wisdom and the marvelous truths
which they advocated, in Jesus Christ.

Calvin, Luther, Melanchthon, and all the reformers, were inspired
in thoughts, words, and actions to accomplish what they did for the
amelioration, liberty and advancement of the human race. They paved the
way for the more perfect gospel of truth to come. Their inspiration,
as with that of the ancients, came from the Father, his Son, Jesus
Christ, and the Holy Ghost, the one true and living God. This may
also truthfully be said concerning the Revolutionary fathers of this
nation, and all who have in the ages past contributed to the progress
of civil and religious freedom. There is no {501} light or truth which
did not come to them first from him. Men are mere repeaters of what he
has taught them. He has voiced no thought originating with man. The
teachings of Jesus did not begin with his incarnation; for, like truth,
he is eternal. He not only inspired the ancients, from the beginning,
but when he came to earth he reiterated eternal, original truth, and
added gloriously to the revelations men had uttered. When he returned
to the Father, he still took, and does take, an interest in his
children and people, by revealing to them new truths, and by inspiring
their actions; and, as men grow in the knowledge of God, they shall
become more and more like him unto the perfect day, when his knowledge
shall cover the earth as the waters cover the deep.

It is folly, therefore, to discredit the Savior on the grounds that he
has uttered nothing new; for, with the Father and the Spirit, he is the
author of that which persists--the truth--that which has been, that
which is, and that which will continue forever.--_Improvement Era,_
Vol. 10, 1907, pp. 627-30.

PURPOSE AND DUTIES OF RELIGIOUS CLASSES. The Religion Class work is an
adjunct to the Church schools. It is a necessary and most interesting
adjunct to our auxiliary organizations. It was established to assist in
the proper training and education of our children, and I commend it to
the presiding authorities, throughout the Church, and bespeak for it
their kind attention, encouragement and assistance, so far as it lies
in their power. Let us take care of these things, for they nurture and
strengthen our children in the right direction, and there is nothing
more important. It is extreme folly for any people to send thousands of
missionaries out into the world to preach the gospel to the nations,
and neglect their own children at home. I think our very first interest
should be to look after our children, and see that they have every
advantage necessary to bring them up in the way {502} they should go,
that when they get old they may not depart from it.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1906, p. 6.

TEACHERS MUST BELIEVE IN JESUS CHRIST. Any man who will question the
divinity of the mission of the Lord Jesus Christ, or will deny the
so-called miracles of the scriptures, is unfit to be a teacher of
Latter-day Saint children.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, December, 1917,
p. 104.

{503}



CHAPTER XXIII

POLITICAL GOVERNMENT

THE TEN COMMANDMENTS. I believe with all my soul in the gospel of
Jesus Christ, and in the law of God, and I do not think any honest
and intelligent man or woman could help but believe in the justice,
the righteousness and the purity of the laws that God wrote upon the
tablets of stone. These principles that I propose to read to you are
the foundation and basic principles of the Constitution of our country,
and are eternal, enduring forevermore, and cannot be changed nor
ignored with impunity:

"And God spake all these words, saying, I am the Lord thy God, which
have brought thee out of the land of Egypt, out of the house of
bondage. Thou shalt have no other gods before me."

That is what it means now, and what it meant to the Latter-day Saints,
and what the Latter-day Saints understood it to mean, when they
embraced the gospel of Jesus Christ.

"Thou shalt have no other gods before me." He is the Father of our
spirits, the Father of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ, who is our
God; and we shall not have any other before him.

"Thou shalt not make unto thee any graven image, or any likeness of
anything that is in heaven above, or that is in the earth beneath, or
that is in the water under the earth:

"Thou shalt not bow down thyself to them, nor serve them: for I the
Lord thy God am a jealous God, visiting the iniquity of the fathers
upon the children unto the third and fourth generation of them that
hate me; and showing mercy unto thousands of them that love me, and
keep my commandments." (Exodus 20:1-6.)

{504} Infidels will say to you: "How unjust, how unmerciful, how
un-Godlike it is to visit the iniquities of the parents upon the
children to the third and fourth generation of them that hate God." How
do you see it? This way: and it is strictly in accordance with God's
law. The infidel will impart infidelity to his children if he can.
The whoremonger will not raise a pure, righteous posterity. He will
impart seeds of disease and misery, if not of death and destruction,
upon his offspring, which will continue upon his children and descend
to his children's children to the third and fourth generation. It is
perfectly natural that the children should inherit from their fathers,
and if they sow the seeds of corruption, crime and loathsome disease,
their children will reap the fruits thereof. Not in accordance with
God's wishes, for his wish is that men will not sin and therefore will
not transmit the consequences of their sin to their children, but
that they will keep his commandments, and be free from sin and from
entailing the effects of sin upon their offspring; but inasmuch as men
will not hearken unto the Lord, but will become a law unto themselves,
and will commit sin, they will justly reap the consequences of their
own iniquity, and will naturally impart its fruits to their children
to the third and fourth generation. The laws of nature are the laws of
God who is just; it is not God that inflicts these penalties, they are
the effects of disobedience to his law. The results of men's own acts
follow them.

"Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord thy God in vain; for the Lord
will not hold him guiltless that taketh his name in vain."

This is an eternal principle; it is not one that we may obey today and
disobey tomorrow, or that we may espouse today as a part of our faith,
and abandon tomorrow with impunity. It is a principle that is inherent
in the plan of life and salvation, for the regeneration of mankind.

"Remember the Sabbath day, to keep it holy. Six {505} days shalt thou
labor, and do all thy work; but the seventh day is the Sabbath of the
Lord thy God: in it thou shalt not do any work, thou, nor thy son, nor
thy daughter, thy manservant, nor thy maid-servant, nor thy cattle, nor
thy stranger that is within thy gates," etc.

That is: Thou shalt honor the Sabbath day and keep it holy. Do we do
it? Is it necessary to do it? It is absolutely necessary to do so in
order that we may be in harmony with God's law and commandments; and
whenever we transgress that law or that commandment we are guilty
of transgressing the law of God. And what will be the result, if we
continue? Our children will follow in our footsteps; they will dishonor
the command of God to keep one day holy in seven; and will lose the
spirit of obedience to the laws of God and his requirements, just as
the father will lose it if he continues to violate the commandments.

"Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long upon the
land which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

When will we ever outgrow that command? When can we set it aside? When
shall we reach the time that we can dishonor our father and mother?
Never! It is an eternal principle, and I am sorry to say--not sorry
for the Japs and for the Chinese--these heathen nations, as we have
been in the habit of calling them--I am not sorry for them, but for the
comparison with them. Those heathen nations set the civilized Christian
world an example in the honor they bestow upon their parents, and yet
this Christian people and nation and all the Christian nations of the
earth, who have the word of the Lord, and the counsels of the Son of
God for their guidance, are not leading out in setting an example of
obedience, as they should, to this great commandment of the Lord,
"Honor thy father and thy mother: that thy days may be long in the land
which the Lord thy God giveth thee."

Again, "Thou shalt not kill." That is a command of God. It is
irrevocable, unless he revokes it; you and I can't {506} revoke it; we
must not transgress it; it is binding upon us. We should not take away
the life we cannot restore or give back. It is an eternal, unchangeable
law.

"Thou shalt not commit adultery." Just as unchangeable! just as
eternal! for the adulterer hath no place in the kingdom of God, nor can
he attain to an exaltation there.

"Thou shalt not steal."

"Thou shalt not bear false witness against thy neighbor."

"Thou shalt not covet thy neighbor's house, thou shalt not covet thy
neighbor's wife, nor his man-servant, nor his maid-servant, nor his ox,
nor his ass, nor anything that is thy neighbor's." (Exodus 20:7-17.)

"Thou shalt not covet." We may say we are thankful that the Lord has
blessed our neighbor above that which he has blessed us. We may be
thankful that the Lord has given to our neighbor greater wisdom and
ability to honestly gather to himself. But we should not covet it. We
should not be envious, because we are commanded not to be.

Now, these are the commandments of God, the principles contained in
these commandments of the great Eternal are the principles that underly
the Constitution of our country, and all just laws. Joseph Smith, the
prophet, was inspired to affirm and ratify this truth, and he further
predicted that the time would come, when the Constitution of our
country would bang as it were by a thread, and that the Latter-day
Saints, above all other people in the world, would come to the rescue
of that great and glorious palladium of our liberty. We cannot brook
the thought of it being torn into shreds, or destroyed, or trampled
under foot and ignored by men. We cannot tolerate the sentiment, at
one time expressed, by a man high in authority in the nation. He said:
"The constitution be damned; the popular sentiment of the people is the
constitution!" That is the sentiment of anarchism, and has spread to a
certain extent, and is spreading {507} over "the land of liberty and
the home of the brave." We do not tolerate it. Latter-day Saints cannot
tolerate such a spirit as this. It is anarchy. It means destruction.
It is the spirit of mobocracy, and the Lord knows we have suffered
enough from mobocracy, and we do not want any more of it. Our people
from Mexico are suffering from the effects of that same spirit. We do
not want any more of it, and we cannot afford to yield to that spirit
or contribute to it in the least degree. We should stand with a front
like flint against every spirit or species of contempt or disrespect
for the constitution of our country and the constitutional laws of our
land.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 8-11.

THE LAWS OF GOD AND THE LAWS OF THE LAND. Nearly all the brethren who
have spoken at this conference have referred to the circumstances in
which we, as a people, are now placed; and it would seem unnecessary
for me to make any further reference to this all-prevailing subject
with which the people generally are more or less familiar, and in which
we necessarily are considerably interested. But while the brethren
who have spoken have merely referred to some of the sayings of the
Prophet Joseph, and to items in the revelations through him, to the
Church, I feel impressed to read in the hearing of the congregation one
or two passages from the revelations previously referred to. I will,
therefore, call the attention of the congregation to a verse or two in
the revelation given in 1831, which will be found on page 219 of the
Doctrine and Covenants:

"Let no man break the laws of the land, for he that keepeth the laws of
God hath no need to break the laws of the land:

"Wherefore, be subject to the powers that be, until He reigns whose
right it is to reign, and subdues all enemies under his feet.

"Behold, the laws which ye have received from my hand are the laws of
the Church, and in this light ye shall {508} hold them forth. Behold
here is wisdom." (Doc. and Cov. 58: 21-23.)

The following I quote from a revelation given in December, 1833, page
357:

"According to the laws and the constitution of the people which I have
suffered to be established, and should be maintained for the rights and
protection of all flesh, according to just and holy principles,

"That every man may act in doctrine and principle pertaining to
futurity, according to the moral agency which I have given unto him,
that every man may be accountable for his own sins in the day of
judgment.

"Therefore, it is not right that any man should be in bondage one to
another.

"And for this purpose have I established the constitution of this land,
by the hands of wise men whom I raised up unto this very purpose, and
redeemed the land by the shedding of blood." (Doc. and Cov. 101:77-80.)

Again, in a revelation on page 342:

"And now, verily I say unto you concerning the laws of the land, it
is my will that my people shall observe to do all things whatsoever I
command them;

"And that law of the land which is constitutional, supporting that
principle of freedom in maintaining rights and privileges, belongs to
all mankind, and is justifiable before me;

"Therefore, I, the Lord, justify you, and your brethren of my Church,
in befriending that law which is the constitutional law of the land;

"And as pertaining to law of man, whatsoever is more or less than
these, cometh of evil.

"I, the Lord God, make you free, therefore ye are free indeed; and the
law also maketh you free;

"Nevertheless, when the wicked rule, the people mourn,

"Wherefore, honest men, and wise men should be {509} sought for
diligently, and good men and wise men ye should observe to uphold;
otherwise whatsoever is less than these cometh of evil.

"And I give unto you a commandment, that ye shall forsake all evil and
cleave unto all good, that ye shall live by every word which proceedeth
forth out of the mouth of God;

"For he will give unto the faithful line upon line, precept upon
precept; and I will try you and prove you herewith;

"And whoso layeth down his life in my cause, for my name's sake, shall
find it again, even life eternal:

"Therefore be not afraid of your enemies, for I have decreed in my
heart, saith the Lord, that I will prove you in all things, whether
you will abide in my covenant, even unto death, that you may be found
worthy;

"For if ye will not abide in my covenant, ye are not worthy of me."
(Doc. and Cov. 98:4-15.)

This, as I understand it, is the law of God to the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints in all the world. And the requirements here
made of us must be obeyed, and practically carried out in our lives, in
order that we may secure the fulfilment of the promises which God has
made to the people of Zion. And it is further written, that inasmuch as
ye will do the things which I command you, thus saith the Lord, then am
I bound; otherwise there is no promise. We can therefore only expect
that the promises are made and will apply to us when we do the things
which we are commanded. (Doc. and Cov. 82:10; 101:7; 124:47-49.)

We are told here that no man need break the laws of the land who will
keep the laws of God. But this is further defined by the passage which
I read afterwards--the law of the land, which all have no need to
break, is that law which is the constitutional law of the land, and
that is as God himself {510} has defined it. And whatsoever is more or
less than this cometh of evil. Now, it seems to me that this makes this
matter so clear that it is not possible for any man who professes to be
a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints to make any
mistake, or to be in doubt as to the course he should pursue under the
command of God in relation to the observance of the laws of the land. I
maintain that the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints has ever
been faithful to the constitutional laws of our country. I maintain,
also, that I have a right to this opinion, as an American citizen, as
one who was not only born on American soil, but who descended from
parents who for generations were born in America. I have a right to
interpret the law in this manner, and to form my own conclusions and
express my opinions thereon, regardless of the opinions of other men.

I ask myself, What law have you broken? What constitutional law have
you not observed? I am bound not only by allegiance to the government
of the United States but by the actual command of God Almighty, to
observe and obey every constitutional law of the land, and without
hesitancy I declare to this congregation that I have never violated nor
transgressed any law, I am not amenable to any penalties of the law,
because I have endeavored from my youth up to be a law-abiding citizen,
and not only so, but to be a peacemaker, a preacher of righteousness,
and not only to preach righteousness by word, but by example. What,
therefore, have I to fear? The Lord Almighty requires this people to
observe the laws of the land, to be subject to "the powers that be,"
so far as they abide by the fundamental principles of good government,
but he will hold them responsible if they will pass unconstitutional
measures and frame unjust and proscriptive laws, as did Nebuchadnezzar
and Darius, in relation to the three Hebrew children and Daniel. If
lawmakers have a mind to violate their oath, break their covenants
{511} and their faith with the people, and depart from the provisions
of the constitution, where is the law, human or divine, which binds me,
as an individual, to outwardly and openly proclaim my acceptance of
their acts? * * *

I wish to enter here my avowal that the people called Latter-day
Saints, as has been often repeated from this stand, are the most
law-abiding, the most peaceable, long-suffering and patient people that
can today be found within the confines of this republic, and perhaps
anywhere else upon the face of the earth; and we intend to continue
to be law-abiding so far as the constitutional law of the land is
concerned; and we expect to meet the consequences of our obedience to
the laws and commandments of God, like men. These are my sentiments
briefly expressed, upon this subject.

NO NATIONALITIES IN THE CHURCH. In speaking of nationalities, we all
understand or should that in the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints there is neither Scandinavian, nor Swiss, nor German, nor
Russian, nor British nor any other nationality. We have become brothers
in the household of faith, and we should treat the people from these
nations that are at war with each other, with due kindness and
consideration. It is nothing but natural that people who are born in
a land, though they may have emigrated from it, who have left their
kindred there, many of them, that they will naturally have a tender
feeling toward their fatherland. But the Latter-day Saints who have
come from England and from France and from Germany and Scandinavia
and Holland, into this country, no matter what their country may be
involved in, it is not our business to distinguish them in any way by
criticism or by complaint toward them, or by condemnation, because
of the place where they were born. They could not help where they
were born, and they have come here to be Latter-day Saints, not to be
Germans, nor to be Scandinavians, nor to be English, nor French, nor
to belong to any other country in the world. They have come {512} here
to be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, and
good and true citizens of the United States, and of the several states
in which they live, and of other places throughout the world, where
Latter-day Saints are building homes for themselves.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1917, p. 11.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS LOYAL TO THE UNITED STATES. We must always bear in
mind that we are not only citizens of the kingdom of God, but we are
citizens of the United States and of the states in which we dwell. We
have ever been loyal both to our state and nation, as well as to the
Church of God, and we defy the world to prove to the contrary. We have
been willing to fight our country's battles, to defend her honor, to
uphold and sustain her good name, and we propose to continue in this
loyalty to our nation and to our people unto the end.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1905, p. 46.

LOYALTY TO THE CONSTITUTION OF THE UNITED STATES. And I hope with all
my soul that the members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints will be loyal in their very hearts and souls, to the principles
of the constitution of our country. From them we have derived the
liberty that we enjoy. They have been the means of guaranteeing to the
foreigner that has come within our gates, and to the native born, and
to all the citizens of this country, the freedom and liberty that we
possess. We cannot go back upon such principles as these. We may go
back upon those who fail to execute the law as they should. We may be
dissatisfied with the decision of judges and may desire to have them
removed out of their places. But the law provides ways and means for
all these things to be done under the constitution of our country, and
it is better for us to abide the evils that we have than to fly to
greater evils that we know not what the results will be.--_Apr. C. R.,_
1912, p. 8.

PROUD OF THE UNITED STATES. I feel proud of the {513} nation of which
we are a part, because I am convinced in my own mind that there is not
another nation upon the face of the globe where the Lord Almighty could
have established his Church with so little difficulty and opposition
as he has done here in the United States. This was a free country,
and religious toleration was the sentiment of the people of the land.
It was the asylum for the oppressed. All the people of the world were
invited here to make homes of freedom for themselves, and under these
tolerant circumstances the Lord was able to establish his Church, and
has been able to maintain it and preserve it up to this time, that
it has grown and spread, until it has become respectable--not only
by its members, not only by the few years of age that it possesses,
but respectable because of its intelligence, respectable because
of its honesty, its purity, union and industry, and for all its
virtues.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1905, p. 6.

ORIGIN AND DESTINY OF THE UNITED STATES: LOYALTY OF THE LATTER-DAY
SAINTS. This great American nation the Almighty raised up by the power
of his omnipotent hand, that it might be possible in the latter days
for the kingdom of God to be established in the earth. If the Lord had
not prepared the way by laying the foundations of this glorious nation,
it would have been impossible (under the stringent laws and bigotry of
the monarchical governments of the world) to have laid the foundations
for the coming of his great kingdom. The Lord has done this. His hand
has been over this nation, and it is his purpose and design to enlarge
it, make it glorious above all others, and to give it dominion, and
power over the earth, to the end that those who are kept in bondage
and serfdom may be brought to the enjoyment of the fullest freedom
and liberty of conscience possible for intelligent men to exercise
in the earth. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints will
be a strong supporter of the nation of which we are a part, in the
accomplishment of this grand purpose. {514} There are no more loyal
people to their country on God's earth today than are the Latter-day
Saints to this country. There are no better, purer or more honorable
citizens of the United States to be found than are found within the
pale of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. I testify to
this, and I know whereof I speak. We never have been enemies to our
nation. We have always been true to it. Though we have been persecuted,
we have said, We will put our trust in thee. We have been driven and
maligned, not by the nation, but by insidious, wicked, unprincipled,
hypocritical, lying, deceitful goats in sheep's clothing, who are
jealous and constantly raising a hue and cry against the covenant
people of God. Our government would have befriended us, protected us,
preserved our rights and liberties, and would have defended us in the
enjoyment of our possessions, if it had not been for these infernal
hounds who are enemies to morality and to the truth. If there be
anything despicable, if there be anything that can never, no, never,
enter into the kingdom of God, it is a wilful liar; and if we have
not been lied about, maligned and misrepresented of late, then I do
not know what lying is. Well, let the falsifiers go on and lie. Some
people are evidently doomed to lie. President Woodruff used to say
there were some people in his day who were born to lie, and they were
true to their missions. There are some of these born liars still with
us and still true to their mission. They cannot, it would seem, tell
the truth; they often do not when it would be for their best good. So
let them go on and lie as much as they desire. But let us do right,
keep the laws of God, and the laws of man, honor our membership in the
kingdom of God, our citizenship in the state of Utah, and our broader
citizenship in the nation of which we are a part, and then God will
sustain and preserve us, and we will continue to grow as we have done
from the beginning, only our future growth will be accelerated and be
far greater than it {515} has been in the past. These slanders and
falsehoods that are circulated abroad with the view of bringing the
ire of the nation upon us will, by and by, be swept away, and because
of these misrepresentations the truth will be brought out clearer and
plainer to the world. Thus the word of the Lord will be verified, that
they cannot do anything against, but for, the kingdom of God. This is
the Lord's work, it is not man's, and he will make it triumphant. He
is spreading it abroad, and giving it deep root in the earth, that its
branches may grow and spread, and its fruit be seen throughout the
length and breadth of the land.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1903, pp. 73-74.

SAINTS TO SERVE GOD. The Latter-day Saints are in the midst of these
mountains for the express purpose of serving Almighty God. We have
not come here to serve ourselves, nor to serve the world. We are here
because we have believed in the gospel that has been restored in the
latter day through the Prophet Joseph Smith. We are here because we
believe that God Almighty has organized his Church and has restored the
fulness of the gospel and holy priesthood. We are here because we have
received the testimony of the Spirit of God that the course which we
have pursued in this regard is right and acceptable in the sight of the
Lord. We are here because we have come in obedience to the command of
the Almighty.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, p. 43.

GUIDED BY GOD TO THE WEST. On somewhat parallel lines our people might
go back in memory to Ohio and to Missouri and to Illinois, and recall
incidents and conditions that existed in those early days by which our
people were harassed, mobbed, persecuted, hated and driven away from
their possessions in Ohio, Missouri and Illinois. It was hard for our
people in those times, and under the conditions that then existed,
to see where God in his providence designed good for his people in
permitting these conditions to exist. But who today will dispute the
fact that, although {516} we were compelled to leave Ohio, Missouri,
and Illinois, against our will, our wishes, our interests temporally,
as was supposed,--it was for our ultimate good? Who of us will now
contend that the overruling Providence which brought us to this place
made a mistake? None of us! When we look back to it we see clearly,
beyond any possible doubt, that the band of God was in it. And while it
was necessary for us to be moved from our footholds on the soil that
our fathers had obtained from the government of the United States, and
from old settlers, and while we were compelled to do it against our
supposed interests--we now see it has resulted in the greatest blessing
possible to us and the Church.

What could we have done in Ohio? What room was there for growth and
development for the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints in
Caldwell county, or in Jackson county, or in Clay county, Missouri?
Where was the chance for this Church to spread abroad, grow, and
obtain a foothold in the earth, as we possess it today, in the state
of Illinois--a populous state, her lands occupied by older inhabitants
who were uncongenial and unfriendly? They had no faith in our good
intentions, nor in the divinity of our cause. They feared us, because
the Saints were progressive. The spirit of growth, development,
and of advancement characterized the life and labors and existence
of communities of Latter-day Saints, as it has with our people in
Mexico.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1912, p. 6.

TRUE PATRIOTISM. Patriotism should be sought for and will be found in
right living, not in high sounding phrases or words. True patriotism
is part of the solemn obligation that belongs both to the nation and
to the individual and to the home. Our nation's reputation should be
guarded as sacredly as our family's good name. That reputation should
be defended by every citizen, and our children should be taught to
defend their country's honor under all {517} circumstances. A truly
patriotic spirit in the individual begets a public interest and
sympathy which should be commensurate with our nation's greatness. To
be a true citizen of a great country takes nothing from, but adds to,
individual greatness. While a great and good people necessarily adds
greatness and goodness to national life, the nation's greatness reacts
upon its citizens and adds honor to them, and insures their welfare
and happiness. Loyal citizens will probably be the last to complain
of the faults and failures of our national administrators. They would
rather conceal those evils which exist, and try to persuade themselves
that they are only temporary and may and will in time be corrected.
It is none the less a patriotic duty to guard our nation whenever and
wherever we can against those changeable and revolutionary tendencies
which are destructive of a nation's weal and permanence.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ Vol. 47, July, 1912, pp. 388-389.

IMPORTANCE OF NATIONAL PATRIOTISM. Our national welfare should always
be a theme deeply rooted in our minds and exemplified in our individual
lives, and the desire for our nation's good should be stronger than
political party adherence. The nation's welfare means the welfare of
every one of its citizens. To be a worthy and a prosperous nation, it
must possess those qualities which belong to individual virtues. The
attitude of our country toward other nations should always be honest
and above suspicion, and every good citizen should be jealous of our
nation's reputation both at home and abroad. National patriotism is,
therefore, something more than mere expression of willingness to fight,
if need be.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 47, July, 1912, p. 389.

THE CHURCH NOT PARTISAN. The Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints is no partisan Church. It is not a sect. It is THE CHURCH OF
JESUS CHRIST OF LATTER-DAY SAINTS. It is the only one today existing
in the world that can and does legitimately bear the name of Jesus
Christ and {518} his divine authority. I make this declaration in all
simplicity and honesty before you and before all the world, bitter as
the truth may seem to those who are opposed and who have no reason for
that opposition. It is nevertheless true and will remain true until he
who has a right to rule among the nations of the earth and among the
individual children of God throughout the world shall come and take the
reins of government and receive the bride that shall be prepared for
the coming of the Bridegroom._--Improvement Era,_ Vol. 20, May, 1918,
p. 639. See also _Gospel Doctrine,_ pp. 169-170.

THE CHURCH LOYAL. All churches claim to be divinely appointed and place
God above country, and any man who renders true homage to God can not
break the law, for he lives above it. No man can be a good Latter-day
Saint and not be true to the best interests and general welfare of his
country. After all these years, it is folly to say that the Church is
antagonistic to the national government. The part which our people took
in the Mexican and Spanish-American wars should be enough to eternally
brand such statements false. The allegiance claimed from its members by
the Church does not prevent a member from being a loyal citizen of the
nation. It rather aids him; fidelity to the Church enables a man better
to entertain patriotic allegiance to his nation and country. There is
nothing required of a Latter-day Saint that can in any way be construed
to militate against loyalty to the nation, and for that reason Senator
Smoot is under no obligations to the Church that can come in conflict
with his fealty to country. It is plain that the campaign of the
ministers is unjustified.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 7, March, 1904, p.
382.

LATTER-DAY SAINTS ARE GOOD CITIZENS. A good Latter-day Saint is a
good citizen in every way. I desire to say to the young men of our
community: be exemplary Latter-day Saints, and let nothing deter you
from aspiring to the greatest positions which our nation has to offer.
Having {519} secured a place, let your virtue, your integrity, your
honesty, your ability, your religious teachings, implanted in your
heart at the knees of your devoted "Mormon" mothers, "so shine before
men, that they may see your good works, and glorify your Father which
is in heaven."--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, April, 1903, p. 469.

CHURCH NOT RESPONSIBLE FOR POLITICAL PARTIES. The Church of Christ is
not responsible for the actions of either of the political parties, in
any sense, or form. If it were, they would stop their quarreling and
contending, and the bitterness and animosity they exhibit towards one
another would cease. If we had anything to do with them, we would stop
their wrangling, and we would have peace in their ranks. The fact that
they quarrel as they do is proof positive we have nothing to do with
them.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1899, p. 41.

THE CHURCH NOT IN POLITICS. The Church does not engage in politics;
its members belong to the political parties at their own pleasure--to
the Republicans, the Democrats, or to no party at all. They are not
asked, much less required, to vote this way or that--a requirement made
by the Protestant ministers of their members against the Saints. But
they cannot justly be denied their rights as citizens, and there is no
reason why they should be, for, on the average, they are as loyal, as
sober, as well educated, as honest, as industrious, as virtuous, as
moral, as thrifty, and as worthy in every other respect as any people
in the nation or on the earth, for that matter. I think that they are
just a little better in these respects than most other communities or
individuals.

To the young men who may be disheartened by false attacks upon the
Saints, and to the missionaries in the world, who are driven and
persecuted, I wish to say: have no fear; slacken not your labors for
the truth; live as becometh Saints. You are in the right way, and the
Lord will not let {520} your efforts fail. This Church stands in no
danger from opposition and persecution from without. There is more to
fear in carelessness, sin and indifference, from within; more danger
that the individual will fail in doing right and in conforming his life
to the revealed doctrines of our Lord and Savior Jesus Christ. If we
do the right, all will be well, the God of our fathers will sustain
us, and every opposition will tend only to the further spread of the
knowledge of truth.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, June, 1903, p. 625.

SHUN THE SPIRIT OF MOB VIOLENCE. Nobody in the world deplores more than
do the Latter-day Saints the prevalence and brutality of mob violence.
If mob violence in this country did not have its origin in the drivings
and persecutions of the Latter-day Saints, it is certain that no
class of people in this country have suffered more and longer from
the lawlessness of the mob than have the Latter-day Saints. For more
than half a century the "Mormons" have been the victims of lawless mob
violence against which very little has been said, for the chief reason
that the victims had been so long pursued by hatred and prejudice that
the world had been taught to withdraw all its sympathy from them.
Whipping, driving, and shooting "Mormon" elders in the South called
forth no anxiety and little objection upon the part of the press; and
the "Mormon" elder, pure and upright in his life, has received less
sympathy and protest in his favor than the negro ravisher who deserved,
perhaps, the punishment, however inexcusable the method of executing it.

The Latter-day Saints in Utah, and everywhere, are earnestly and
prayerfully admonished to shun as a sacred religious duty the spirit
of mob violence. It is better to be patient and endure deprivations of
human rights than to violate the institutions of our country, and to
substitute violence for law and order. If the reign of the mob extends
its hideous rule over this country as rapidly in the future {521} as it
has done in the past, it may reach communities where the Saints live
before they are aware of its presence. It is not only the duty of every
Latter-day Saint, therefore, to refrain from the violent and unlawful
conduct of bodies of men bent upon human destruction, but to exercise
his influence and power to restrain others from imbuing their hands
in the blood of their fellow men.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38,
September, 1903, p. 564.

THE DANGER OF MOBS. One of the greatest menaces to our country is that
of the combination of men into irresponsible, reckless mobs, wild with
prejudice, hatred and fanaticism, led by men of ambition, or passion,
or hatred. There is no other thing in the world that I can conceive of
so absolutely obnoxious to God and good men as a combination of men
and women filled with the spirit of mobocracy. Men combining together
to stop or shut off the food supply from the mouth of the honest
laborer to starve the man that is willing to work, and the wife and the
children who are dependent upon him, because he is not willing to join
a mob, is one of the most infamous perils and menaces to the people of
our country today. I do not care who they are, or what name they go by.
They are a menace to the peace of the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1911, p.
122.

THE BASIS OF LABOR UNIONS. If we are to have labor organizations among
us, and there is no good reason why our young men might not be so
organized, they should be formed on a sensible basis, and officered by
men who have their families and all their interests around them. The
spirit of good-will and brotherhood, such as we have in the gospel of
Christ, should characterize their conduct and organizations. For be it
known, the religious note is and should remain the dominant note of our
character and of all our actions.

While there is no reason why workmen should not join together for
their own mutual protection and benefit, {522} there is every reason
why in so doing they should regard the rights of their fellows, be
jealous of the protection of property, and eliminate from their
methods of warfare, boycotts, sympathetic strikes, and the walking
delegate.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 6, August, 1903, p. 182.

LABOR UNIONS. Labor unions will find that the same eternal law
of justice applies to unions that applies to individuals, that
fair dealing and rational conduct must be maintained if financial
misfortunes are averted. Where there are Latter-day Saints in unions
they should assume a conservative attitude and never arouse men's
prejudices by inflaming their passions. There can be no objections
to a firm and persistent contention for the right of labor, if the
contention is maintained in the spirit of reason and fairness. Above
all things, the Latter-day Saints should hold sacred the life and
liberty of their fellow-men, as also their rights of property and
maintain inviolate every right to which humanity is entitled.

The unions are forcing our people into an inconsistent and dangerous
attitude when they compel Latter-day Saints within the union to
make war upon their brethren who are without the union, and thereby
denying the most sacred and God-given rights of one class of Saints
that another class may gain some advantage over a third person, their
employer. Such conduct is destructive of the liberty which every man is
entitled to enjoy, and will lead in the end to the spirit of contention
and apostasy.

It is not easy to see how the Latter-day Saints can endorse the methods
of modern labor unions. As a people we have suffered too much from
irrational class prejudice and class hatred to participate in violent
and unjust agitations. No one denies the rights of laborers to unite in
demanding a just share of the prosperity of our country, provided the
union is governed by the same spirit that {523} should actuate men who
profess the guidance of a Christian conscience.

In the present status of capital and labor there should be mutual
interests; and at the same time workmen should realize that there is
a limit to the pressure which capital can endure by the demands made
upon it. Competition has always given some measure of relief to the
laborer by the demands of capital for human service, and men should not
therefore abandon themselves to the supposed power of arbitrary demands
which labor unions are now making in many cases upon their employers.
The contention for the recognition of unions is often a very indefinite
factor, for no one seems to know just what that recognition means now,
or what it is to mean in the future. If recognition means the exclusive
right of any class of men to gain a livelihood by their work, then
recognition should be persistently and forcefully resisted.

The Latter-day Saints, whether in the unions or out of them, know very
well whether individual or united demands are arbitrary and unjust, and
they will lose nothing by a manly refusal to violate their sense of
justice.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 38, June, 1903, p. 370.

CAUSE OF WAR. The condition of the world today presents a spectacle
that is deplorable, so far as it relates to the religious convictions,
faith and power of the inhabitants of the earth. Here we have nations
arrayed against nations, and yet in every one of these nations are
so-called Christian peoples professing to worship the same God,
professing to possess belief in the same divine Redeemer, many of them
professing to be teachers of God's word, and ministers of life and
salvation to the children of men, and yet these nations are divided
one against the other, and each is praying to his God for wrath upon
and victory over his enemies and for his own preservation. Would it be
possible, could it be possible, for this condition to exist if {524}
the people of the world possessed really the true knowledge of the
gospel of Jesus Christ? And if they really possessed the Spirit of the
living God--could this condition exist? No; it could not exist, but
war would cease, and contention and strife would be at an end. And not
only the spirit of war would not exist, but the spirit of contention
and strife that now exists among the nations of the earth, which is
the primal element of war, would cease to be. We know that the spirit
of strife and contention exists to an alarming extent among all the
people of the world. Why does it exist? Because they are not one with
God, nor with Christ. They have not entered into the true fold, and
the result is they do not possess the spirit of the true Shepherd
sufficiently to govern and control their acts in the ways of peace and
righteousness. Thus they contend and strive one against another, and at
last nation rises up against nation in fulfilment of the predictions
of the prophets of God that war should be poured out upon all nations.
I don't want you to think I believe that God has designed or willed
that war should come among the people of the world, that the nations
of the world should be divided against one another in war, and engaged
in the destruction of each? God did not design or cause this. It is
deplorable to the heavens that such a condition should exist among men,
but the conditions do exist, and men precipitate war and destruction
upon themselves because of their wickedness, and that because they will
not abide in God's truth, walk in his love, and seek to establish and
maintain peace instead of strife and contention in the world.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1914, p. 8.

ATTITUDE TOWARDS WAR. We do not want war. We do not want to see our
nation go to war. We would like to see it the arbiter of peace for all
nations. We would like to see the government of the United States true
to the constitution, an instrument inspired by the spirit of wisdom
from God. We want to see the benignity, the honor, the {525} glory
and the good name, and the mighty influence for peace of this nation,
extended abroad, not only over Hawaii and the Philippines, but over the
islands of the sea east and west of us. We want to see the power, the
influence for good, for elevating mankind, and for the establishment of
righteous principles spread out over these poor, helpless peoples of
the world, establishing peace, good will and intelligence among them,
that they may grow to be equal, if possible, to the enlightened nations
of the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1912, p. 7.

WE WANT PEACE. We want peace in the world. We want love and good will
to exist throughout the earth, and among all the people of the world;
but there never can come to the world that spirit of peace and love
that should exist, until mankind will receive God's truth and God's
message unto them, and acknowledge his power and authority which is
divine, and never found in the wisdom only of men.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914,
p. 7.

WHEN PEACE SHALL COME. We will never have peace until we have truth. We
will never be able to establish peace on earth and good will until we
have drunk at the fountain of righteousness and eternal truth, as God
has revealed it to man.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1914, p. 129.

PEACE ON EARTH, GOOD WILL TO MEN. We certainly live in troublesome
times; and, notwithstanding the peace that pervades our own land,
we are not without our troubles at home. There is, among us today,
I am sorry to say, the germ of the spirit that has prompted, very
largely, the conditions that exist in Europe today--internal unrest,
dissatisfaction, discontent, internal contention over political, labor
and religious matters, and almost every subject that affects society
at this time. And the very germ that has prompted the terrible results
that we see in the nations of Europe, is at work among us here today.
We need not forget it, nor ignore it, either.

{526} There is just one power, and one only, that can prevent war among
the nations of the earth, and that is true religion and undefiled
before God, the Father. Nothing else will accomplish it. It is a very
common expression today that there is good in all religions. So there
is; but there is not sufficient good in the denominations of the world
to prevent war, nor to prevent contention, strife, division and hatred
of one another.

And, put all the good doctrines, in all the denominations of the world,
together, and they do not constitute sufficient good to prevent the
evils that exist in the world. Why? Because the denominations lack the
essential knowledge of God's revelation and truth, and the enjoyment
of that spirit which comes from God that leadeth unto all truth, and
that inspires men to do good and not evil, to love and not to hate, to
forgive and not to bear malice, to be kind and generous and not to be
unkind and contracted.

So, I repeat, there is but one remedy that can prevent men from going
to war, when they feel disposed to do it, and that is the Spirit of
God, which inspires to love, and not to hatred, which leads unto all
truth, and not unto error, which inclines the children of God to pay
deference to him and to his laws and to esteem them as above all other
things in the world.

The Lord has told us that these wars would come. We have not been
ignorant that they were pending, and that they were likely to burst out
upon the nations of the earth at any time. We have been looking for the
fulfilment of the words of the Lord that they would come. Why? Because
the Lord wanted it? No; not by any means. Was it because the Lord
predestined it, or designed it, in any degree? No, not at all. Why? It
was for the reason that men did not hearken unto the Lord God, and he
foreknew the results that would follow, because of men, and because of
the nations of the earth; and therefore he was able to predict what
would {527} befall them, and came upon them in consequence of their
own acts, and not because he has willed it upon them, for they are but
suffering and reaping the results of their own actions.

Well, my sisters, "peace on earth, and good will to men," is our
slogan. That is our principle. That is the principle of the gospel of
Jesus Christ. And while I think it is wrong, wickedly wrong, to force
war upon any nation, or upon any people, I believe it is righteous
and just for every people to defend their own lives and their own
liberties, and their own homes, with the last drop of their blood.
I believe it is right, and I believe that the Lord will sustain any
people in defending their own liberty to worship God according to the
dictates of their conscience, any people trying to preserve their wives
and their children from the ravages of the war. But we do not want to
be brought into the necessity of having to defend ourselves.

If the condition of the world appears to you as it does to me, at
the present time it seems to me that you have within your hearts and
minds one of the strongest evidences that has ever been brought to
your understanding, of the truth of the declaration which God gave to
the world through Joseph Smith, that "they draw near to me with their
lips, but their hearts are far from me; they teach for doctrines the
commandments of men: having a form of godliness, but they deny the
power thereof," and have it not. (_History of the Church,_ Vol. 1, p.
6.) In Germany, at this time, Protestants and Catholics are praying to
God for victory over their foes. In France and England and in Russia
and in Belgium, and Austria, and in all other countries, that are at
war with one another, they are praying. Protestants and Catholics
together for victory. The Allies are praying for victory, to the same
God, supposed to be, for these are called Christian nations, and they
are members of the same churches, worshiping in the same forms of
religion and yet they are calling upon God {528} one against another,
to defend them against their enemies, and to strengthen their arms to
destroy their foes. What does it prove? It proves what God said. They
have not his Spirit; they have not his power to guide them. They are
not in possession of his truth; and, therefore, the very conditions
that exist are the results of this unbelief in the truth; and this
worship of men and organizations and powers of men is divested of the
power of God.

Now, my sisters, I am speaking from my point of view, and my point of
view is that Christ was divinely appointed and sent into the world to
relieve mankind of sin through repentance; to relieve mankind from the
death which came upon them by the sin of the first man. I believe it
with all my soul. I believe that Joseph Smith was raised up by Almighty
God to renew the spirit, power and plan of God's Church, of Christ's
gospel and holy priesthood. I believe it with all my soul, or I would
not be here. I therefore stand upon this principle, that the truth is
in the gospel of Jesus Christ, that the power of redemption, the power
of peace, the power for good will, love, charity and forgiveness, and
the power for fellowship with God, abides in the gospel of Jesus Christ
and in obedience to it on the part of the people. I therefore admit,
and not only admit but claim, that there is nothing greater on earth,
nor in heaven, than the truth of God's gospel which he has devised and
restored for the salvation and the redemption of the world. And it is
through that that peace will come to the children of men, and it will
not come to the world in any other way. The nations cannot possess it
without they come to God, from whom they are to receive the spirit of
union and the spirit of love. And those organizations in the world,
created with a view to combining men, possess in them so many of the
elements of self-destruction that they cannot exist long, as they are,
and under the influences which hold them together today. I can tell you
that there is no combination formed by men that will {529} prosper and
continue to endure, unless it is based upon the principles of truth,
righteousness, and justice toward all. When a man comes to me and says:
"You must be my servant, you must obey me, or conform to my plan, or we
will starve you to death," I don't care how many elements of goodness
there are in the organization that will exclude me from a right to
worship God according to the dictates of my conscience, or that would
prevent me from laboring in honest labor to earn my bread, it possesses
the elements of decay and destruction, and it cannot last, for it is
wrong, absolutely wrong.

In the gospel is the light of freedom. Men worship God according to the
dictates of their own conscience. We can not compel you to obey the
principles of the gospel at all.

That is the principle of the gospel of Jesus Christ. But these man-made
organizations will force you to do as they will, or they will damn you
and destroy you; and therein lies the elements of self-destruction
in--themselves, because they can only last for a time.--_Relief Society
Magazine,_ Vol. 2, No. 1, 1914, p. 13.

THE KEY TO PEACE. There is only one thing that can bring peace into
the world. It is the adoption of the gospel of Jesus Christ, rightly
understood, obeyed and practiced by rulers and people alike. It is
being preached in power to all nations, kindreds, tongues and peoples
of the world, by the Latter-day Saints, and the day is not far distant
when its message of salvation shall sink deep into the hearts of
the common people, who, in sincerity and earnestness, when the time
comes, will not only surely register their judgment against a false
Christianity, but against war and the makers of war as crimes against
the human race. For years it has been held that peace comes only by
preparation for war; the present conflict should prove that peace
comes only by preparing for peace, through training the people in
righteousness {530} and justice, and selecting rulers who respect the
righteous will of the people.

Not long hence and the voice of the people shall be obeyed, and the
true gospel of peace shall dominate the hearts of the mighty. It will
then be impossible for war lords to have power over the life and death
of millions of men as they now have, to decree the ruin of commerce,
industry, and growing fields, or to cause untold mental agony and
human misery like plague and pestilence to prevail over the nations.
It looks much as if, after the devastation of wars, as promised in the
scriptures, (and who shall say that it may not follow this war?) the
self-constituted monarchs must give way to rulers chosen by the people,
who shall be guided by the doctrines of love and peace as taught in the
gospel of our Lord. There will then be instituted a new social order in
which the welfare of all shall be uppermost, and all shall be permitted
to live in the utmost liberty and happiness.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
17, No. 11, September, 1914, p. 1074.

GOD STRIVES WITH WARRING NATIONS. Would the nations of the earth that
are at war with each other be at war as they are, if the Spirit of
God Almighty had pervaded their souls and moved and actuated them
in their designs? No; not at all. Worldly ambition, pride, and the
love of power, determination on the part of rulers to prevail over
their competitors in the national games of life, wickedness at heart,
desire for power, for worldly greatness, have led the nations of
the earth to quarrel with one another and have brought them to war
and self-destruction. I presume there is not a nation in the world
today that is not tainted with this evil more or less. It may be
possible, perhaps to trace the cause of the evil, or the greatest
part of it, to some particular nation of the earth; but I do not
know. This I do believe, with all my heart, that the hand of God is
striving with certain nations of the earth to preserve and protect
{531} human liberty, freedom to worship him according to the dictates
of conscience, freedom and the inalienable right of men to organize
national governments in the earth, to choose for themselves their own
leaders; men whom they may select as standards of honor, of virtue and
truth, men of wisdom, understanding and integrity; men who have at
heart the well being of the people who choose them to govern, to enact
and execute the laws in righteousness. I believe that the Lord's hand
is over the nations of the world today, to bring about this rule and
this reign of liberty and righteousness among the nations of the earth.
He has some hard material to work with, too. He is working with men
who never prayed, men who have never known God, nor Jesus Christ whom
he has sent into the world, and whom to know is life eternal. God is
dealing with nations of infidels, men who fear not God, and love not
the truth, men who have no respect for virtue or purity of life. God
is dealing with men who are full of pride and ambition; and he will
find it difficult, I fear, to control them and lead them directly in
the course that he would have them pursue to accomplish his purposes;
but he is striving to uplift. God is striving to bless, to benefit, to
happify, to ameliorate the condition of his children in the world, to
give them freedom from ignorance and a knowledge of him, to learn of
his ways and to walk in his paths, that they may have his Spirit to be
with them always, to lead them into all truth.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
20, July, 1917, p. 823.

CONDUCT OF THE BOYS IN THE ARMY. Therefore, when our boys and our
maturer men are invited and chosen, selected and called, to go out to
help to protect and defend these principles, we hope and pray, and we
certainly have some reason to believe, that there will be some, at
least, from amidst the great family of mankind in the world, who will
have some affinity with the Spirit of God and at least some desire,
some inclination, to hearken to the whisperings of the {532} still
small voice of the Spirit, that leadeth to peace and happiness, to
the well-being and the uplifting of mankind in the world and to life
eternal. When a Latter-day Saint, a man born, perhaps, and reared under
the bond of the New and Everlasting Covenant of the gospel, enlists
in the army of the United States, in the National Guard, which has
been recommended here by President Penrose to you--and which I confirm
and emphasize, because I think the citizens of the state should be
united together, and the cities and the state should stand together
and should have sympathy and fellowship for each other, more than they
could expect to derive from those of other states and places, who are
strangers and foreigners to them--that when our boys, thus born, are
called into the army of the United States, I hope and pray that they
will carry with them the Spirit of God, not the spirit of bloodshed, of
adultery, of wickedness, but the spirit of righteousness, the spirit
which leads to do good, to build up, to benefit the world, and not to
destroy and shed blood.

Remember the passage of scripture that was quoted here by President
Lund, as related in the Book of Mormon, concerning the pure young men
that abjured war and the shedding of blood, lived pure and innocent,
free from the contaminating thought of strife, of anger, or wickedness
in their hearts; but when necessity required, and they were called
to go out to defend their lives, and the lives of their fathers and
mothers, and their homes, they went--not to destroy but to defend, not
to shed blood but rather to save the blood of the innocent and of the
unoffending, and the peace-lovers of mankind.

Will those men who go out from Utah, from the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, forget their prayers? Will they forget God? Will
they forget the teachings that they have received from their parents at
home? Will they forget the principles of the gospel of Jesus Christ and
the covenants that they have made in the waters of baptism, and {533}
in sacred places? Or will they go out as men, in every sense--pure men,
high-minded men, honest men, virtuous men, men of God? That is what I
am anxious about.

I want to see the hand of God made manifest in the acts of the men
that go out from the ranks of the Church of Jesus Christ and from the
state of Utah, to help to defend the principles of liberty and sound
government for the human family. I want to see them so live that they
can be in communion with the Lord, in their camps, and in their secret
places, and that in the midst of battle they can say: "Father, my life
and my spirit are in thine hand!"

I want to see the boys that go away from here in this cause, go feeling
just as our missionaries do when sent out into the world, carrying with
them the spirit a good mother feels when she parts with her boy, on the
morning of his departure for his mission. She embraces him with all the
mother's love in her soul--!

I know how the mother feels for her boy when he goes away from home on
a mission, where he will be in the midst of strangers, without friends,
trying to preach the gospel to the world. She says to him: "My boy,
I have taught you the principles of the gospel. I have taught you to
pray to God, at my knees, from the time you were a child until you have
reached manhood. I have taught you virtue. I have taught you honor. I
have taught you to stand for the Truth, and to honor your father and
your mother in the world, and by so doing honor the fathers and the
mothers, and the daughters of all men, wherever you go. Never in your
life think of defiling any man's wife, or daughter, any more than you
would think of defiling your mother or your sister! Go out into the
world from your home clean. Keep yourself pure and unspotted from the
world, and you will be immune from sin, and God will protect you. You
will be in his hands. Then, if anything should happen that would cost
you your life, you will lay it down in the service of humanity, and of
{534} God. You would lay down your life pure and undefiled. Your spirit
would ascend from that tenement of clay inhabited in this world, into
the glorious presence of God, undefiled, uncontaminated, pure and clean
as the spirit of a child just born into the world. Thus you would be
acceptable to God, ready to receive your crown of glory and everlasting
reward."

So I would say, "My boy, my son, and your son, when you go out to face
the disasters that are now afflicting the world, go out as you do on a
mission, be just as good and pure and true in the army of the United
States as you are in the army of the elders of Israel who are preaching
the gospel of love and peace to the world. Then, if you unavoidably
fall prey to the bullet of the enemy you will go pure as you have
lived; you will be worthy of your reward; you will have proved yourself
a hero, and not only a hero, but a valiant servant of the living God,
worthy of his acceptation and of admission into the loving presence of
the Father!"

It is in such things as this that we can see the hand of God. If our
boys will only go out into the world this way, carrying with them the
spirit of the gospel and the behavior of true Latter-day Saints, no
matter what may befall them in life, they will endure with the best.
They will be able to endure as much as anybody else can possibly endure
of fatigue or of suffering, if necessary, and when they are brought to
the test they will stand it! Because they have no fear of death! They
will be free from fear of the consequences of their own lives. They
will have no need to dread death, for they have done their work; they
have kept the faith, they are pure in heart, and they are worthy to see
God!

I have some feelings in these matters, for I have boys of my own, and
I love my sons. They have grown up with me. They are mine! The Lord
gave them to me. I expect to claim them, in the relationship of father
and sons that exists {535} between us, throughout all eternities
that will come. I would rather see my sons shot down by the enemies
of God and humanity, by those who are inimical to the freedom of the
children of men, while defending the cause of Righteousness and Truth,
a thousand times rather, than to see them die the vile death of sinners
and of transgressors of the laws of God. While death in battle might
be instantaneous, or it might linger, perhaps, to one whose cause
is just it would be honorable; but the death that is caused by the
transgression of the laws of God, by the poison and sting of sin, is to
be dreaded worse, a thousand times, than to die sinless in defending
the cause of Truth.

I don't want to see one of my boys lose the faith of the gospel of
Jesus Christ. I don't want to see one of them deny Christ, the Son of
the living God, the Savior of the world. I do not want one of them
to turn his back upon the divine mission of the Prophet Joseph Smith
whose blood courses in their veins. I would rather see them perish in
defending a cause of righteousness, a thousand times, while they are
firm in the faith, than I would see them live to deny that faith and
the God that gave them life! That is where I stand with reference to
the matters that are facing us at this moment!--_Improvement Era,_ Vol.
20, July, 1917, p. 824, _June C. R._

MESSAGE TO THE BOYS IN WAR SERVICE. Our country is at war. This
regrettable condition has been forced upon us by enemies of
representative government and individual freedom. Despotism is
endeavoring to gain the ascendency and to establish its might in the
earth. Many of our young men who have been reared in the Church,
and taught the principles of the gospel in the Sabbath Schools and
other organizations of the Church, have been called to the colors in
defense of our liberties and the liberty and freedom of the world.
In all probability they will be sent to the front before many months
have passed, to take their places in the trenches in the European
battlefields and engage {536} in this appalling conflict, the like of
which the world has never seen until this day.

We most sincerely hope that our young men will prove loyal to their
country and stand honorably in its defense and prove themselves worthy
in every respect as defenders of those principles for which our
government was born and for which it still exists.

In going forth to war these young men are liable to be confronted with
danger far greater than that which they might expect from the bullets
of the enemy. There are many evils that usually follow in the wake
of marshaled armies equipped for and engaged in war, far worse than
honorable death which may come in the conflict of battle. It matters
not so much when our young men are called, or where they may go, but
it does matter much to their parents, friends and associates in the
truth, and above all to themselves, how they go. They have been trained
all their lives as members of the Church to keep themselves pure and
unspotted from the sins of the world, to respect the rights of others,
to be obedient to righteous principles, to remember that virtue is one
of the greatest gifts from God. Moreover, that they should respect
the virtue of others and rather die a thousand times than defile
themselves by committing deadly sin. We want them to go forth clean,
both in thought and action, with faith in the principles of the gospel
and the redeeming grace of our Lord and Savior. We would have them
remember that only by living clean and faithful lives can they hope to
attain the salvation promised through the shedding of the blood of our
Redeemer.

If they will go forth in this manner, fit companions for the Spirit
of the Lord, free from sin, and trusting in the Lord, then whatever
befalls them they will know that they have found favor in the sight of
God. Should death overtake them while thus engaged in the discharge of
duty in defense of their country, they need have no fear, for their
{537} salvation is assured. Moreover, under conditions such as these
they will have a better claim to the blessings of the Almighty and,
like the two thousand young men of Helaman's army, they will be more
likely to receive the protecting care of the Lord.

Let them go in the spirit of truth and righteousness; the spirit which
will direct them to save rather than destroy; which leads to do good
rather than to commit evil; with love in their hearts for their fellow
men, prepared to teach all mankind the saving principles of the gospel.
And, should they be required, in the defense of the principles for
which they go, to shed the blood of any among the contending forces,
it shall not be a sin, and the blood of their enemies shall not be
required at their hands.

We will have no fear for those who will be true to the covenants
they have made in the waters of baptism and observe to keep the
commandments of God. If they die, they shall die unto the Lord and
shall stand before him spotless and void of offense. And should they
return unharmed, we will give to our Father in heaven the credit for
his protecting care over them while in the discharge of perilous duty.
While they are away the prayers of the Saints will ascend in their
behalf for their protection, and we sincerely hope their prayers
will not be without avail, and surely they will avail if our boys
will continue to be worthy of the mercies of the Lord.--_Juvenile
Instructor,_ August, 1917, p. 404, Vol. 52.

{538}



CHAPTER XXIV

ETERNAL LIFE AND SALVATION

ETERNAL LIFE AND SALVATION. Every man born into the world will die. It
matters not who he is, nor where he is, whether his birth be among the
rich and the noble, or among the lowly and poor in the world, his days
are numbered with the Lord, and in due time he will reach the end. We
should think of this. Not that we should go about with heavy hearts or
with downcast countenances; not at all. I rejoice that I am born to
live, to die, and to live again. I thank God for this intelligence.
It gives me joy and peace that the world cannot give, neither can the
world take it away. God has revealed this to me, in the gospel of
Jesus Christ. I know it to be true. Therefore, I have nothing to be
sad over, nothing to make me sorrowful. All that I have to do with in
the world is calculated to buoy me up, to give me joy and peace, hope
and consolation in this present life, and a glorious hope of salvation
and exaltation in the presence of my God in the world to come. I have
no reason to mourn, not even at death. It is true, I am weak enough to
weep at the death of my friends and kindred. I may shed tears when I
see the grief of others. I have sympathy in my soul for the children
of men. I can weep with them when they weep; I can rejoice with them
when they rejoice; but I have no cause to mourn, nor to be sad because
death comes into the world. I am speaking now of the temporal death,
the death of the body. All fear of this death has been removed from the
Latter-day Saints. They have no dread of the temporal death, because
they know that as death came upon them by the transgression of Adam, so
by the righteousness of Jesus Christ shall life come unto them, {539}
and though they die, they shall live again. Possessing this knowledge,
they have joy even in death, for they know that they shall rise again
and shall meet again beyond the grave. They know that the spirit dies
not, at all; that it passes through no change, except the change from
imprisonment in this mortal clay to freedom and to the sphere in
which it acted before it came to this earth. We are begotten in the
similitude of Christ himself. We dwelt with the Father and with the Son
in the beginning, as the sons and daughters of God; and at the time
appointed, we came to this earth to take upon ourselves tabernacles,
that we might become conformed to the likeness and image of Jesus
Christ and become like him; that we might have a tabernacle, that we
might pass through death as he has passed through death, that we might
rise again from the dead as he has risen from the dead. As he was the
first fruits of the resurrection of the dead, so shall we be the second
fruits of the resurrection from the dead; for as he came forth, so
shall we come forth. What is there, therefore, to be sad about? What is
there to make us heavy of heart or sorrowful in this matter? Nothing at
all. Sorrowful, indeed, to think that we shall live forever! Is there
any cause for sorrow to know that we shall rise from the dead, and
possess the same tabernacle that we have here in mortality? Is there
cause for sorrow in this great, glorious gospel truth that has been
revealed to us in this dispensation? Certainly there can be no sorrow
connected with a thought like this. There must be only joy connected
with this knowledge--the joy that springs from the ten thousand
feelings and affections of the human soul; the joy that we feel in
association with brethren, with wives and children, with fathers and
mothers, with brothers and sisters. All these joyous thoughts spring
up in our souls at the thought of death and the resurrection. Wherein
should we be sad or sorrowful? On the contrary, it is cause for joy
unspeakable, and for {540} pure happiness. I cannot express the joy I
feel at the thought of meeting my father, and my precious mother, who
gave me birth in the midst of persecution and poverty, who bore me in
her arms and was patient, forbearing, tender and true during all my
helpless moments in the world. The thought of meeting her, who can
express the joy? The thought of meeting my children who have preceded
me beyond the veil, and of meeting my kindred and my friends, what
happiness it affords! For I know that I shall meet them there. God has
shown me that this is true. He has made it clear to me, in answer to my
prayer and devotion, as he has made it clear to the understanding of
all men who have sought diligently to know him.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899,
pp. 70-71.

CLOSE RELATION OF THE NEXT LIFE. I feel sure that the Prophet Joseph
Smith and his associates, who, under the guidance and inspiration of
the Almighty, and by his power, began this latter-day work, would
rejoice and do rejoice,--was going to say if they were permitted to
look down upon the scene that I behold in this tabernacle; but I
believe they do have the privilege of looking down upon us just as
the all-seeing eye of God beholds every part of his handiwork. For I
believe that those who have been chosen in this dispensation and in
former dispensations, to lay the foundation of God's work in the midst
of the children of men, for their salvation and exaltation, will not
be deprived in the spirit world from looking down upon the results
of their own labors, efforts and mission assigned them by the wisdom
and purpose of God, to help to redeem and to reclaim the children of
the Father from their sins. So I feel quite confident that the eye
of Joseph, the prophet, and of the martyrs of this dispensation, and
of Brigham, and John, and Wilford, and those faithful men who were
associated with them in their ministry upon the earth, are carefully
guarding the interests of the kingdom of God in which {541} they
labored and for which they strove during their mortal lives. I believe
they are as deeply interested in our welfare today, if not with greater
capacity, with far more interest, behind the veil, than they were
in the flesh. I believe they know more; I believe their minds have
expanded beyond their comprehension in mortal life, and their interests
are enlarged and expanded in the works of the Lord to which they gave
their lives and their best service. Although some may feel and think
that it is a little extreme to take this view, yet I believe that it is
true; and I have a feeling in my heart that I stand in the presence not
only of the Father and of the Son, but in the presence of those whom
God commissioned, raised up, and inspired, to lay the foundations of
the work in which we are engaged. Accompanying that sense of feeling,
I am impressed with the thought that I would not this moment say or do
one thing that would be taken as unwise or imprudent, or that would
give offense to any of my former associates and co-laborers in the work
of the Lord.

I would not like to say one thing, or express a thought, that would
grieve the heart of Joseph, or of Brigham, or of John, or of Wilford,
or of Lorenzo, or of any of their faithful associates in the ministry.
Sometimes the Lord expands our vision from this point of view and
this side of the veil, that we feel and seem to realize that we can
look beyond the thin veil which separates us from that other sphere.
If we can see, by the enlightening influence of the Spirit of God
and through the words that have been spoken by the holy prophets of
God, beyond the veil that separates us from the spirit world, surely
those who have passed beyond, can see more clearly through the veil
back here to us than it is possible for us to see to them from our
sphere of action. I believe we move and have our being in the presence
of heavenly messengers and of heavenly beings. We are not separated
from them. We begin to realize more and more fully, as we {542}
become acquainted with the principles of the gospel, as they have
been revealed anew in this dispensation, that we are closely related
to our kindred, to our ancestors, to our friends and associates and
co-laborers who have preceded us into the spirit world. We cannot
forget them; we do not cease to love them; we always hold them in our
hearts, in memory, and thus we are associated and united to them by
ties that we cannot break, that we cannot dissolve or free ourselves
from. If this is the case with us in our finite condition, surrounded
by our mortal weaknesses, shortsightedness, lack of inspiration and
wisdom, from time to time, how much more certain it is, and reasonable
and consistent, to believe that those who have been faithful, who
have gone beyond, are still engaged in the work for the salvation of
the souls of men, in the opening of the prison doors to them that are
bound and proclaiming liberty to the captives, who can see us better
than we can see them--that they know us better than we know them. They
have advanced; we are advancing; we are growing as they have grown; we
are reaching the goal that they have attained unto; and therefore, I
claim that we live in their presence, they see us, they are solicitous
for our welfare, they love us now more than ever. For now they see the
dangers that beset us; they can comprehend better than ever before,
the weaknesses that are liable to mislead us into dark and forbidden
paths. They see the temptations and the evils that beset us in life,
and the proneness of mortal beings to yield to temptation and to wrong
doing; hence their solicitude for us and their love for us and their
desire for our well being must be greater than that which we feel for
ourselves. I thank God for the feeling that I possess and enjoy, and
for the realization that I have that I stand, not only in the presence
of Almighty God, my Maker and Father, but in the presence of his Only
Begotten Son in the flesh, the Savior of the world; and I stand in the
presence of Peter and James (and perhaps the {543} eyes of John are
also upon us and we know it not) and that I stand also in the presence
of Joseph, and Hyrum, and Brigham and John, and those who have been
valiant in the testimony of Jesus Christ and faithful to their mission
in the world, who have gone before. When I go, I want to have the
privilege of meeting them with the consciousness that I have followed
their example, that I have carried out the mission in which they
were engaged, as they would have it carried out; that I have been as
faithful in the discharge of duty, committed to me and required at my
hand, as they were faithful in their time, and that when I meet them, I
shall meet them as I met them here, in love, in harmony, in unison, and
in perfect confidence that I have done my duty as they have done theirs.

I hope you will forgive me for my emotion. You would have peculiar
emotions, would you not, if you felt that you stood in the presence
of your Father, in the very presence of Almighty God, in the very
presence of the Son of God and of holy angels? You would feel rather
emotional, rather sensitive. I feel it to the very depths of my soul
this moment. So I hope you will forgive me, if I exhibit some of my
real feelings.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1916, pp. 2-4.

CONDITION IN A FUTURE LIFE. Some people dream, you know, and think, and
teach that all the glory they ever expect to have in the world to come
is to sit in the light and glory of the Son of God, and sing praises
and songs of joy and gratitude all their immortal lives. We do not
believe in any such things. We believe that every man will have his
work to do in the other world, just as surely as he had it to do here,
and a greater work than he can do here. We believe that we are on the
road of advancement, of development in knowledge, in understanding, and
in every good thing, and that we will continue to grow, advance, and
develop throughout the eternities that are before us. That is what we
believe.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, p. 8.

{544} SPIRITUAL DEATH. But I want to speak a word or two in relation
to another death, which is a more terrible death than that of the
body. When Adam, our first parent, partook of the forbidden fruit,
transgressed the law of God, and became subject unto Satan, he was
banished from the presence of God, and was thrust out into outer
spiritual darkness. This was the first death. Yet living, he was
dead--dead to God, dead to light and truth, dead spiritually; cast out
from the presence of God; communication between the Father and the
Son was cut off. He was as absolutely thrust out from the presence of
God as was Satan and the hosts that followed him. That was spiritual
death. But the Lord said that he would not suffer Adam nor his
posterity to come to the temporal death until they should have the
means by which they might be redeemed from the first death, which is
spiritual. Therefore angels were sent unto Adam, who taught him the
gospel, and revealed to him the principle by which he could be redeemed
from the first death, and be brought back from banishment and outer
darkness into the marvelous light of the gospel. He was taught faith,
repentance, and baptism for the remission of sins, in the name of Jesus
Christ, who should come in the meridian of time and take away the sin
of the world, and was thus given a chance to be redeemed from the
spiritual death before he should die the temporal death.

Now, all the world today, I am sorry to say, with the exception of a
handful of people who have obeyed the new and everlasting covenant, are
suffering this spiritual death. They are cast out from the presence
of God. They are without God, without gospel truth, and without the
power of redemption; for they know not God nor his gospel. In order
that they may be redeemed and saved from the spiritual death which has
spread over the world like a pall, they must repent of their sins, and
be baptized by one having authority, for the remission of their sins,
that they may be {545} born of God. That is why we want these young men
to go out into the world to preach the gospel. While they themselves
understand but little, perhaps, the germ of life is in them. They
have been born again, they have received the gift of the Holy Ghost,
and they have the authority of the holy priesthood, by which they can
administer in the name of the Father, and of the Son, and of the Holy
Ghost. Though they may know but little in the beginning, they can
learn, and as they learn they can preach, and as they have opportunity
they can baptize for the remission of sins. Therefore, we want them
to do their duty at home. We want them above all things to be pure in
heart.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1899, p. 72.

THE UNPARDONABLE SIN. Now, if Judas really had known God's power, and
had partaken thereof, and did actually "deny the truth" and "defy" that
power, "having denied the Holy Spirit after he had received it," and
also "denied the Only Begotten," after God had "revealed him" unto him,
then there can be no doubt that he "will die the second death."

That Judas did partake of all this knowledge--that these great truths
had been revealed to him--that he had received the Holy Spirit by the
gift of God, and was therefore qualified to commit the unpardonable
sin, is not at all clear to me. To my mind it strongly appears that not
one of the disciples possessed sufficient light, knowledge nor wisdom,
at the time of the crucifixion, for either exaltation or condemnation;
for it was afterward that their minds were opened to understand the
scriptures, and that they were endowed with power from on high; without
which they were only children in knowledge, in comparison to what they
afterwards become under the influence of the Spirit.

Saul, of Tarsus, possessing extraordinary intelligence and learning,
brought up at the feet of Gamaliel, taught according to the perfect
manner of the law, persecuted the {546} Saints unto death, binding
and delivering unto prisons both men and women; and when the blood
of the Martyr Stephen was shed, Saul stood by keeping the raiment of
those who slew him, and consented unto his death. And "he made havoc
of the Church, entering into every house, and haling men and women
committed them to prison." And when they were put to death, he gave his
voice against them, and he "punished them oft in every synagogue, and
compelled them to blaspheme; and being exceedingly mad against them,
persecuted them even unto strange cities," and yet this man committed
no unpardonable sin, because he knew not the Holy Ghost. Acts 8:3; 9:1;
22:4; 26:10, 11.

While, for the crime of adultery with Bathsheba, and for ordering Uriah
to be put in the front of battle in a time of war, where he was slain
by the enemy, the priesthood, and the kingdom were taken from David,
the man after God's own heart, and his soul was thrust into hell. Why?
Because "the Holy Ghost spake by the mouth of David"--or, in other
words, David possessed the gift of the Holy Ghost, and had power to
speak by the light thereof. But even David, though guilty of adultery
and murder of Uriah, obtained the promise that his soul should not
be left in hell, which means, as I understand it, that even he shall
escape the second death.

While suspended upon the cross, in the agonies of death, as he was
about to yield up his spirit, our gracious, glorious Savior breathed
this memorable and merciful prayer: "Father, forgive them; for they
know not what they do." (Luke 23:34.)

No man can sin against light until he has it; nor against the Holy
Ghost, until after he has received it by the gift of God through the
appointed channel or way. To sin against the Holy Ghost, the Spirit of
Truth, the Comforter, the Witness of the Father and the Son, wilfully
denying him and defying him, after having received him, constitutes
{547} this sin. Did Judas possess this light, this witness, this
Comforter, this baptism of fire and the Holy Ghost, this endowment from
on high? If he did, he received it before the betrayal, and therefore
before the other eleven apostles. And if this be so, you may say,
"he is a son of perdition without hope." But if he was destitute of
this glorious gift and outpouring of the Spirit, by which the witness
came to the eleven, and their minds were opened to see and know the
truth, and they were able to testify of him, then what constituted the
unpardonable sin of this poor, erring creature, who rose no higher in
the scale of intelligence honor or ambition than to betray the Lord of
glory for thirty pieces of silver?

But not knowing that Judas did commit the unpardonable sin; nor that he
was a "son of perdition without hope" who will die the second death,
nor what knowledge he possessed by which he was able to commit so great
a sin, I prefer, until I know better, to take the merciful view that
he may be numbered among those for whom the blessed Master prayed,
"Father, forgive them; for they know not what they do."--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 21, June, 1918, p. 732.

THE RESURRECTION. Speaking of the resurrection, the subject on which
so much has been said during this conference, and appropriately said,
too--we distinctly believe that Jesus Christ himself is the true, and
only true type of the resurrection of men from death unto life. We
believe there is no other form of resurrection from death to life; that
as he rose, and as he preserved his identity, even to the scars of the
wounds in his hands and feet and side, that he could prove himself to
those that were skeptical of the possibility of rising from the dead,
that he was indeed himself, the Lord crucified, buried in the tomb,
and raised again from death to life, so it will be with you and with
every son and daughter of Adam, born into the world. You will not lose
your identity any more than Christ did. You will {548} be brought forth
from death to life again, just as surely as Christ was brought forth
from death to life again, just as surely as those who ministered to the
Prophet Joseph Smith had been raised from death to life--therefore, in
the same manner in which Christ has been raised, so will life, and the
resurrection from death to life again, come upon all who have descended
from our first parents. The death that came into the world by Adam's
transgression has been conquered, and its terror vanquished by the
power and righteousness of the Son of God. He came to redeem man from
the temporal death, and also to save him from spiritual death if he
will repent of his sins, and will believe on the name of Christ, follow
his example, and obey his laws.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1912, pp. 135-136.

NATURE OF MINISTERING ANGELS. We are told by the Prophet Joseph Smith,
that "there are no angels who minister to this earth but those who do
belong or have belonged to it." Hence, when messengers are sent to
minister to the inhabitants of this earth, they are not strangers,
but from the ranks of our kindred, friends, and fellow-beings and
fellow-servants. The ancient prophets who died were those who came to
visit their fellow creatures upon the earth. They came to Abraham, to
Isaac, and to Jacob; it was such beings--holy beings if you please--who
waited upon the Savior and administered to him on the Mount. The angel
that visited John, when an exile and unfolded to his vision future
events in the history of man upon the earth, was one who had been here,
who had toiled and suffered in common with the people of God; for you
remember that John, after his eyes had beheld the glories of the great
future, was about to fall down and worship him, but was peremptorily
forbidden to do so. "See thou do it not; for I am thy fellow-servant,
and of thy brethren the prophets, and of them which keep the sayings
of this book; worship God." (Rev. 22:9) Jesus has {549} visited the
people of this earth from time to time. He visited and showed himself
in his spiritual body to the brother of Jared, touching certain
stones with his finger, that the brother of Jared had fashioned out
of the rock, making them to give light to him and his people in the
barges in which they crossed the waters of the great deep to come to
this land. He visited others at various times before and after he
tabernacled in the flesh. It was Jesus who created this earth, it
therefore is his inheritance, and he had a perfect right to come and
minister to inhabitants of this earth. He came in the meridian of time
and tabernacled in the flesh, some 33 years among men, introducing
and teaching the fulness of the gospel, and calling upon all men to
follow in his footsteps; to do the same thing that he himself did,
that they might be worthy to inherit with him the same glory. After he
suffered the death of the body, he appeared, not only to his disciples
and others on the eastern continent, but to the inhabitants of this
continent, and he ministered unto them as he did to the people in the
land of Palestine. In like manner our fathers and mothers, brothers,
sisters and friends who have passed away from this earth, having been
faithful, and worthy to enjoy these rights and privileges, may have
a mission given them to visit their relatives and friends upon the
earth again, bringing from the divine Presence messages of love, of
warning, or reproof and instruction, to those whom they had learned
to love in the flesh. And so it is with Sister Cannon. She can return
and visit her friends, provided it be in accordance with the wisdom
of the Almighty. There are laws to which they who are in the Paradise
of God must be subject, as well as laws to which we are subject. It
is our duty to make ourselves acquainted with those laws, that we may
know how to live in harmony with his will while we dwell in the flesh,
that we may be entitled to come forth in the morning of the first
resurrection, clothed {550} with glory, immortality and eternal lives,
and be permitted to sit down at the right hand of God, in the kingdom
of heaven. And except we become acquainted with those laws, and live in
harmony with them, we need not expect to enjoy these privileges; Joseph
Smith, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young, Heber C. Kimball, Jedediah M. Grant,
David Patten, Joseph Smith, Sen., and all those noble men who took an
active part in the establishment of this work, and who died true and
faithful to their trust, have the right and privilege, and possess the
keys and power, to minister to the people of God in the flesh who live
now, as much so and on the same principle as the ancient servants of
God had the right to return to the earth and minister to the Saints of
God in their day.

These are correct principles. There is no question about that in
my mind. It is according to the Scriptures; it is according to the
revelation of God to the Prophet Joseph Smith; and it is a subject
upon which we may dwell with pleasure and perhaps profit to ourselves,
provided we have the Spirit of God to direct us.--Discourse delivered
at the funeral services of Elizabeth H. Cannon, Fourteenth Ward
assembly rooms, Salt Lake City, January 29, 1882. _Journal of
Discourses,_ Vol. 22, pp. 350-353.

REDEMPTION BEYOND THE GRAVE. "But woe unto him that has the law given;
yea, that has all the commandments of God, like unto us, and that
transgresseth them, and that wasteth the days of his probation, for
awful is his state." (II Nephi 9:27-38; see also Alma 11:40, 41).

Now, it is evident that such as these have no chance for redemption,
no matter what may be done for them in hope or by faith, for they will
have sinned against life and knowledge, and are, therefore, worthy
of damnation. It is nowhere revealed that such as these will ever be
forgiven, although we are informed that all of God's judgments are not
given unto men.

{551} There is no other means of salvation revealed or given to the
children of men except that offered by the Son of God, and those who
reject this, whether before or after they have received it in part,
cannot be saved, because they rejected the means of their redemption
and salvation. Not so with those to whom Christ went to deliver the
gospel when his body lay in the tomb; they were disobedient to the
message of Noah, which was a warning to them to repent or they should
be destroyed by a flood. We are not told to what extent the gospel
of Christ, in its fulness, was proclaimed to them, but are left to
suppose that the message of Noah was not the fulness of the gospel,
but a cry of repentance from sin that they might escape destruction
by the flood. They hardened their hearts against Noah's message, and
would not receive it, and were punished for this disobedience in their
destruction by the flood; thus in part paying the penalties for their
disobedience; but not having received the light they could not be
condemned as those spoken of in 9th Nephi, who had all the commandments
of God given unto them.

Therefore, Jesus went with his message to their spirits in prison and
proclaimed liberty and deliverance to them through their obedience in
the spirit world, that the work might be done for them in the flesh,
and they be judged according to men in the flesh, and live according
to God in the spirit. So there is no conflict in these scriptures.
Of course, there is a difference between those who receive the light
of the gospel and the testimony of Jesus Christ and afterwards rebel
against that light and reject it, thereby putting Christ to an open
shame and crucifying him, and those who are referred to by Alma:
"Therefore the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption
made." These are not under as great a condemnation as those who have
received it and rejected it; but so long as they remain unrepentant and
wicked, there is no redemption for them any {552} more than for the
others; but it is possible that these may repent in the spirit world.

In relation to the deliverance of spirits from their prison house, of
course, we believe that can only be done after the gospel has been
preached to them in the spirit, and they have accepted the same, and
the work necessary to their redemption by the living be done for them.
That this work may be hastened so that all who believe, in the spirit
world, may receive the benefit of deliverance, it is revealed that
the great work of the Millennium shall be the work in the temples for
the redemption of the dead; and then we hope to enjoy the benefits of
revelation through the Urim and Thummim, or by such means as the Lord
may reveal concerning those for whom the work shall be done, so that
we may not work by chance, or by faith alone, without knowledge, but
with the actual knowledge revealed unto us. It stands to reason that,
while the gospel may be preached unto all, the good and the bad, or
rather to those who would repent and to those who would not repent in
the spirit world, the same as it is here, redemption will only come to
those who repent and obey. There is, no doubt, great leniency given
to people who are anxious to do the work for their dead, and in some
instances, very unworthy people may have the work done for them; it
does not follow, however, that they will receive any benefit therefrom,
and the correct thing is to do the work only for those of whom we have
the testimony that they will receive it. However, we are disposed to
give the benefit of the doubt to the dead, as it is better to do the
work for many who are unworthy than to neglect one who is worthy. Now,
we know in part and see in part, but steadfastly look forward to the
time when that which is perfect will come. We are left largely to our
own agency here, to exercise our own intelligence and to receive all
the light that is revealed so far as we are capable of receiving it,
and only those who seek the light, and desire {553} it, are likely to
find it.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, December, 1901, pp. 145-7.

NATURE OF DEATH. God has given laws to govern all his works, and
especially has he given laws to govern his people, who are his sons and
daughters. We have come to sojourn in the flesh, to obtain tabernacles
for our immortal spirits; or, in other words, we have come for the
purpose of accomplishing a work like that which was accomplished by
the Lord Jesus Christ. The object of our earthly existence is that
we may have a fulness of joy, and that we may become the sons and
daughters of God, in the fullest sense of the word, being heirs of God
and joint heirs with Jesus Christ, to be kings and priests unto God,
to inherit glory, dominion, exaltation, thrones and every power and
attribute developed and possessed by our Heavenly Father. This is the
object of our being on this earth. In order to attain unto this exalted
position, it is necessary that we go through this mortal experience, or
probation, by which we may prove ourselves worthy, through the aid of
our elder brother Jesus. The spirit without the body is not perfect. It
is not capacitated, without the body, to possess a fulness of the glory
of God, and therefore it cannot, without the body, fulfil its destiny.
We are foreordained to become conformed to the likeness of the Lord
Jesus Christ; and in order that we may become like unto him, we must
follow in his footsteps, even until we sanctify ourselves by the law
of truth and righteousness. This is the law of the celestial kingdom,
and when we die, its power will bring us forth in the morning of the
first resurrection, clothed with glory, immortality and eternal lives.
Unless we do keep the law that God has given unto us in the flesh,
which we have the privilege of receiving and understanding, we cannot
be quickened by its glory, neither can we receive the fulness thereof,
and the exaltation of the celestial kingdom.

"There is a law, irrevocably decreed in heaven before {554} the
foundations of the world, upon which all blessings are predicated; and
when we obtain any blessing from God, it is by obedience to that law
upon which it is predicated."--(Doc and Cov. 130:20.)

We must, therefore, learn the laws of heaven, which are the laws of the
gospel, live and obey them with all our hearts, and in faith abide in
them, perfecting ourselves thereby, in order to receive the fulness of
the glory of that kingdom. * * *

While we are in mortality we are clogged, and we see as through a
glass darkly, we see only in part, and it is difficult for us to
comprehend the smallest things with which we are associated. But when
we put on immortality, our condition will be very different, for we
ascend into an enlarged sphere; although we shall not become perfect
immediately after our departure from the body, for the spirit without
the body is not perfect, and the body without the spirit is dead. The
disembodied spirit during the interval of the death of the body and its
resurrection from the grave is not perfect, hence it is not prepared
to enter into the exaltation of the celestial kingdom; but it has the
privilege of soaring in the midst of immortal beings, and of enjoying,
to a certain extent, the presence of God, not the fulness of his glory,
not the fulness of the reward which we are seeking and which we are
destined to receive, if found faithful to the law of the celestial
kingdom, but only in part.

The righteous spirit that departs from this earth is assigned its
place in the Paradise of God; it has its privileges and honors which
are in point of excellency, far above and beyond human comprehension;
and in this sphere of action, enjoying this partial reward for its
righteous conduct on the earth, it continues its labors, and in this
respect is very different from the state of the body from which it is
released. For while the body sleeps and decays, the spirit receives
a new birth; to it the portals of life are opened. It {555} is born
again into the presence of God. The spirit of our beloved sister in
taking its departure from this world is born again into the spirit
world, returning there from the mission it has been performing in
this state of probation, having been absent a few years from father,
mother, kindred, friends, neighbors, and from all that was dear; it has
returned nearer to the home-circle, to old associations and scenes,
much in the same way as a man who comes home from a foreign mission, to
join again his family and friends and enjoy the pleasures and comforts
of home.

This is the condition of her whose remains now lie before us, and of
every one who has been faithful to virtue and purity, while traveling
here below; but more especially of those who while here had the
privilege of obeying the gospel, and who lived true and faithful to
its covenants. Instead of continuing here among the things of time,
surrounded as we are with the weaknesses of a fallen world, and subject
to earthly cares and sorrows, they are freed from them to enter a state
of joy, glory and exaltation; not a fulness of any one of them but
to await the morning of the resurrection of the just, to come forth
from the grave to redeem the body, and to be reunited with it and thus
become a living soul, an immortal being, never more to die. Having
accomplished its work, having gone through its earthly probation, and
having fulfilled its mission here below, it is then prepared for the
knowledge and glory and exaltation of the celestial kingdom. This Jesus
did; and he is our forerunner, he is our exemplar. The path which he
marked out we have to walk, if we ever expect to dwell and be crowned
with him in his kingdom. We must obey and put our trust in him, knowing
that he is the Savior of the world.

What reason have we to mourn? None, except that we are deprived for a
few days of the society of one whom we love. And if we prove faithful
while in the flesh we will soon follow, and be glad that we had the
privilege of passing {556} through mortality, and that we lived in
a day in which the fulness of the everlasting gospel was preached,
through which we will be exalted, for there is no exaltation except
through obedience to law. Every blessing, privilege, glory, or
exaltation is obtained only through obedience to the law upon which
the same is promised. If we will abide the law, we shall receive
the reward; but we can receive it on no other ground. Then let us
rejoice in the truth, in the restoration of the priesthood--that power
delegated to man, by virtue of which the Lord sanctions in the heavens
what man does upon the earth. The Lord has taught us the ordinances of
the gospel by which we may perfect our exaltation in his kingdom. We
are not living as the heathen, without law; that which is necessary for
our exaltation has been revealed. Our duty, therefore, is to obey the
laws; then we shall receive our reward, no matter whether we are cut
down in childhood, in manhood, or old age; it is all the same, so long
as we are living up to the light we possess we shall not be shorn of
any blessing, nor deprived of any privilege; for there is a time after
this mortal life, and there is a way provided by which we may fulfil
the measure of our creation and destiny, and accomplish the whole great
work that we have been sent to do, although it may reach far into the
future before we fully accomplish it.

Jesus had not finished his work when his body was slain, neither did
he finish it after his resurrection from the dead; although he had
accomplished the purpose for which he then came to the earth, he had
not fulfilled all his work. And when will he? Not until he has redeemed
and saved every son and daughter of our father Adam that have been or
ever will be born upon this earth to the end of time, except the sons
of perdition. That is his mission. We will not finish our work until
we have saved ourselves, and then not until we shall have saved all
depending upon us; for we are to become saviors upon Mount Zion, as
well as Christ. We are {557} called to this mission. The dead are not
perfect without us, neither are we without them. We have a mission to
perform for and in their behalf; we have a certain work to do in order
to liberate those who, because of their ignorance and the unfavorable
circumstances in which they were placed while here, are unprepared
for eternal life; we have to open the door for them, by performing
ordinances which they cannot perform for themselves, and which are
essential to their release from the "prison-house," to come forth and
live according to God in the spirit, and be judged according to men in
the flesh.

The Prophet Joseph Smith has said that this is one of the most
important duties that devolves upon the Latter-day Saints. And why?
Because this is the dispensation of the fulness of times, which will
usher in the millennial reign, and in which all things spoken by the
mouths of holy prophets, since the world began, must be fulfilled, and
all things united, both which are in heaven and in the earth. We have
that work to do; or, at least all we can of it, leaving the balance
to our children, in whose hearts we should instill the importance of
this work, rearing them in the love of the truth and in the knowledge
of these principles, so that when we pass away, having done all we
can do, they will then take up the labor and continue it until it is
consummated.

May the Lord bless this bereaved family and comfort them in their
deprivation. Those who die in the Lord shall not taste of death. When
Adam partook of the forbidden fruit he was cast out from the presence
of God into outer darkness; that is, he was shut out from the presence
of his glory and the privilege of his society, which was spiritual
death. This was the first death; this indeed was death; for he was
shut out from the presence of God; and ever since, Adam's posterity
have been suffering the penalty of this spiritual death, which is
banishment from his presence and {558} the society of holy beings. This
first death will also be the second death. Now we look upon the mortal
remains of our departed sister; her immortal part has gone. Where? Into
outer darkness?--banished from the presence of God? No, but born again
into his presence, restored, or born from death to life, to immortality
and to joy in his presence. This is not death, then; and this is true
in relation to all Saints who die in the Lord and the covenant of the
gospel. They return from the midst of death to life, where death has no
power.

There is no death except to those who die in sin, without the sure and
steadfast hope of the resurrection of the just. There is no death where
we continue in the knowledge of the truth and have hope of a glorious
resurrection. Life and immortality are brought to light through the
gospel; hence, there is no death here; here is a peaceful slumber, a
quiet rest for a little season, and then she will come forth again
to enjoy this tabernacle. If there is anything lacking in regard to
ordinances pertaining to the House of the Lord, which may have been
omitted or not reached, those requirements can be attended to for her.
Here are her father and mother, her brothers and sisters; they know
the ordinances necessary to be performed in order to secure every
benefit and blessing that it was possible for her to have received in
the flesh. These ordinances have been revealed unto us for this very
purpose, that we might be born into the light from the midst of this
darkness--from death into life.

We live, then; we do not die; we do not anticipate death but we
anticipate life, immortality, glory, exaltation, and to be quickened
by the glory of the celestial kingdom, and receive of the same even a
fulness. This is our destiny; this is the exalted position to which
we may attain and there is no power that can deprive or rob us of it,
if we prove faithful and true to the covenant of the gospel.--Funeral
{559} sermon preached over the remains of Emma Wells, Salt Lake City,
April 11, 1878.--_Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 19, 1878, pp. 258-265.

THE RESURRECTION. Guided by the Spirit of the Lord Jesus by faith in
God, in the testimony of his prophets and in the scriptures, I accept
the doctrine of the resurrection with all my heart, and rejoice at its
confirmation in nature with the awakening of each returning spring. The
Spirit of God testifies to me, and has revealed to me, to my complete
personal satisfaction, that there is life after death, and that the
body which we lay down here will be reunited with our spirit, to become
a perfect soul, capable of receiving a fulness of joy in the presence
of God.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 16, 1912-1913, pp. 508-510.

THE RESURRECTION. It is true, all of us are clothed with mortality, but
our spirits existed long before they took upon them this tabernacle
that we now inhabit. When this body dies, the spirit does not die. The
spirit is an immortal being, and when separated from the body takes its
flight to the place prepared for it, and there awaits the resurrection
of the body, when the spirit will return again and re-occupy this
tabernacle which it occupied in this world.

This great and glorious principle of the resurrection is no longer a
theory, as some think, but it is an accomplished fact which has been
demonstrated beyond all successful contradiction, doubt or controversy.
Job, who lived before the resurrection of Christ, possessing the
spirit of prophecy, looked forward to the time of the resurrection.
He comprehended the fact. He understood the principles and knew
the power and design of God to bring it to pass, and predicted its
accomplishment. He declares: "I know that my Redeemer liveth, and that
he shall stand at the latter day upon the earth." He further says,
"And though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my flesh
shall I see God." (Job 19:25-26) He looked forward to something not yet
{560} done, something which had never been done in this world before
his day. It was not accomplished till long after his time. Having
received the spirit of the gospel and of revelation, he was enabled
to look down into unborn time and see his body which had moulded and
crumbled into dust, raised from the dead. What he saw by the eye of
faith has become actual history unto us, and we possess not only the
history of the fact but a knowledge by the testimony of the Holy Ghost
of its truth. We are not therefore situated as Job was; we live in the
latter times which are pregnant with grand and glorious events, among
the greatest of which is this glorious principle of the resurrection
of the dead, which is no longer a mere prediction, a cherished hope,
or a prophetic promise, but a reality; for long before our day it has
actually been accomplished. Christ himself burst the barriers of the
tomb, conquered death and the grave and came forth "the first fruits
of them that slept." But, says one, how can we know that Jesus was put
to death or resurrected? We have plenty of evidence to show that Jesus
was crucified and resurrected. We have the testimony of his disciples,
and they produce irrefutable evidence that they did see him crucified,
and witnessed the wounds of the nails and spear which he received on
the cross. They also testify that his body was laid away in a sepulchre
wherein no man had lain, and they rolled a great stone to the door and
departed.

Now the chief priests and Pharisees were not satisfied with the
crucifixion and burial of our Lord and Savior; they remembered that
while living he had said that after three days he would rise again, so
they established a strong guard to protect the sepulchre, and set a
seal upon the stone, lest his disciples should come by night and steal
away the body and say unto the people, "He is risen from the dead," and
thus perpetuate a fraud upon the world.

Lo and behold! by this act those unbelieving guards {561} became actual
witnesses to the fact that a heavenly personage came and rolled away
the stone and that Jesus came forth. The disciples witness and testify
to the resurrection, and their testimony can not be impeached. It
therefore stands good, and is true and faithful.

But is this the only evidence we have to depend on? Have we nothing but
the testimony of the ancient disciples to rest our hopes upon? Thank
God we have more. And the additional evidence which we possess enables
us to become witnesses to the truth of the testimony of the ancient
disciples. We go to the Book of Mormon; it testifies of the death and
resurrection of Jesus Christ in plain and unmistakable terms; we may
go to the book of Doctrine and Covenants containing the revelations of
this dispensation, and we shall find clear and well defined evidence
there. We have the testimony of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the testimony
of Oliver Cowdery, and the testimony of Sidney Rigdon, that they saw
the Lord Jesus--the same that was crucified in Jerusalem--and that he
revealed himself unto them. Joseph and Sidney testify to it as follows:

"We, Joseph Smith, Jr., and Sidney Rigdon, being in the Spirit on the
sixteenth of February, in the year of our Lord, one thousand eight
hundred and thirty-two, by the power of the Spirit our eyes were opened
and our understandings were enlightened, so as to see and understand
the things of God--even those things which were from the beginning
before the world was, which were ordained of the Father, through his
Only Begotten Son, who was in the bosom of the Father, even from the
beginning, of whom we bear record, and the record which we bear is the
fulness of the gospel of Jesus Christ, who is the Son, whom we saw and
with whom we conversed in the heavenly vision." (Doc. and Cov. 76:
11-14).

They were called to be special witnesses of Jesus Christ and his death
and resurrection.

{562} We have also the testimony of the ancient disciples who lived
on this continent of the crucifixion and resurrection. You will find
their testimony recorded in the Book of Mormon. The disciples who
lived upon this continent knew what transpired at Jerusalem; the Lord
showed them these things. After his resurrection he manifested himself
to his disciples on this continent, and showed them the wounds he had
received on Calvary. They were convinced that Jesus was the Christ
and the Redeemer of the world. They beheld him in the flesh and they
bear witness of it, and their testimony is true. We have the testimony
of many witnesses. We have the testimony of eleven special witnesses
to the divine origin of the Book of Mormon, which book testifies of
Christ's resurrection, containing as it does the records of the ancient
prophets and disciples of Christ on this continent, thus confirming
their testimonies.

Is this all the evidence we have? No. Joseph Smith boldly declared to
the world that if mankind would sincerely repent of their sins and be
baptized by authority, they should not only receive a remission of
their sins, but, by the laying on of hands, they should receive the
Holy Ghost, and should know of the doctrine for themselves. Thus all
who obey the law and abide in the truth become witnesses of this and
other equally great and precious truths. Today there are thousands of
Latter-day Saints living in Utah and throughout the world who have
attained to the possession of these things, both men and women. If we
witness by our acts, and from our hearts, our determination to carry
out the mind and will of the Lord, we shall have this double assurance
of a glorious resurrection, and be able to say as the Prophet Job
said--his was a glorious declaration "For I know that my Redeemer
liveth, and that he shall [again] stand at the latter day upon the
earth: and though after my skin worms destroy this body, yet in my
flesh shall I see God: whom I shall see for myself, and mine eyes shall
behold, {563} and not another; though my reins be consumed within me."
(Job 19:25-27) Thousands have received this testimony and can witness
unto God and testify from their hearts that they know these things.

I bear my testimony, and surely it is of as much force and effect, if
it be true, as the testimony of Job, the testimonies of the disciples
of Jerusalem, the disciples on this continent, of Joseph Smith, or
any other man who told the truth. All are of equal force and binding
on the world. If no man had ever testified to these things upon the
face of the globe, I want to say as a servant of God, independent of
the testimonies of all men and of every book that has been written,
that I have received the witness of the Spirit in my own heart, and I
testify before God, angels and men, without fear of the consequences,
that I know that my Redeemer lives, and I shall see him face to face,
and stand with him in my resurrected body upon this earth, if I am
faithful; for God has revealed this unto me. I have received the
witness, and I bear my testimony, and my testimony is true.

The testimony of the Latter-day Saints is in addition to and consonant
with that of the disciples of Jesus Christ who lived at Jerusalem,
those who lived on this continent, the Prophet Joseph, Oliver, Sidney,
and others, of our crucified and risen Redeemer, because they received
it not of them, but by the same Spirit by which they received it. No
man ever received this testimony unless the Spirit of God revealed it
unto him.

We will see Brother Urie again. Sister Urie will meet him on the other
side of the grave. The spirit and the body will be reunited. We shall
see each other in the flesh, in the same tabernacles that we have here
while in mortality. Our tabernacles will be brought forth as they
are laid down, although there will be a restoration effected; every
organ, every limb that has been maimed, every deformity {564} caused
by accident or in any other way, will be restored and put right. Every
limb and joint shall be restored to its proper frame. We will know
each other and enjoy each other's society throughout the endless ages
of eternity, if we keep the law of God. It is for us to remain true
and faithful and keep our covenants, and to train our children up in
the paths of holiness, virtue and truth, in the principles of the
gospel, that we may with them be prepared to enjoy the perfect and
eternal day.--Discourse delivered at the funeral services of James
Uric, Sixteenth ward, Salt Lake City, February 3, 1883.--_Journal of
Discourses,_ Vol. 24, pp. 75-82.

ON THE RESURRECTION. I believe that as Christ arose from the dead, so
shall all the faithful arise. We shall all see one another again. I
know that Jesus is the Christ, that after his death and burial he arose
from the dead, and became the first fruits of the resurrection. To all
believers, and to the Latter-day Saints especially, there is sweet
comfort in this knowledge, and in the thought that through obedience to
the ordinances and principles of the gospel, which Christ, our Savior,
taught and enjoined upon the people and his disciples, men shall be
born again, redeemed from sin, arise from the grave, and like Jesus
return into the presence of the Father. Death is not the end. When we,
sorrowing, lay away our loved ones in the grave, we have an assurance
based upon the life, words and resurrection of Christ, that we shall
again meet and shake hands and associate with them in a better life,
where sorrow and trouble are ended, and where there is to be no more
parting.

This knowledge is one of the greatest incentives that we have to live
right in this life, to pass through mortality, doing and feeling and
accomplishing good. The spirits of all men, as soon as they depart from
this mortal body, whether they are good or evil, we are told in the
Book of Mormon, are taken home to that God who gave them life, where
there {565} is a separation, a partial judgment, and the spirits of
those who are righteous are received into a state of happiness which is
called paradise, a state of rest, a state of peace, where they expand
in wisdom, where they have respite from all their troubles, and where
care and sorrow do not annoy. The wicked, on the contrary, have no part
nor portion in the Spirit of the Lord, and they are cast into outer
darkness, being led captive, because of their own iniquity, by the evil
one. And in this space between death and the resurrection of the body,
the two classes of souls remain, in happiness or in misery, until the
time which is appointed of God that the dead shall come forth and be
reunited both spirit and body, and be brought to stand before God, and
be judged according to their works. This is the final judgment.

Where a man has obeyed the principles of the gospel, used his influence
for good, injured no soul, loved righteousness, and despised wrong
doing, laying down his body to the rest of the righteous in the grave,
I feel and know that, in addition to the spirit's promised state of
peace and rest in paradise, there will be a glorious reunion of body
and spirit, a bright awakening for him in the resurrection, and a
future beyond, full of happiness. When this time shall come, none but
God knoweth, but we do know that all men shall come forth from the dead.

Now, I know these statements to be true; I know them to be true by the
thrill of the inspiration of God which fills my entire being with this
knowledge. To me they are consistent with God's wisdom and with his
holy purposes. We have the testimony of Christ, the testimony of the
prophets, the whisperings of the Holy Spirit, and with these evidences,
I cannot help but believe, and know that there is a resurrection of
the dead, a literal, actual resurrection of the body. I cannot believe
that a wise and merciful God would create a man like our friend and
brother, upright, honorable, honest in all his dealings and in his
{566} life, only to live a few years, then to pass away forever, to be
known no more. As Jesus arose from the dead so will he, and all the
innocent and righteous, arise. The elements which compose this temporal
body will not perish, will not cease to exist, but in the day of the
resurrection these elements will come together again, bone to bone, and
flesh to flesh. The body will come forth as it is laid to rest, for
there is no growth nor development in the grave. As it is laid down,
so will it arise, and changes to perfection will come by the law of
restitution.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 7, June, 1914, p. 619.

RESURRECTION AND FINAL JUDGEMENT. When the spirit leaves the body, it
returns, says the prophet, immediately to God, to be assigned to its
Place, either to associate with the good and the noble ones who have
lived in the paradise of God, or to be confined in the "prison-house"
to await the resurrection of the body from the grave. Therefore we
know that Brother Clayton has gone to God, gone to receive the partial
judgment of the Almighty which pertains to the period intervening
between the death of the body and the resurrection of the body, or
the separation of the spirit from the body and their uniting together
again. This judgment is passed upon the spirit alone. But there will
come a time which will be after the resurrection, when the body and
spirit shall be reunited, when the final judgment will be passed on
every man. This is in accordance with the vision of John the Revelator:

"And I saw the dead, small and great, stand before God; and the books
were opened: and another book was opened, which is the book of life:
and the dead were judged out of those things which were written in the
books, according to their works.

"And the sea gave up the dead which were in it; and death and hell
delivered up the dead which were in them: * * * and death and hell were
cast into the lake of fire. This is the second death.

{567} "And whosoever was not found written in the book of life was cast
into the lake of fire." (Rev. 20:12-15)

That is the final judgment, which we will all receive after we have
performed this our earthly mission.

The Savior did not finish his work when he expired on the cross, when
he cried out, "It is finished." He, in using those words, had no
reference to his great mission to the earth, but merely to the agonies
which he suffered. The Christian world, I know, say he alluded to the
great work of redemption. This, however, is a great mistake, and is
indicative of the extent of their knowledge of the plan of life and
salvation. I say, he referred merely to the agonies of death, and the
sufferings he felt for the wickedness of men who would go so far as
to crucify their Redeemer. It was this feeling, and this alone, that
prompted him to cry out in the agony of his soul, "It is finished," and
then he expired.

But his work was not completed; it was in fact only begun. If he had
stopped here, instead of his being the Savior of the world, he, as well
as all mankind, would have perished irredeemably, never to have come
forth out of the grave; for it was designed from the beginning that
he should be the first fruits of them that slept; it was part of the
great plan that he should burst the bands of death and gain the victory
over the grave. If, therefore, his mission had ceased when he gave up
the ghost, the world would have slumbered in the dust in interminable
death, never to have risen to live again. It was but a small part of
the mission of the Savior that was performed when he suffered death; it
was indeed the lesser part; the greater had yet to be done.

It was in his resurrection from the tomb, in his coming forth from
death unto life, in uniting again the spirit and the body that he might
become a living soul; and when this was done, then he was prepared to
return to the Father. {568} And all this was in strict accordance with
the great plan of salvation. For even Christ himself, though without
sin, was required to observe the outward ordinance of baptism, in order
to fulfil all righteousness.

So, after his resurrection from the dead he could return to the
Father, there to receive the welcome plaudit, Well done; you have
done your work, you have accomplished your mission, you have wrought
out salvation for all the children of Adam; you have redeemed all men
from the grave; and through their obedience to the ordinances of the
gospel which you have established, they can also be redeemed from the
spiritual death, again to be brought back into our presence, to partake
of glory, exaltation and eternal life with us.

And so it will be when we come forth out of the grave, when the trump
shall sound, and these our bodies shall rise and our spirits shall
enter into them again, and they shall become living souls, no more to
be dissolved or separated, but to become inseparable, immortal, eternal.

Then we shall stand before the bar of God to be judged. So says the
Bible, so says the Book of Mormon, and so say the revelations which
have come direct to us through the Prophet Joseph Smith. And then those
who have not been subject and obedient to the celestial law will not be
quickened by the celestial glory. And those who have not been subject
and obedient to the terrestrial law will not be quickened by the
terrestrial glory. And those who have not been subject and obedient to
the telestial law, will not be quickened by a telestial glory; but they
will have a kingdom without glory.

The sons of perdition, men who once were in possession of the light and
truth, but who turned away from them and denied the Lord, putting him
to an open shame, as did the Jews when they crucified him and said,
"His blood be on us, and on our children;" men who consent, against
light {569} and knowledge, to the shedding of innocent blood, it will
be said unto them, "Depart from me, ye cursed." (Matt. 25:41) I never
knew you; depart into the second death, even banishment from the
presence of God for ever and ever, where the worm dieth not and the
fire is not quenched, from whence there is no redemption, neither in
time nor in eternity. Herein is the difference between the second and
the first death wherein man became spiritually dead; for from the first
death he may be redeemed by the blood of Christ, through obedience to
the laws and ordinances of the gospel, but from the second, there is no
redemption at all.

We read in the book of Doctrine and Covenants, that the devil tempted
Adam, and he partook of the forbidden fruit, and transgressed the
commandment, wherein he became subject to the will of the devil because
he yielded unto temptation, and because of this transgression he became
"spiritually dead, which is the first death, even that same death,
which is the last death, which is spiritual, which shall be pronounced
upon the wicked when I shall say--Depart, ye cursed!" (Doc. and Cov.
29:41.)

But who will receive such punishment? Only those who deserve it, those
who commit the unpardonable sin.

Then there is the banishment of the transgressor (not the sons of
perdition) into the prison-house, a place of punishment, with no
exaltation, no increase, no dominion, no power, whose inhabitants after
their redemption may become servants of them that have obeyed the
laws of God and kept the faith. That will be the punishment of such
as reject the truth, but sin not unto death.--Discourse delivered at
funeral of William Clayton, in the Seventeenth Ward meetinghouse, Salt
Lake City, December 7, 1879. _Journal of Discourses_ Vol. 21, 1881,
pp. 9-13.

CONDITION OF CHILDREN IN HEAVEN. If we have received the testimony
of the spirit of truth in our souls we know that all is well with
our little children who pass away, {570} that we could not, if we
would, better their condition; and least of all would it better their
condition if we could call them back here, for the reason that so long
as man is in the world, clothed with mortality, surrounded by the evils
that are in the world, he runs chances and is subject to risks, and
there are responsibilities resting upon him which may prove fatal to
his future prosperity, happiness and exaltation. It is only those who
are thoroughly and firmly grounded in the truth, who are established in
the principles of life, that will be able to certainly claim the reward
of the faithful, and an exaltation in the presence of the Father. As
soon as any man turns away from the truth that binds him to God, that
moment he is in danger, and may fall.

But, with little children who are taken away in infancy and innocence
before they have reached the years of accountability, and are not
capable of committing sin, the gospel reveals to us the fact that they
are redeemed, and Satan has no power over them. Neither has death any
power over them. They are redeemed by the blood of Christ, and they
are saved just as surely as death has come into the world through the
fall of our first parents. It is further written that Satan has no
power over men or women, except that power which he gains over them
in this world. In other words, none of the children of the Father who
are redeemed through obedience, faith, repentance, and baptism for the
remission of sins, and who live in that redeemed condition, and die in
that condition are subject to Satan. Therefore he has no power over
them. They are absolutely beyond his reach, just as little children are
who die without sin. To my mind this is a consolation and a glorious
truth that my soul delights in. I am grateful to my heavenly Father
that he has revealed it unto me, for it affords a consolation that
nothing else can give, and it brings a joy to my spirit that nothing
can take away, except the consciousness on my {571} part of having
sinned and transgressed against light and knowledge which I may have
possessed.

Under these circumstances, our beloved friends who are now deprived of
their little one, have great cause for joy and rejoicing, even in the
midst of the deep sorrow that they feel at the loss of their little
one for a time. They know he is all right; they have the assurance
that their little one has passed away without sin. Such children are
in the bosom of the Father. They will inherit their glory and their
exaltation, and they will not be deprived of the blessings that belong
to them; for, in the economy of heaven, and in the wisdom of the
Father, who doeth all things well, those who are cut down as little
children are without any responsibility for their taking off, they,
themselves, not having the intelligence and wisdom to take care of
themselves and to understand the laws of life; and, in the wisdom and
mercy and economy of God our Heavenly Father, all that could have been
obtained and enjoyed by them if they had been permitted to live in the
flesh will be provided for them hereafter. They will lose nothing by
being taken away from us in this way.

This is a consolation to me. Joseph Smith, the prophet, was the
promulgator under God of these principles. He was in touch with the
heavens. God revealed himself unto him, and made known unto him
the principles that lie before us, and which are comprised in the
everlasting gospel. Joseph Smith declared that the mother who laid down
her little child, being deprived of the privilege, the joy, and the
satisfaction of bringing it up to manhood or womanhood in this world,
would, after the resurrection, have all the joy, satisfaction and
pleasure, and even more than it would have been possible to have had in
mortality, in seeing her child grow to the full measure of the stature
of its spirit. If this be true, and I believe it, what a consolation it
is. Jesus Christ was the Son of God before he came into the world, yet
he {572} came as an infant, grew and developed into manhood, and when
his spirit departed from its tabernacle it went to proclaim the gospel
to the spirits which were imprisoned, possessing all the intelligence,
powers and faculties which it had in the flesh, except the possession
of the body, wherein he became absolutely like unto God. And so I
believe it is with all men that come into the world. Every spirit that
comes to this earth to take upon it a tabernacle is a son or a daughter
of God, and possesses all the intelligence and all the attributes
that any son or daughter can enjoy, either in the spirit world, or in
this world, except that in the spirit, and separated from the body,
they lacked just the tabernacle of being like God the Father. It is
said that God is a spirit, and they who worship him must worship him
in spirit and in truth. But he is a spirit possessing the tabernacle
of flesh and bones, as tangible as a man's and therefore to be like
God and Jesus all men must have a body. It matters not whether these
tabernacles mature in this world, or have to wait and mature in the
world to come, according to the word of the Prophet Joseph Smith, the
body will develop, either in time or in eternity, to the full stature
of the spirit, and when the mother is deprived of the pleasure and joy
of rearing her babe to manhood or to womanhood in this life, through
the hand of death, that privilege will be renewed to her hereafter, and
she will enjoy it to a fuller fruition than it would be possible for
her to do here. When she does it there, it will be with the certain
knowledge that the results will be without failure; whereas here, the
results are unknown until after we have passed the test.

With these thoughts in my mind, I take consolation in the fact that I
shall meet my children who have passed behind the veil; I have lost a
number, and I have felt all that a parent can feel, I think, in the
loss of my children. I have felt it keenly, for I love children, and
I am particularly fond of the little ones, but I feel thankful to God
for the knowledge {573} of these principles, because now I have every
confidence in his word and in his promise that I will possess in the
future all that belongs to me, and my joy will be full. I will not be
deprived of any privilege or any blessing that I am worthy of and that
may be properly entrusted to me. But every gift, and every blessing
that it is possible for me to become worthy of I shall possess, either
in time or in eternity, and it will not matter, so that I acknowledge
the hand of God in all these things, and say in my heart, "The Lord
giveth and the Lord taketh away, blessed be the name of the Lord."
This is the way we should feel with regard to our children, or our
relatives, or friends, or whatever vicissitudes we may be called to
pass through.

Now, the beauty of this to me is that I know these things, that I am
satisfied of them, and so long as I possess the spirit of truth I have
no fear that any doubt or uncertainty will ever enter my mind in regard
to these principles. There is only one course that I might pursue which
would bring about mistrust and fear, trembling and doubt, in relation
to these things. And that would be for me to deny the truth and cut
myself loose from the guiding influences of the Holy Spirit, for I
do know that so long as a man is under the guiding influence of the
Spirit of God he never can deny these truths which God has revealed to
him, and in that condition he is not subject to the power of Satan.
It is only when he transgresses the law of God, and dismisses these
principles from his thoughts, that he becomes subject to the powers of
evil, that his mind becomes darkened, and he begins to doubt and fear.
But, let a man have the Spirit of God in his heart, that Spirit which
reveals the things of God unto men, and makes them to know the truth
as God himself knows it, he never can doubt those things which God has
revealed. Therefore, I rejoice in these truths, for I know they are
true.

I know that Brother Heber and his companion, if they {574} are faithful
to the light they possess and to the covenants that they have entered
into before the Lord, will just as assuredly inherit the joy and the
possession and the glory of this little one that has now departed,
as that they see its little form lying here before them this moment.
Everyone who has the spirit of truth in his soul must feel this to be
true.--Remarks at the funeral of Daniel Wells Grant, child of Heber
J. Grant, and Emily Wells Grant, in family residence, Salt Lake City,
March 12, 1895.--_Young Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 6, pp. 369-374.

STATUS OF CHILDREN IN THE RESURRECTION. The spirits of our children
are immortal before they come to us, and their spirits, after bodily
death, are like they were before they came. They are as they would have
appeared if they had lived in the flesh, to grow to maturity, or to
develop their physical bodies to the full stature of their spirits. If
you see one of your children that has passed away it may appear to you
in the form in which you would recognize it, the form of childhood; but
if it came to you as a messenger bearing some important truth, it would
perhaps come as the spirit of Bishop Edward Hunter's son (who died when
a little child) came to him, in the stature of full-grown manhood, and
revealed himself to his father, and said: "I am your son."

Bishop Hunter did not understand it. He went to my father and said:
"Hyrum, what does that mean? I buried my son when he was only a little
boy, but he has come to me as a full-grown man--a noble, glorious,
young man, and declared himself my son. What does it mean?"

Father (Hyrum Smith, the Patriarch) told him that the Spirit of Jesus
Christ was full-grown before he was born into the world; and so our
children were full-grown and possessed their full stature in the
spirit, before they entered mortality, the same stature that they
will possess after they have passed away from mortality, and as they
will also appear {575} after the resurrection, when they shall have
completed their mission.

Joseph Smith taught the doctrine that the infant child that was laid
away in death would come up in the resurrection as a child; and,
pointing to the mother of a lifeless child, he said to her: "You will
have the joy, the pleasure, and satisfaction of nurturing this child,
after its resurrection, until it reaches the full stature of its
spirit." There is restitution, there is growth, there is development,
after the resurrection from death. I love this truth. It speaks volumes
of happiness, of joy and gratitude to my soul. Thank the Lord he has
revealed these principles to us.

In 1854, I met with my aunt, the wife of my uncle, Don Carlos Smith,
who was the mother of that little girl that Joseph Smith, the Prophet,
was speaking about when he told the mother that she should have the
joy, the pleasure, and the satisfaction of rearing that child, after
the resurrection, until it reached the full stature of its spirit;
and that it would be a far greater joy than she could possibly have
in mortality, because she would be free from the sorrow and fear and
disabilities of mortal life, and she would know more than she could
know in this life. I met that widow, the mother of that child, and she
told me this circumstance and bore testimony to me that this was what
the Prophet Joseph Smith said when he was speaking at the funeral of
her little daughter.

One day I was conversing with a brother-in-law of mine, Lorin Walker,
who married my oldest sister. In the course of the conversation he
happened to mention that he was present at the funeral of my cousin
Sophronia, and that he heard the Prophet Joseph Smith declare the very
words that Aunt Agnes had told me.

I said to him, "Lorin, what did the Prophet say?" and he repeated,
as nearly as he could remember, what the Prophet Joseph said in
relation to little children. The body {576} remains undeveloped in
the grave, but the spirit returns to God who gave it. Afterwards, in
the resurrection, the spirit and body will be reunited; the body will
develop and grow to the full stature of the spirit; and the resurrected
soul will go on to perfection. So I had the statement of two witnesses
who heard this doctrine announced by the Prophet Joseph Smith, the
source of intelligence.

Eventually I was in conversation with Sister M. Isabella Horn. She
began to relate to me the circumstance of her being present at the
funeral that I refer to, when Joseph spoke of the death of little
children, their resurrection, as little children, and of the glory,
and honor, and joy, and happiness the mother would have in rearing
her little children in the resurrection to the full stature of their
spirits. "Well," she said, "I heard Joseph say that. I was at that
funeral." Sister Isabella Horne told me this.

Then I said to her: "Why haven't you spoken about it before? How is it
you have kept it to yourself all these long years? Why haven't you let
the Church know something about this declaration of the Prophet?"

She replied: "I did not know whether it was my duty to do so, or
whether it would be proper or not."

I said: "Who else was there?"

"My husband was there."

"Does he remember it?"

"Yes, he remembers it."

"Well, will you and Brother Horne give me an affidavit in writing,
stating the fact, and let it be sworn to?"

She said, "With the greatest of pleasure."

So I have the testimony in affidavit form of Brother and Sister Horne,
in addition to the testimony of my aunt, and the testimony of my
brother-in-law, in relation to the Prophet Joseph's remarks at that
funeral.

Just a little while later, to my joy and satisfaction, the first man
I ever heard mention it in public was Franklin D. {577} Richards; and
when he spoke of it, I felt in my soul: the truth has come out. The
truth will prevail. It is mighty, and it will live; for there is no
power that can destroy it. Presidents Woodruff and Cannon approved of
the doctrine and after that I preached it.

It is a good thing for us not to attempt to advance new doctrine,
or new and advanced thought in relation to principles and doctrines
pertaining to, or presumed to pertain to, the gospel of Jesus Christ,
without weighing it carefully, with the experience of years, before we
attempt to make a doctrinal test and to advance it to the people of the
Lord. There is so much simple truth, necessary to be understood, that
has been revealed to us in the gospel that it is extreme folly in us to
attempt to go beyond the truth that has been revealed, until we have
mastered and can comprehend the truth that we have. There is a great
deal within our reach that we have not yet mastered.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 21, May, 1918, pp. 567-573.

ADDRESS AT FUNERAL SERVICES OF MARY A. FREEZE. There does not seem to
be much left to be said. I endorse heartily and fully every kindly
sentiment that I have heard expressed here this afternoon with
reference to our departed sister. I have known her, as a worker in
the Church, for a goodly number of years, and have had the pleasure
of frequently meeting her in the various capacities in which she has
labored in the Church, and in every instance I have been more and more
impressed with the pure character and spirit of the woman. There was a
calmness about her appearance, her conversation, and her conduct that
seemed to indicate a well-matured character and a well-established
principle of life. Nothing that I have ever perceived in her has
appeared flighty, unsettled, or unstable, but in everything, her life
indicated a life of stability, of reliability and fidelity to the Lord
and to his covenants.

After hearing the many good things that have been said {578} (yet, as
Brother Joseph E. Taylor has remarked, "not half has been told") in
relation to the good life and labors of our dear sister, it makes my
mind revert to the blessed hopes that are inspired in our souls by and
through our faith in the gospel of our Lord Jesus Christ--the hope
that that gospel inspired in our souls that we are following in the
footsteps of our Redeemer and that every man and woman following in
his footsteps will become like him, will enjoy the blessed privileges
which he enjoyed, will pass through the varied ordeals through which he
passed, and will eventually land at the same goal and will be blessed
with the same privileges, and power and glory, and exaltation that
he, himself, vindicated, proved and fulfilled in his life and death
and resurrection from death to life again. I cannot conceive of any
more desirable thing than is vouchsafed to us in the gospel of Jesus
Christ--that though we die, yet we shall live again, and though we
die and dissolve into the native elements of which our tabernacles
are composed, yet these elements will again be restored to each other
and be reorganized, and we will become again living souls just as the
Savior did before us; and his having done so has made it possible for
all the rest of us. What can there be more joyous to think of than the
fact that Brother Freeze, who loved his wife and whom she loved, to
whom he was true and who was true to him all her days of association
with him as wife and mother, will have the privilege of coming up on
the morning of the first resurrection clothed with immortality and
eternal life, and resume the relationship that existed between them in
this life, the relationship of husband and wife, father and mother,
parents to their children, having laid the foundation for eternal glory
and eternal exaltation in the kingdom of God! Life without this hope
would seem to me in vain. And yet there is nothing that I have ever
discovered in the world, except the gospel of Jesus Christ, that gives
this assurance. Nothing has ever pointed it out {579} in a tangible
way except the gospel of Jesus Christ. Jesus Christ has laid this
foundation, has taught this principle and this truth, and has uttered
that memorable sentiment that, "He that believeth in me, though he were
dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and believeth in me shall
never die." (John 11:25, 26.)

Now, to me this explains the sentiment expressed by Brother Joseph E.
Taylor, when he said he did not feel the presence of death when he
went to visit her. Do you feel the presence of death here? He did not
feel it then. Just prior to the departure of her spirit, there was no
element of death there. The element of dissolution--the separation of
the spiritual from the temporal, of the immortal from the mortal was
visible, but in the presence of the Spirit of the Lord, and with the
hope inspired in the gospel of the Son of God, that "he that believeth
in me, though he were dead, yet shall he live; and whosoever liveth and
believeth in me shall never die," and in the knowledge of the fact that
every provision the Lord has given by which we may be prepared to enjoy
the fulness of these blessings has been observed and entered into,
believed and followed by this good woman, what reason could there be,
under such circumstances, for thoughts of death? It was not death, but
a change from mortality to immortality, from death, in fact, to life
everlasting.

Now, I believe that if ever a soul in the world is entitled to the
enjoyment or realization of that saying, of the Son of God this good
woman is entitled to it; for I believe, according to her knowledge, she
was true to every principle by which she might fulfil the intent of it
and by which she may receive the verification of it in the world to
come.

I do not feel that it would be proper or necessary for me to occupy
very much time, but while the brethren and sisters were speaking, the
thought naturally passed through my mind--what will be her occupation
in the world to come? {580} What will she do there? We are told that
she will not be idle. She could not be idle. In God's plans, there
is no such thing as idleness. God is not pleased with the thought of
idleness. He is not idle, and there is no such thing as inertia in
the providences and in the purposes of God. We are either growing and
advancing, or are retrograding. We are not stationary. We must grow.
The principles of everlasting growth and development tend to glory, to
exaltation, to happiness, and to a fulness of joy. What has she been
doing? She has been working in the temple, among other things. She has
been working, also, as a minister of life among young women of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints. She has labored diligently
and earnestly in trying to persuade the daughters of Zion to come to a
knowledge of the truth as she possessed it. She seemed to be thoroughly
established in it. I have never discovered the least symptom of any
dubiety in her mind in reference to the gospel of Jesus Christ. She
has been laboring to bring others of the daughters of Zion to the same
standard of knowledge, faith and understanding of the principles of the
gospel of Christ that she herself possessed, a ministering angel and a
mother in Israel, seeking the salvation of other daughters and other
mothers in Israel. What can you conceive of grander than a calling like
that? Then, as I said, she has been at work in the temple. What for?
Administering ordinances that God has revealed are essential to the
salvation of the living and their preparation for greater exaltation
and glory here and hereafter, and also for the redemption of the dead.
What can you think of greater than this? To my mind, there isn't
anything so great and so glorious in this world as to labor for the
salvation of the living and for the redemption of the dead. We read of
the Savior going to preach the gospel to the spirits in prison, when
his body lay in the tomb. That was a part of the great mission he had
to perform. He was sent not only {581} to preach the gospel to those
dwelling in mortality, but he was foreordained and anointed of God to
open the doors of the prison house to those in bondage and to proclaim
his gospel to them.

I have always believed, and still do believe with all my soul, that
such men as Peter and James and the twelve disciples chosen by the
Savior in his time, have been engaged all the centuries that have
passed since their martyrdom for the testimony of Jesus Christ, in
proclaiming liberty to the captives in the spirit world and in opening
their prison doors. I do not believe that they could be employed in
any greater work. Their special calling and anointing of the Lord
himself was to save the world, to proclaim liberty to the captives,
and the opening of the prison doors to those who were bound in chains
of darkness, superstition, and ignorance. I believe that the disciples
who have passed away in this dispensation--Joseph, the Prophet, and
his brother Hyrum, and Brigham, and Heber, and Willard, and Daniel and
John, and Wilford and all the rest of the prophets who have lived in
this dispensation, and who have been intimately associated with the
work of redemption and the other ordinances of the gospel of the Son of
God in this world, are preaching that same gospel that they lived and
preached here, to those who are in darkness in the spirit world and who
had not the knowledge before they went. The gospel must be preached to
them. We are not perfect without them--they cannot be perfect without
us.

Now, among all these millions of spirits that have lived on the
earth and have passed away, from generation to generation, since the
beginning of the world, without the knowledge of the gospel--among
them you may count that at least one-half are women. Who is going to
preach the gospel to the women? Who is going to carry the testimony of
Jesus Christ to the hearts of the women who have passed away without a
knowledge of the gospel? Well, {582} to my mind, it is a simple thing.
These good sisters who have been set apart, ordained to the work,
called to it, authorized by the authority of the holy priesthood to
minister for their sex, in the House of God for the living and for the
dead, will be fully authorized and empowered to preach the gospel and
minister to the women while the elders and prophets are preaching it
to the men. The things we experience here are typical of the things of
God and the life beyond us. There is a great similarity between God's
purposes as manifested here and his purposes as carried out in his
presence and kingdom. Those who are authorized to preach the gospel
here and are appointed here to do that work will not be idle after
they have passed away, but will continue to exercise the rights that
they obtained here under the priesthood of the Son of God to minister
for the salvation of those who have died without a knowledge of the
truth. Some of you will understand when I tell you that some of these
good women who have passed beyond have actually been anointed queens
and priestesses unto God and unto their husbands, to continue their
work and to be the mothers of spirits in the world to come. The world
does not understand this--they cannot receive it--they do not know
what it means, and it is sometimes hard for those who ought to be
thoroughly imbued with the spirit of the gospel--even for some of us,
to comprehend, but it is true.

Now, may the Lord bless Brother Freeze. As Sister Martha Tingey has
said, Sister Freeze could never have done the work she has done if it
had not been for his seconding her in her efforts. He consented to her
partially neglecting her home duties in order to labor in a broader
field for the salvation of others. But just here let me my a word to
you mothers. Oh, mothers, salvation, mercy, life ever-lasting begin
at home. "What profiteth it a man, though he gain the whole world and
lose his own soul?" What would it profit me, though I should go out
into the world and {583} win strangers to the fold of God and lose my
own children? Oh! God, let me not lose my own. I can not afford to lose
mine, whom God has given to me and whom I am responsible for before
the Lord, and who are dependent upon me for guidance, for instruction,
for proper influence. Father, do not permit me to lose interest in my
own, in trying to save others. Charity begins at home. Life everlasting
should begin at home. I should feel very badly to be made to realize,
by and by, that through my neglect of home, while trying to save
others, I have lost my own. I do not want that. The Lord help me to
save my own, so far as one can help another. I realize I cannot save
anybody, but I can teach them how to be saved. I can set an example
before my children how they can be saved, and it is my duty to do that
first. I owe it more to them than to anybody else in the world. Then,
when I have accomplished the work I should do in my own home circle,
let me extend my power for good abroad just as far as I can.

My brethren and sisters, I know as I know I live that Joseph Smith was
and is and ever will be the instrument chosen of God the eternal Father
to lay the foundation of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, and to establish the kingdom of God on earth, never more to
be thrown down. I bear testimony to you. I know as I know I live that
every doctrine that he taught is calculated to build up, to ennoble, to
enlarge the soul, to establish peace and righteousness in the hearts of
the children of men, and lead them up to God, and not away from him.
I know it as I know I live. It is true, and I thank God that, like my
dear sister here, whose earthly remains only now are with us, he has
made me to believe it and to accept of it without recourse. I believe
it with all my heart, just as I believe I live, and as I believe my
own mother and father. Let us all strive for this belief, and if we
will, we shall have joy and satisfaction, and we shall enter into God's
rest, right here, {584} in this world. For he that entereth in God's
rest here will never more be disturbed by the hallucinations of sin and
wickedness, and the enemies of truth will have no power over him.

That God will help us to reach that point is my prayer, and may the
blessings of the Lord attend the family of Sister and Brother Freeze
and their children, that not one of them will ever take a course that
will bring sorrow to their beloved and sainted mother. That has been
one of the stimulants of my life, one of the things that has made me
strive to do good. I would not grieve my blessed mother, if I knew
it, for anything in the world. There is nothing between me and the
heavens that would compensate for doing something that would grieve
or hurt my mother. Why? Because she loved me, she would have died for
me over and over again, if such were possible, only to have saved me.
Why should I grieve, why should I disappoint her? Why should I take a
course contrary to her own life and her life's teachings to me, for she
taught me honor, and virtue, and truth, and integrity to the kingdom of
God, and she taught me not only by precept but by example. I would not
grieve her for the world. Boys and girls, do not do anything to grieve
your mother. You know she was a Latter-day Saint, you know she was true
to her convictions. Be as true as she was, and, as the Lord lives,
you will be exalted with your mother, and will have a fulness of joy,
which, may God grant, is my prayer in the name of Jesus. Amen.--_Young
Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 23, 1911, pp. 128-132.

THE RESURRECTION. Now I am going to take the liberty of reading a
little scripture to you, and then, as I go along, express my belief
and conviction in relation to what we believe as Latter-day Saints
with reference to the resurrection from the dead. I shall not take the
pains or time to go into the subject in detail, for there are a great
many scriptures that can be brought to bear upon the subject, {585}
scattered through the New Testament, in the declaration of the Son
of God; but I will content myself by reading the description of his
resurrection. We all know that he was lifted upon the cross; that he
was pierced in the side, and that his life blood flowed from the body;
and that he groaned upon the cross and gave up the spirit; that his
body was taken from the cross, embalmed and wrapped in clean linen and
laid in a new sepulchre wherein the body of no man had ever been laid.
And then, remembering the remark that he was to lay down his body and
take it up again, the claim that he made that that temple was to be
destroyed but that it would be raised up the third day, that he was
going to lay down his life and take it up again, the chief priests went
to the chief authorities and demanded that a great stone be placed at
the mouth of the sepulchre and that a seal be placed upon it, and that
also a guard should be placed there, lest his disciples should come at
night and take away the body and impose upon the public the claim that
he had risen from the dead. And so a cordon of soldiers were placed
to guard the tomb, and a great stone was placed at the mouth of the
sepulchre, and a seal was placed upon it according to the history given
in the scriptures of it, so that it would be absolutely impossible
for the disciples of Christ to perpetrate a deception upon the world
by clandestinely stealing and taking away the body of Christ and then
proclaiming to the world that his body had been raised from the dead.
Sometimes even the enemies of the truth and those who are seeking to
destroy it become the unwitting means of verifying truth and of putting
it beyond possibility of a doubt; for if they had not taken this
precaution themselves, and if their guard had not been placed at the
tomb to guard the sepulchre to see that no fraud could be perpetrated,
then they could easily have gone out to the world and said, "Why, his
disciples came and took the body away; they slipped in and stole it at
night." But they closed their own mouths {586} in a vain attempt to
destroy the effects of his resurrection from the dead upon the minds of
the people and upon the history of the world.

Thomas, one of the Twelve, called Didymus, was not with them when Jesus
came, after his resurrection. "The other disciples therefore said unto
him, We have seen the Lord. But he said unto them, Except I shall see
in his hands the print of the nails, and put my finger into the print
of the nails, and thrust my hand into his side, I will not believe."
(John 20:25.)

We have a great many Didymuses in our day and generation, but we hope
that there are none of them here, but the other class Jesus named.

"And after eight days again his disciples were within, and Thomas with
them: then came Jesus, the doors being shut, and stood in the midst,
and said, Peace be unto you. Then saith he to Thomas, Reach hither thy
finger, and behold my bands; and reach hither thy hand, and thrust it
into my side: and be not faithless, but believing. And Thomas answered
and said unto him, My Lord and my God. Jesus saith unto him, Thomas,
because thou hast seen me, thou hast believed: blessed are they that
have not seen, and yet have believed." (John 20:26-29)

The disciple who wrote this, the beloved disciple, the personal witness
himself, he who ran to the sepulchre and who outran Peter and came to
it first, and looked into it, and who afterwards went into it after
Peter, he who has written these words, says further: "And many other
signs truly did Jesus in the presence of his disciples, which are not
written in this book: but these are written, that ye might believe that
Jesus is the Christ, the Son of God; and that believing ye might have
life through his name." (John 20:30, 31)

Now what I want to call to your minds is, emphatically, the undeniable
and unequivocal and direct description of {587} the body, the
resurrected body of the Lord Jesus Christ, given in this narrative of
his resurrection and appearance to his disciples, which dissipates all
imagination or thought that the death of the body and the departure
of the spirit from the body is the resurrection of the dead. Does it
not? Christ is the Son of God, and his disciples bear faithful record
of the truth as they witnessed it--as they declare they did witness
it; for they declare that they saw it with their eyes, heard it with
their ears, were pricked in their hearts, and they examined the wounds
with their own hands, to see and feel that he was indeed the same
individual, the same person, the same body that was crucified, bearing
the same marks that were inflicted upon the body while it was extended
upon the cross--all this must go to show to you that the resurrection
of Christ was the resurrection of himself, and not his spirit. Before
I proceed further, there is another scripture that I will read to you,
from the 24th chapter of Luke:

"And, behold, two of them went that same day to a village called
Emmaus, which was from Jerusalem about three-score furlongs. And they
talked together of all these things which had happened. And it came to
pass, that, while they communed together and reasoned, Jesus himself
drew near, and went with them. But their eyes were holden that they
should not know him." (Luke 24:13-16)

And he journeyed and talked with them on the way, and unfolded the
scriptures unto them, but they did not know that it was he. They did
not personally know that it was Christ resurrected.

"And it came to pass, as he sat at meat with them, he took bread, and
blessed it, and brake, and gave to them."

Now this is not the testimony of John. This is the testimony of Luke,
another of the disciples of Christ.

"And their eyes were opened, and they knew him; and he vanished out
of their sight. And they said one to another, {588} Did not our heart
burn within us, while he talked with us by the way, and while he opened
to us the scriptures? And they rose up the same hour, and returned
to Jerusalem, and found the eleven gathered together, and them that
were with them, saying, The Lord is risen indeed, and hath appeared
to Simon. And they told what things were done in the way, and how he
was known of them in breaking of bread. And as they thus spake, Jesus
himself stood in the midst of them, and saith unto them, Peace be unto
you. But they were terrified and affrighted, and supposed that they
had seen a spirit. And he said unto them, Why are ye troubled? and why
do thoughts arise in your hearts? Behold my hands and my feet, that
it is I myself: handle me, and see; for a spirit bath not flesh and
bones as ye see me have. And when he had thus spoken, he shewed them
his hands and his feet. And while they yet believed not for joy, and
wondered, he said unto them, Have ye here any meat? And they gave him a
piece of broiled fish, and of an honeycomb. And he took it, and did eat
before them. And he said unto them, These are the words which I spake
unto you, while I was yet with you, that all things must be fulfilled,
which were written in the law of Moses, and in the prophets, and in the
psalms, concerning me." (Luke 24:30-44)

Now, shall we accept the scriptural definition of the resurrection of
the body? Shall we accept Christ's manifestation in his own person
resurrected from the dead? Or shall we take the Rev. Mr. Phillip's
opinion of it, that the death of the body and the separation of the
spirit from it is the resurrection of the dead? Which do you choose?

Joseph the Prophet declared in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants (Sec.
130:22) that the Father has a body of flesh and bones as tangible as
man's, and the Son of God has a body of flesh and bones as he himself
has declared that he has, and is not a mere spirit, but is a risen
being, a resurrected {589} soul. And the Holy Ghost is a personage
of spirit, but not a personage of bones and flesh, as are the Father
and the Son. Consequently, the Holy Spirit, or the Holy Ghost, may be
conferred upon men, and he may dwell with them for a while, or he may
continue to dwell with them in accordance with their worthiness, and he
may depart from them at his will.

Now I am going to read a little from the Book of Mormon, a book of
scripture that was translated by the gift and power of God, for
the voice of God declared to the three witnesses that it had been
translated by the gift and power of God and that it was true. The
three witnesses declared and testified to its truth, and eight other
witnesses, besides the Prophet Joseph, declared that they beheld the
plates and handled them, and saw the engravings on them, and that
they do know that Joseph Smith did have the plates from which the
Book of Mormon was translated. And it is one of the greatest puzzles
to scientists that they are discovering in the path of ancient
civilization of this continent evidences and proofs of the divinity
of the Book of Mormon, that they cannot dispute or gainsay. And their
wonder is, how Joseph Smith, a man unlearned in history, in theology,
in science, a man without book learning, practically, could ever so
closely hit upon facts that are now being discovered by explorers and
scientists throughout this historical country, that the Book of Mormon
covers, and they say it is perplexing to them. It is astonishing to
them that three men could testify, as the three witnesses to the Book
of Mormon have testified, and that the eight other witnesses could
testify as they have done, and yet not one of them ever repudiate
his testimony. They cannot understand and they cannot account for it
upon any scientific principle. If it was a fraud, and these men were
deceived or led into a trap, and did it by sophistry or with a purpose
of deceiving the world, surely some one or more of them {590} would
have risen to the truth before they died and have divulged the fraud.
But no, not one of them did. They apostatized from Joseph, but they did
not deny the divinity of the Book of Mormon. They remained faithful
and true to their testimony to that. True, they declared that Joseph
Smith had gone astray, that the Church had gone astray, just like all
other apostates have declared. You never saw apostates anywhere who
would admit that they were wrong; but they always claim that they are
right, and the Church is wrong. So it was with Oliver Cowdery until he
repented and returned to the Church.

So it was with David Whitmer until the day of his death. He believed
that Joseph had been led astray, first, into receiving the Melchizedek
Priesthood as well as the Aaronic priesthood. That he received the
Aaronic priesthood and was ordained under the band of John the Baptist
he admitted and believed, but he denied any ordination under the
hands of Peter, James, and John to the Melchizedek priesthood, and
consequently he went to work and organized a church and a presidency
after the order of the Aaronic priesthood. But never, up to the time
of his death, did he deny his testimony as one of the three witnesses,
and in his dying words he declared that his testimony contained in this
book is true.

So did Oliver Cowdery. He came back into the Church after saying many
bad things and after wandering about for a while, and confessed his
follies and his wrong, and claimed that if he could only be permitted
to come back a lay member in the Church it would be all that he could
ask, or would ask for. He felt that he was unworthy of anything better
or greater, and he was permitted to come back and be baptized.

Martin Harris also came back and was baptized into the Church, and died
with his testimony on his lips, for not one of them ever repudiated his
testimony.

{591} Furthermore, not one of the eight witnesses ever did either.
Neither did the Prophet Joseph. So, here you have a record, the
witnesses of which remain unimpeached and whose integrity no power
beneath the kingdom of God can impeach, for they told the truth, and
they abode in the truth which they told until they died in the flesh.

Now, one of the ancient disciples or prophets who lived upon this
continent, who was inspired of God and who delivered this message
to the world afterwards that was engraven upon plates of gold, and
preserved and handed down and revealed in this dispensation of the
world, has something precious to say upon this subject. This is not
from Jerusalem. This is not a message that was delivered to the
disciples of Christ in Jerusalem; but this is a message that was
delivered by a prophet who lived upon this continent;--and here are his
words:

"And he shall come into the world to redeem his people; [for this was
before the coming of Christ to redeem his people] and he shall take
upon him the transgression of those who believe on his name; and these
are they that shall have eternal life, and salvation cometh to none
else."

Now let me say here: "He shall come into the world, and he shall take
upon him the transgressions of those who believe on his name."

And those who believe will do the works that he commands. No man
that will believe in truth will ever refuse to do what is required.
And these are they that believe, that shall have eternal life, and
salvation cometh to none else.

"Therefore, the wicked remain as though there had been no redemption
made, except it be the loosing of the bands of death; for behold, the
day cometh that all shall rise from the dead and stand before God,
and be judged according to their works. Now, there is a death which
is called a temporal death; and the death of Christ shall loose the
bands {592} of this temporal death, that all shall be raised from
this temporal death; the spirit and the body shall be reunited again
in its perfect form; both limb and joint shall be restored to its
proper frame, even as we now are at this time; and we shall be brought
to stand before God, knowing even as we know now, and have a bright
recollection of all our guilt. Now this restoration shall come to all,
both old and young, both bond and free, both male and female, both the
wicked and the righteous; and even there shall not so much as a hair of
their heads be lost; but all things shall be restored to its perfect
frame, as it is now, or in the body, and shall be brought and be
arraigned before the bar of Christ the Son, and God the Father, and the
Holy Spirit, which is one eternal God, to be judged according to their
works, whether they be good or whether they be evil. Now, behold, I
have spoken unto you concerning the death of the mortal body, and also
concerning the resurrection of the mortal body. [Not the resurrection
of the spirit, but the resurrection of the mortal body.] I say unto
you that this mortal body is raised to an immortal body; that is from
death; even from the first death unto life, that they can die no more;
their spirits uniting with their bodies, never to be divided; thus
the whole becoming spiritual and immortal, that they can no more see
corruption." (Alma 11:40-45)

Now that is the doctrine of the Latter-day Saints. That is the
resurrection of Jesus Christ, and, as he is the first fruits of the
resurrection from the dead, as he was raised up, so will be raise up
all the children of his Father upon whom the curse of Adam came. For as
by one man came temporal death upon all men, so by the righteousness of
Christ all shall come to life, through the resurrection from the dead
upon all men; whether they be good or whether they be evil, whether
they be black or white, bond or free, learned or unlearned, or whether
they be young or old, it matters not. The death that came by the fall
of our first parents is {593} eradicated by the resurrection of the Son
of God, and you and I cannot help it.--_Journal of Discourses,_ October
26, 1867.

WORK FOR THE DEAD. The work for our dead, which the Prophet Joseph laid
upon us with more than ordinary injunction, instructing us that we
should look after those of our kinfolk and our ancestors who have died
without the knowledge of the gospel, should not be neglected. We should
avail ourselves of those sacred and potent ordinances of the gospel
which have been revealed as essential to the happiness, salvation and
redemption of those who have lived in this world when they could not
learn the gospel and have died without the knowledge of it, and are now
waiting for us, their children, who are living in an age when these
ordinances can be performed, to do the work necessary for their release
from the prison-house. Through our efforts in their behalf their chains
of bondage will fall from them, and the darkness surrounding them
will clear away, that light may shine upon them and they shall hear
in the spirit world of the work that has been done for them by their
children here, and will rejoice with you in your performance of these
duties.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1916, p. 6.

TEMPLE ORDINANCES UNCHANGED. We are engaged in temple work. We have
built four temples in this land, and we built two temples in the
eastern country before we came here. During the lifetime of the Prophet
Joseph Smith one of the two was built and dedicated, and the foundation
of the other was laid and the walls had well progressed when he was
martyred. It was finished by the efforts of the people under the most
trying circumstances, and in poverty, and was dedicated unto the Lord.
The ordinances of the house of God were administered therein as they
had been taught to the leading authorities of the Church by the Prophet
Joseph Smith himself. The same gospel, the same ordinances, the same
authority and blessings, that were administered {594} by the Prophet
Joseph Smith and taught by him to his associates are now being enjoyed
by and taught to the Latter-day Saints in the four temples that have
been built in these valleys of the mountains. When you hear anybody
say that we have changed the ordinances, that we have transgressed
the laws, or have broken the everlasting covenants which were entered
into under the personal administration of the Prophet Joseph Smith,
tell them for me, tell them for President Snow, for President Cannon,
and for all those who are living today who received blessings and
ordinances under the bands of the Prophet Joseph Smith, that they are
in error. The same gospel prevails today, and the same ordinances
are administered today, both for the living and for the dead, that
were administered by the Prophet himself, and delivered by him to the
Church.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1900, pp. 46, 47.

CARE AND NEED OF TEMPLES. We feel that an effort should be made to
preserve the temples of God, those houses that have been erected for
the purpose of administering the ordinances of the gospel therein,
for the living and the dead. We desire that these buildings shall be
preserved and kept in repair and in a wholesome condition, so that
the Spirit of the Lord may dwell in them, and that those who minister
therein may feel the presence and influence of his Spirit. We also feel
that when the time shall come and our hands shall be free from the
obligations that now rest upon us, other places should be prepared for
the convenience of the Latter-day Saints in more distant stakes, in
order that those who are living at great distances from the center may
have the privilege of receiving the ordinances of the gospel without
being put to the great expense and loss of time that is necessary now
in journeying from 500 to 1,000 miles in order to reach the houses of
God. We hope to see the day when we shall have temples built in the
various parts of the land where they are needed for the convenience
{595} of the people; for we realize that one of the greatest
responsibilities that rests upon the people of God today is that their
hearts shall be turned unto their fathers, and that they shall do the
work that is necessary to be done for them in order that they may be
joined together fitly in the bond of the New and Everlasting Covenant
from generation to generation. For the Lord has said, through the
Prophet, that this is one of the greatest responsibilities devolving
upon us in this latter day.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1902, pp. 2, 3.

PREACHING THE GOSPEL IN THE SPIRIT WORLD. Never has there been a name
brought to the intelligence of the human race since the foundation of
the world that has cost so much, that has accomplished so much, that
has been revered and honored so much as the name of Jesus Christ, once
so hated, and persecuted, and then crucified. The day will come, and it
is not far distant either, when the name of the Prophet Joseph Smith
will be coupled with the name of Jesus Christ of Nazareth, the Son of
God, as his representative, as his agent whom he chose, ordained and
set apart to lay anew the foundations of the Church of Jesus Christ,
possessing all the powers of the gospel, all the rites and privileges,
the authority of the holy priesthood and every principle necessary
to fit and qualify both the living and the dead to inherit eternal
life and to attain to exaltation in the kingdom of God. The day will
come when you and I will not be the only ones who will believe this,
by a great deal, but there will be millions living and dead who will
proclaim this truth. This gospel revealed to the Prophet Joseph is
already being preached to the spirits in prison, to those who have
passed away from this stage of action into the spirit world without the
knowledge of the gospel. Joseph Smith is preaching that gospel to them.
So is Hyrum Smith. So is Brigham Young, and so are all the faithful
apostles that lived in this dispensation under the administration of
the Prophet Joseph. They are there, having carried with them {596} from
here the holy priesthood that they received under authority, and which
was conferred upon them in the flesh; they are preaching the gospel to
the spirits in prison; for Christ, when his body lay in the tomb, went
to proclaim liberty to the captives and opened the prison doors to them
that were bound. Not only are these engaged in that work but hundreds
and thousands of others; the elders that have died in the mission field
have not finished their missions, but they are continuing them in the
spirit world. Possibly the Lord saw it necessary or proper to call them
hence as he did. I am not going to question that thought, in the least,
nor dispute it. I leave it in the hand of God, for I believe that all
these things will be overruled for good, for the Lord will suffer
nothing to come to his people in the world that he will not overrule
eventually for their greater good.--M. I. A. Conference, June 5, 1910;
_Young Woman's Journal,_ Vol. 21, pp. 456-460.

VISION OF THE REDEMPTION OF THE DEAD. On the third of October, in the
year nineteen hundred and eighteen, I sat in my room pondering over
the Scriptures and reflecting upon the great atoning sacrifice that
was made by the Son of God for the redemption of the world, and the
great and wonderful love made manifest by the Father and the Son in the
coming of the Redeemer into the world, that through his Atonement and
by obedience to the principles of the gospel, mankind might be saved.

While I was thus engaged, my mind reverted to the writings of the
Apostle Peter to the primitive saints scattered abroad throughout
Pontus, Galatia, Cappadocia, and other parts of Asia where the gospel
had been preached after the crucifixion of the Lord. I opened the
Bible and read the third and fourth chapters of the first epistle of
Peter, and as I read I was greatly impressed, more than I had ever been
before, with the following passages:

"For Christ also bath once suffered for sins, the just {597} for the
unjust, that he might bring us to God, being put to death in the flesh,
but quickened by the Spirit:

"By which also he went and preached unto the spirits in prison;

"Which sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God
waited in the days of Noah, while the ark was a preparing, wherein few,
that is, eight souls were saved by water." (I Peter 3:18-20)

"For, for this cause was the gospel preached also to them that are
dead, that they might be judged according to men in the flesh, but live
according to God in the spirit." (I Peter 4:6)

As I pondered over these things which are written, the eyes of my
understanding were opened, and the Spirit of the Lord rested upon me,
and I saw the hosts of the dead, both small and great. And there were
gathered together in one place an innumerable company of the spirits of
the just, who had been faithful in the testimony of Jesus while they
lived in mortality, and who had offered sacrifice in the similitude of
the great sacrifice of the Son of God, and had suffered tribulation in
their Redeemer's name. All these had departed the mortal life, firm
in the hope of a glorious resurrection, through the grace of God the
Father and his Only Begotten Son, Jesus Christ.

I beheld that they were filled with joy and gladness, and were
rejoicing together because the day of their deliverance was at hand.
They were assembled awaiting the advent of the Son of God into the
spirit world, to declare their redemption from the bands of death.
Their sleeping dust was to be restored unto its perfect frame, bone to
his bone, and the sinews and the flesh upon them, the spirit and the
body to be united never again to be divided, that they might receive a
fulness of joy.

While this vast multitude waited and conversed, rejoicing in the hour
of their deliverance from the chains of {598} death, the Son of God
appeared, declaring liberty to the captives who had been faithful, and
there he preached to them the everlasting gospel, the doctrine of the
resurrection and the redemption of mankind from the fall, and from
individual sins on conditions of repentance. But unto the wicked he
did not go, and among the ungodly and the unrepentant who had defiled
themselves while in the flesh, his voice was not raised, neither did
the rebellious who rejected the testimonies and the warnings of the
ancient prophets behold his presence, nor look upon his face. Where
these were, darkness reigned, but among the righteous there was peace,
and the saints rejoiced in their redemption, and bowed the knee and
acknowledged the Son of God as their Redeemer and Deliverer from death
and the chains of hell. Their countenances shone and the radiance from
the presence of the Lord rested upon them and they sang praises unto
his holy Name.

I marveled, for I understood that the Savior spent about three years
in his ministry among the Jews and those of the house of Israel,
endeavoring to teach them the everlasting gospel and call them unto
repentance; and yet, notwithstanding his mighty works and miracles and
proclamation of the truth in great power and authority, there were
but few who hearkened to his voice and rejoiced in his presence and
received salvation at his hands. But his ministry among those who were
dead was limited to the brief time intervening between the crucifixion
and his resurrection; and I wondered at the words of Peter wherein
he said that the Son of God preached unto the spirits in prison who
sometime were disobedient, when once the longsuffering of God waited in
the days of Noah, and how it was possible for him to preach to those
spirits and perform the necessary labor among them in so short a time.

And as I wondered, my eyes were opened, and my understanding quickened,
and I perceived that the Lord went {599} not in person among the
wicked and the disobedient who had rejected the truth, to teach
them; but behold, from among the righteous he organized his forces
and appointed messengers, clothed with power and authority, and
commissioned them to go forth and carry the light of the gospel to them
that were in darkness, even to all the spirits of men. And thus was
the gospel preached to the dead. And the chosen messengers went forth
to declare the acceptable day of the Lord, and proclaim liberty to
the captives who were bound; even unto all who would repent of their
sins and receive the gospel. Thus was the gospel preached to those
who had died in their sins, without a knowledge of the truth, or in
transgression, having rejected the prophets. These were taught faith in
God, repentance from sin, vicarious baptism for the remission of sins,
the gift of the Holy Ghost by the laying on of hands, and all other
principles of the gospel that were necessary for them to know in order
to qualify themselves that they might be judged according to men in the
flesh, but live according to God in the spirit.

And so it was made known among the dead, both small and great, the
unrighteous as well as the faithful, that redemption had been wrought
through the sacrifice of the Son of God upon the cross. Thus was it
made known that our Redeemer spent his time during his sojourn in the
world of spirits, instructing and preparing the faithful spirits of the
prophets who had testified of him in the flesh, that they might carry
the message of redemption unto all the dead unto whom he could not go
personally because of their rebellion and transgression, that they
through the ministration of his servants might also hear his words.

Among the great and mighty ones who were assembled in this vast
congregation of the righteous, were Father Adam, the Ancient of Days
and father of all, and our glorious Mother Eve, with many of her
faithful daughters who {600} had lived through the ages and worshiped
the true and living God. Abel, the first martyr, was there, and his
brother Seth, one of the mighty ones, who was in the express image of
his father Adam. Noah, who gave warning of the flood; Shem, the great
High Priest; Abraham, the father of the faithful; Isaac, Jacob, and
Moses, the great law-giver of Israel; Isaiah, who declared by prophecy
that the Redeemer was anointed to bind up the broken hearted, to
proclaim liberty to the captives, and the opening of the prison to them
that were bound, were also there.

Moreover, Ezekiel, who was shown in vision the great valley of dry
bones which were to be clothed upon with flesh to come forth again in
the resurrection of the dead, living souls; Daniel, who foresaw and
foretold the establishment of the kingdom of God in the latter days,
never again to be destroyed nor given to other people; Elias, who was
with Moses on the Mount of Transfiguration; Malachi, the prophet who
testified of the coming of Elijah--of whom also Moroni spake to the
Prophet Joseph Smith--declaring that he should come before the ushering
in of the great and dreadful day of the Lord, were also there. The
prophet Elijah was to plant in the hearts of the children the promises
made to their fathers, foreshadowing the great work to be done in the
temples of the Lord in the Dispensation of the Fulness of Times, for
the redemption of the dead and the sealing of the children to their
parents, lest the whole earth be smitten with a curse and utterly
wasted at his coming.

All these and many more, even the prophets who dwelt among the Nephites
and testified of the coming of the Son of God, mingled in the vast
assembly and waited for their deliverance, for the dead had looked
upon the long absence of their spirits from their bodies as a bondage.
These the Lord taught, and gave them power to come forth, after his
resurrection from the dead, to enter into his Father's kingdom, there
to be crowned with immortality and eternal life, and {601} continue
thenceforth their labors as had been promised by the Lord, and be
partakers of all blessings which were held in reserve for them that
love him.

The Prophet Joseph Smith, and my father, Hyrum Smith, Brigham Young,
John Taylor, Wilford Woodruff, and other choice spirits who were
reserved to come forth in the fulness of times to take part in laying
the foundations of the great Latter-day work, including the building
of the temples and the performance of ordinances therein for the
redemption of the dead, were also in the spirit world. I observed that
they were also among the noble and great ones who were chosen in the
beginning to be rulers in the Church of God. Even before they were
born, they, with many others, received their first lessons in the world
of spirits, and were prepared to come forth in the due time of the Lord
to labor in his vineyard for the salvation of the souls of men.

I beheld that the faithful elders of this dispensation, when they
depart from mortal life, continue their labors in the preaching of
the gospel of repentance and redemption, through the sacrifice of the
Only Begotten Son of God, among those who are in darkness and under
the bondage of sin in the great world of the spirits of the dead. The
dead who repent will be redeemed, through obedience to the ordinances
of the house of God, and after they have paid the penalty of their
transgressions, and are washed clean, shall receive a reward according
to their works, for they are heirs of salvation.

Thus was the vision of the redemption of the dead revealed to me, and I
bear record, and I know that this record is true, through the blessing
of our Lord and Savior, Jesus Christ, even so. Amen.--_Joseph F. Smith_.

This _Vision of the Redemption of the Dead_ was submitted October
31, 1918, to the Counselors in the First Presidency, the Council
of the Twelve and the Patriarch, {602} and by them unanimously
accepted.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 22, December, 1918, pp. 166-170.

MODERATION IN BURIAL DISPLAYS. A good friend who is often called upon
to attend to the proprieties on behalf of the dead, calls attention
in a letter to the indulgence of extravagance in the laying away of
our departed friends and relatives. She believes that the Lord is not
pleased with the profusion of flowers, the expensive dress, and even
with the ornaments of gold in the form of rings and other jewelry used
in decorating the dead.

We certainly recommend moderation and wisdom in the use of flowers, the
hire of carriages, and the purchase of caskets. In the old scriptures
we have numerous examples of simplicity in burials. While we are not
called upon literally to follow these, they should be a lesson to us
to avoid ostentations, and to attend to these matters with only such
displays and preparations as will show due respect for the departed,
and proper consideration for the living.

Relating to dress, the Latter-day Saints burial clothes are all
sufficient for our day. Anything more is unnecessary, which good,
common sense would clearly suggest; while the burial of jewelry with
the dead can serve no good purpose. It savors of vanity, and might
prove a temptation to grave robbers,--a naturally horrible thought. In
like manner with carriages and caskets, only the necessary and modest
should be used.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 12, December, 1908, p. 145.

WHO CANNOT BE REACHED BY THE GOSPEL? And he that believes, is baptized,
and receives the light and testimony of Jesus Christ, and walks well
for a season, receiving the fulness of the blessings of the gospel
in this world, and afterwards turns wholly unto sin, violating his
covenants, he will be among those whom the gospel can never reach in
the spirit world; and all such go beyond its saving power, they will
taste the second death, and be banished from the presence {603} of God
eternally.--_Oct. C. R., Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 24, 1875, p. 708.

PRINCIPLE OF BAPTISM FOR THE DEAD. Here will come in the principles
of baptism for the dead, and of proxy and heirships, as revealed
through the Prophet Joseph Smith, that they may receive a salvation
and an exaltation, I will not say a fulness of blessing and glory, but
a reward according to their merits and the righteousness and mercy
of God, even as it will be with you and with me. But there is this
difference between us and the antediluvians--they rejected the gospel,
consequently they received not the truth nor the testimony of Jesus
Christ; therefore they did not sin against a fulness of light, while we
have received the fulness of the gospel; are admitted to the testimony
of Jesus Christ, and a knowledge of the living and true God, whose
will it is also our privilege to know, that we may do it. Now if we
sin, we sin against the light and knowledge, and peradventure we may
become guilty of the blood of Jesus Christ, for which sin there is no
forgiveness, neither in this world nor in the world to come.--_Oct. C.
R., Deseret Weekly News,_ Vol. 24, 1875, p. 708.

{604}



CHAPTER XXV

JOSEPH SMITH THE PROPHET

THE REALITY OF JOSEPH'S VISION. Our critics say it was an apparition
that the Prophet Joseph saw, but he did not say so. He said the
personages who appeared to him were real men, and there is nothing more
improbable in his statement than in the recital in the Bible of the
conception and birth of Christ, and of John the Baptist. To us has come
the account of the birth, life and work of Christ, and there is nothing
in the narrative to cause us to believe it more readily than that story
of the Prophet Joseph Smith. Christ walked and talked and counseled
with his friends when he came down from heaven over 1900 years ago. Is
there any reason why he could not come again, why he should not visit
this earth once more and talk with men today? If there is I should be
glad to hear it.

The thing I want to impress upon you is that God is real, a person of
flesh and bones, the same as you are and I am. Christ is the same, but
the Holy Ghost is a person of spirit.

If Joseph Smith's teachings were untrue, then those of the Great
Nazarene fall to the ground, for they are one and the same. You can't
philosophize the truths of the gospel away, nor explain them by saying
the prophet was a victim of apparitions, for they are real, tangible
facts behind which stand a great mass of proof as good as has ever been
offered to substantiate any statement. It is a comfort, a blessing,
a delight to me, and I pray that it may ever be so to you.--_Logan
Journal,_ March 14, 1911.

SERVICE OF JOSEPH SMITH. Our faith in Jesus Christ lies at the
foundation of our religion, the foundation of our hope for remission of
sins, and for exaltation after death, {605} and for the resurrection
from death to everlasting life. Our faith in the doctrines that have
been restored through the instrumentality of the Prophet Joseph Smith
confirms and strengthens us and establishes beyond a question or doubt,
our faith and belief in the divine mission of the Son of God. Joseph
Smith was the instrument chosen of God and endowed with his authority
to restore the holy priesthood, the power of God to bind on earth
and in heaven,--the power of the priesthood by which men may perform
ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ for the salvation of mankind.
Through Joseph Smith the gospel of repentance, baptism in water for
the remission of sins, the baptism of the Holy Ghost and by fire have
been restored, and the knowledge that Jesus is the Christ, the Only
Begotten Son of God, is made manifest through the spirit of truth. We
are obligated to this humble servant that the Lord chose to lay the
foundation of this work for the ordinances of the gospel of the Son of
God, then and still unknown to the world, by which we may become united
together as families, as kindreds, under the bonds of the new and
everlasting covenant, for time and for all eternity. We are obligated
to the Prophet Joseph Smith, as an instrument in the hand of the Lord,
for the knowledge that we possess of the work which is necessary to
be done in the house of God, for the salvation of the living and
the redemption of the dead, and for the eternal union of souls who
are united in this life by the power of God, under the bond of the
everlasting covenant. We are indebted, or obligated at least, to the
Prophet Joseph Smith, as the instrument in the hands of God, for the
knowledge we now possess that a man cannot be exalted into the presence
of God and the full enjoyment of his glory, alone. It was not designed
for the man to be alone, for the man is not without the woman, neither
the woman without the man, in the Lord.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1916, p. 3.

JOSEPH SMITH'S NAME WILL NEVER PERISH. God {606} lives, and Jesus is
the Christ, the Savior of the world. Joseph Smith is a prophet of
God--living, not dead; for his name will never perish. The angel that
visited him and declared God's message unto him, told him that his
name should be held for good and for evil throughout the world. This
prediction was made in the days of his youth, before the Church was
organized, and before there was any prospect of that which has since
been accomplished. The declaration was made, notwithstanding it then
seemed an absolute impossibility; but from the day it was spoken until
this moment, and from now on until the winding-up scene, the name of
Joseph Smith, the prophet of the nineteenth century, has been, is
being, and will be heralded abroad to the nations of the earth, and
will be held in honor or contempt by the people of the world. But the
honor in which it is now held by a few will by and by he increased that
his name shall be held in reverence and honor among the children of men
as universally as the name of the Son of God is held today; for he did
and is doing the work of the Master. He laid the foundations in this
dispensation for the restoration of the principles that were taught by
the Son of God, who for these principles lived, and taught, and died,
and rose from the dead. Therefore I say, as the name of the Son of God
shall be held in reverence and honor, and in the faith and love of men,
so will the name of Joseph Smith eventually be held among the children
of men, gaining prestige, increasing in honor and commanding respect
and reverence, until the world shall say that he was a servant and
Prophet of God. The Lord God Omnipotent reigneth. Peace on earth, good
will to men, is the proclamation that Joseph the Prophet made, and that
is the same as his Master, the Lord Jesus Christ, made to the world.
That is the mission we are trying to fulfil, and the proclamation we
are seeking to make to the world today. It is the mission that these
young men have been chosen to proclaim, and be {607} witnesses of to
the nations of the earth. It is their duty to see to it that this
proclamation and this gospel of peace and good will shall be sent to
every nation, and kindred, and tongue, and people, under the whole
heavens. God bless Israel, is my earnest prayer in the name of Jesus.
Amen.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, pp. 125-126.

THE PROPHET JOSEPH SMITH. Brother Woodruff, in the course of his
remarks, made the assertion that Joseph Smith was the greatest prophet
that has ever lived, of whom we have any knowledge, save and except
Jesus Christ himself. The world would say that he was an impostor; and
the Lord said that his name should be had for good and for evil among
all the nations of the earth; and this much, at least, so far as his
name has become known, has been fulfilled. This prediction was made
through the Prophet Joseph Smith himself, when he was an obscure youth,
and when there was but little prospect of his name ever becoming known
beyond the village where he lived. It was at an early period of his
life, and at the beginning of the work that this prophecy or revelation
was given, and it has been truly verified. Today there is not another
man, perhaps, who has figured in religion, whose name is so wide-spread
among the nations, as that of Joseph Smith. In connection with the
work of which he was the instrument in the hands of God of laying the
foundation, his name is spoken of in nearly every civilized nation upon
the globe, for good or for evil. Where it is spoken of for good, it is
by those who have had the privilege of hearing the gospel which has
come to the earth through him, and who have been sufficiently honest
and humble to receive the same. They speak of him with a knowledge
which they have received by the inspiration of the Holy Spirit, through
obedience to the principles which he taught, as a prophet and as an
inspired man. They speak to his praise, to his honor, and they hold his
name in honorable remembrance. They revere him, and they love {608}
him, as they love no other man, because they know he was the chosen
instrument in the hands of the Almighty in restoring the gospel of life
and salvation unto them, of opening their understandings of the future,
of lifting the veil of eternity, as it were, from before their eyes.
Those who have received the principles which he promulgated know they
pertain not only to their own salvation, happiness and peace, spiritual
and temporal, but to the welfare, happiness, salvation and exaltation
of their kindred who have died without a knowledge of the truth.

The work in which Joseph Smith was engaged was not confined to this
life alone, but it pertains as well to the life to come, and to the
life that has been. In other words, it relates to those who have
lived upon the earth, to those who are living and to those who shall
come after us. It is not something which relates to man only while he
tabernacles in the flesh, but to the whole human family from eternity
to eternity. Consequently, as I have said, Joseph Smith is held in
reverence, his name is honored; tens of thousands of people thank God
in their hearts, and from the depths of their souls, for the knowledge
the Lord has restored to the earth through him, and therefore they
speak well of him and bear testimony of his worth. And this is not
confined to a village, nor to a state, nor to a nation, but extends to
every nation, kindred, tongue and people where the gospel, up to the
present, has been preached--in America, Great Britain, Europe, Africa,
Australia, New Zealand and upon the islands of the sea. And the Book of
Mormon, which Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hands of God in
bringing forth to this generation, has been translated into the German,
French, Danish, Swedish, Welsh, Hawaiian, Hindustani, Spanish, and
Dutch languages, and this book will be translated into other languages,
for according to the predictions it contains, and according to the
promises of the Lord through Joseph Smith it is to be sent unto {609}
every nation, and kindred, and people under the whole heavens, until
all the sons and daughters of Adam shall have the privilege of hearing
the gospel as it has been restored to the earth in the dispensation of
the fulness of times.

The world presume that we have not received a knowledge of the truth.
Those who are in ignorance in regard to the character, life, and labors
of Joseph Smith, who have never read his revelations or studied or
investigated his claims to divine authority, and are ignorant of his
mission, revile him, sneer at his name, and ridicule his claims to
prophetic inspiration, and called him an impostor in his day, except a
few who hearkened to his instruction, and believed his testimony. The
great majority of mankind then living who knew of Christ, deemed him an
impostor, and considered him worthy to be put to death; precisely the
same feeling existed towards Joseph Smith.

* * * *

Let us return to the Prophet Joseph Smith. He was accused of nearly
everything that was vile, by his enemies, who, as is well known by
the Latter-day Saints, were generally entirely ignorant of his true
character and mission. What did Joseph Smith do? Was human blood found
upon his hands? No, verily no. He was innocent. Was he a slanderer and
vilified? No, verily, he was not. Did he wrongfully and unjustly accuse
men of wickedness? No, he did not. Did he institute an order of things
that has proved injurious to the human family? Let the people who have
become acquainted with his doctrines, and with the institutions which
he established upon the earth, and his own life's labor, answer.

He was born December 23, 1805, in the state of Vermont. His parents
were American citizens, as had been their ancestors for generations.
In the spring of 1820, he received the first supernatural or heavenly
manifestation. {610} He was then fourteen years of age. Ordinarily we
do not expect a very great deal from a boy who is only fourteen years
of age, and it is not likely that a boy of that tender age could have
become very vicious or wicked, especially when he was born and reared
on a farm, apart from the corrupting vices of great cities, and free
from contact with the debasing influence of vile associations. It is
not likely that he spent many idle moments during the working years of
his life, up to fourteen years of age; for his father had to labor for
his living and earn it from the soil by the labor of his hands, being a
poor man with a large family to support.

In 1820, as I have said, Joseph Smith received a revelation in which he
claimed that God had declared that he was about to restore the ancient
gospel in its purity, and many other glorious things. In consequence
of this, Joseph Smith became very notorious in the neighborhood where
he resided, and people began to regard him with a great deal of
suspicion. He was at once called an impostor, and a few years later
he was styled by his enemies, "old Joe Smith." His fame became known
throughout the United States. He was called a "money digger," and many
other contemptuous things. If you will look at his history, and at the
character of his parents, and surroundings, and consider the object
of his life, you can discover how much consistency there was in the
charges brought against him. All this was done to injure him. He was
neither old nor a "money digger," nor an impostor, nor in any manner
deserving of the epithets which they applied to him. He had never
injured anybody, nor robbed anybody--he never did anything for which he
could be punished by the laws under which he lived.

When he was between 17 and 18 years of age, he received another
heavenly manifestation, and some great and glorious things were
revealed to him, and for four years subsequently he received
visits from a heavenly messenger. {611} He did not claim he was in
communication with wicked men or demons from the lower regions. He
claimed he was in communication with Moroni, one of the ancient
prophets who lived upon this continent. He was a good man when he lived
here, and it is not likely that he had become wicked since he went
away. This personage, he claimed, revealed to him the mind and will of
the Lord, and showed him the character of the great work that he, in
the hands of God was to be instrumental in establishing in the earth
when the time should come. This was the labor that was performed by the
angel Moroni, during the four years intervening between 1823 and 1827.
In 1827 he received from the hands of the angel Moroni, the gold plates
from which this book (Book of Mormon) was translated by him through the
inspiration of the Almighty, and the gift and power of God unto him.
I heard it read when I was a child. I have read it many times since,
and I have asked myself, scores of times, have you ever discovered one
precept, doctrine, or command, within the lids of that book, that is
calculated to injure anybody, to do harm to the world, or that is in
contradiction to the word of God as contained in the Bible? And the
answer invariably came, No, not one solitary thing, every precept,
doctrine, word of advice, prophecy, and indeed every word contained
within the lids of that book, relating to the great plan of human
redemption and salvation, are calculated to make bad men good and good
men better.

Did Joseph Smith during the three years intervening between 1827 and
1830, while he was laboring with his hands for a scanty subsistence,
dodging his enemies, and trying to evade the grasp of those who
sought to destroy him and prevent the accomplishment of his mission,
struggling all the while against untold obstacles and depressing
embarrassments to complete the translation of this book, have much
{612} chance of becoming wicked or corrupt? I do not think he had. When
he had finished translating the Book of Mormon he was still only a boy,
yet in producing this book he developed historical facts, prophecies,
revelations, predictions, testimonies and doctrines, precepts and
principles that are beyond the power and wisdom of the learned world
to duplicate or refute. Joseph Smith was an unlearned youth, so far
as the learning of the world is concerned. He was taught by the angel
Moroni. He received his education from above, from God Almighty, and
not from man-made institutions; but to charge him with being ignorant
would be both unjust and false; no man or combination of men possessed
greater intelligence than he, nor could the combined wisdom and cunning
of the age produce an equivalent for what he did. He was not ignorant,
for he was taught by him from whom all intelligence flows. He possessed
a knowledge of God and of his law, and of eternity, and mankind have
been trying, with all their learning, wisdom and power--and not content
with that, they have tried with the sword and cannon--to extirpate from
the earth the superstructure which Joseph Smith, by the power of God,
erected; but they have signally failed, and will yet be overwhelmed by
their efforts to destroy it.

Again, the world say that Joseph Smith was an indolent person. The
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints was organized April 6,
1830. Joseph Smith was martyred in Carthage, Illinois, on the 27th
day of June, 1844--fourteen years after the organization of the
Church. What did he accomplish, in these fourteen years? He opened
up communication with the heavens in his youth. He brought forth the
Book of Mormon, which contains the fulness of the gospel; and the
revelations contained in the Book of Doctrine and Covenants; restored
the holy priesthood unto man; established and organized the Church
of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, an organization which has no
parallel in all {613} the world, and which all the cunning and wisdom
of men for ages has failed to discover or produce and never could have
done. He founded colonies in the states of New York, Ohio, Missouri
and Illinois, and pointed the way for the gathering of the Saints into
the Rocky Mountains; sent the gospel into Europe and to the islands of
the sea; founded the town of Kirtland, Ohio, and there built a temple
that cost scores of thousands of dollars; he founded the city of Nauvoo
in the midst of persecution; gathered into Nauvoo and vicinity some
20,000 people, and commenced the building of the temple there, which
when completed cost one million dollars; and in doing all this he
had to contend against the prejudices of the age, against relentless
persecution, mobocracy, and vile calumny and slander, that were heaped
upon him from all quarters without stint or measure. In a word, he did
more in from fourteen to twenty years for the salvation of man than any
other man, save Jesus only, who ever lived, and yet he was accused by
his enemies of being an indolent and worthless man!

Where shall we go to find another man who has accomplished a
one-thousandth part of the good that Joseph Smith accomplished? Shall
we go to the Rev. Mr. Beecher, or Talmage, or any other of the great
preachers of the day? What have they done for the world, with all their
boasted intelligence, influence, wealth, and the popular voice of
the world in their favor! Joseph Smith had none of their advantages,
if these are advantages. And yet, no man in the nineteenth century,
except Joseph Smith, has discovered to the world a ray of light upon
the keys and power of the holy priesthood, or the ordinances of the
gospel, either for the living or the dead. Through Joseph Smith, God
has revealed many things which were kept hidden from the foundation of
the world in fulfilment of the prophets--and at no time since Enoch
walked the earth has the Church of God been organized as perfectly
as it is today, not excepting the dispensation of {614} Jesus and
his disciples,--or, if it was, we have no record of it. And this is
strictly in keeping with the objects and character of this great
latter-day work, destined to consummate the great purposes and designs
of God concerning the dispensation of the fulness of times.

The principle of baptism for the redemption of the dead, with the
ordinances appertaining thereto, for the complete salvation and
exaltation of those who have died without the gospel, as revealed
through Joseph Smith, is alone worth more than all the dogmas of the
so-called Christian world combined.

Joseph Smith is accused of being a false prophet. It is, however,
beyond the power of the world to prove that he was a false prophet.
They may so charge him, but you who have received the testimony of
Jesus Christ, by the spirit of prophecy, through his administrations,
are my witnesses that they have not the power to prove him false, and
that is why they are so vexed about it. In my humble opinion many of
our enemies know that they lie before God, angels and men, when they
make this charge, and they would only be too glad to produce proof to
sustain their accusations, but they cannot. Joseph Smith was a true
prophet of God. He lived and died a true prophet, and his words and
works will yet demonstrate the divinity of his mission to millions of
the inhabitants of this globe. Perhaps not so many that are now living,
for they have in a great measure rejected the gospel, and the testimony
which the elders of this Church have borne to them; but their children
after them, and generations to come, will receive with delight the
name of the Prophet Joseph Smith, and the gospel which their fathers
rejected. Amen.--Discourse delivered in Assembly Hall, Salt Lake City,
Oct. 29, 1882. _Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 24, 1884, pp. 8-16.

PREDICTION OF JOSEPH SMITH FULFILLED. As the time remaining is so
short, I think I could not do better than devote {615} it to continuing
the subject dwelt upon by Brother Cannon.

The Doctrine and Covenants, as well as the Book of Mormon, contains
indisputable evidence of the divine calling and mission of Joseph
Smith. For instance, I will refer the congregation to the revelation
given December 25, 1832, in relation to the great war of the Rebellion,
with which all are more or less familiar (Doc. and Cov. 87). A portion
of that revelation has been literally fulfilled, even to the very place
indicated in the prediction where the war should commence; which, as
was therein stated, was to terminate in the death and misery of many
souls.

Again, in the revelation given in March, 1831, to Parley P. Pratt and
Lemon Copley, the following remarkable prediction is found:

"But before the great day of the Lord shall come, Jacob shall flourish
in the wilderness, and the Lamanites shall blossom as the rose. Zion
shall flourish upon the hills and rejoice upon the mountains, and shall
be assembled together unto the place which I have appointed." (Doc. and
Cov. 49:24, 25)

Who, let me ask, unless he was inspired of the Lord, speaking by the
gift and power of God, at that remote period of the Church's history,
when our numbers were few, when we had no influence, name or standing
in the world--who, I would ask, under the circumstances in which We
were placed when this prediction was made, could have uttered such
words unless God inspired him? Zion is, indeed, flourishing on the
hills, and it is rejoicing on the mountains, and we who compose it are
gathering and assembling together unto the place appointed. I now ask
this congregation if they cannot see that this prediction (which was
made many years before the idea prevailed at all among this people that
we should ever migrate and gather out to these mountain valleys) has
been and is being literally fulfilled? If there {616} were no other
prophecy uttered by Joseph Smith, fulfillment of which could be pointed
to, this alone would be sufficient to entitle him to the claim of being
a true prophet.

Again, in the revelation given February, 1834, this remarkable promise
and prophecy is found:

"Verily I say unto you, I have decreed a decree which my people shall
realize, inasmuch as they hearken from this very hour, unto the counsel
which I, the Lord their God, shall give unto them. Behold they shall,
for I have decreed it, begin to prevail against mine enemies from
this very hour, and by hearkening to observe all the words which I,
the Lord their God, shall speak unto them, they shall never cease to
prevail until the kingdoms of the world are subdued under my feet, and
the earth is given unto the Saints, to possess it for ever and ever."
(Doctrine and Covenants 103:5-7)

Is there a person within the sound of my voice, or anywhere else upon
the face of the wide earth, who can say that this promise has failed,
that this prediction is not founded in truth, that so far it has not
been fulfilled? I stand before this vast congregation, and am at the
defiance of any human being to say that this was not pronounced by
the spirit of truth, by the inspiration of the Almighty, for it has
been fulfilled, and is being fulfilled, and that, too, in the face
of opposition of the most deadly character; and what remains will be
fulfilled literally and completely. And it is the fear in the heart
of Satan that this will be the case that causes him to stir up his
emissaries to oppose the kingdom of God and seek, if possible, to
destroy this great and glorious work. For it is a living fact, a fact
that fills the hearts of the righteous and God-fearing with unspeakable
joy, and the hearts of the wicked and ungodly with consternation and
jealous fear, that this work of God, this work of redemption and
salvation in which we are engaged, is moving forward and is destined to
continue in its onward march until the kingdoms of the world shall be
subdued and brought {617} under the law of Almighty God. And that this
will come to pass, I can assure you, the enemy of all righteousness
comprehends as well as we do. Yes, he knows that this will eventually
be the case, better than many who profess to have received the Holy
Spirit in their hearts; and, therefore, he is diligently seeking to
stir up the hearts of the wicked to fight against the Saints of God,
until they are discomfited, and Zion is free.

These predictions concerning the triumph of the cause of God over the
wicked who contend against them, were uttered by Joseph Smith in his
youth, in the early rise of the Church when, to all human appearance,
their fulfillment was absolutely impossible. At that time there were
but few who could believe, that dared to believe the truth of these
predictions. The few, comparatively, that did believe when they heard,
were those whose minds had been enlightened by the Holy Spirit of
Promise and who, therefore, were prepared to receive them. As these
predictions have been fulfilled, so those not yet fulfilled will come
to pass in the due time of the Lord; and as this latter-day work has so
far grown and assumed force and power in the earth, so it will continue
to do, and there is no power beneath the celestial kingdom that can
prevent its growth, or the consummation of all that has been predicted
concerning it.--_Apr. C. R., Journal of Discourses,_ Vol. 25, 1884, pp.
97-101.

JOSEPH SMITH, THE BOY. To me there is a sweet fascination in the
contemplation of his childhood and youth. I love to contemplate the
innocence and the artless simplicity of his boyhood. It bears record
that he was honest, that he was led by the Spirit of God to perform his
wonderful mission. How could a child at his age be impelled by other
than honest motives in the accomplishment of his high and holy calling?
What he did he was led to do by the inspiration and guidance of his
Heavenly Father, of this I feel assured.

{618} He was much like other children; his play was like that of his
companions; his thoughts, like those of most children, were innocent,
and consequently he was incapable of the knavery and connivance that
his enemies declared he practiced. Though poor, his parents were
honest and good; they delighted in the truth, and it was their honest
desire to live according to the best light within them. Love and good
will to all found expression in their hearts and actions, and their
children were imbued with like sentiments. They were firm believers
in God, and trusted in his watchcare over his children. They had
frequently received manifestations of his loving kindness, in dreams,
visions, and inspirations, and God had healed their little ones, in
answer to prayer, when they were nigh unto death. It was in such an
atmosphere that the boy was reared. Joseph was a remarkably quiet and
well-disposed child who gave his parents little or no trouble. As early
as the age of eight, he gave proof that besides being thoughtful,
easily governed, and of sweet and loving disposition, he possessed the
foundation principles of good character--filial affection, patience,
endurance, courage.

Concerning his spiritual manifestations, is it reasonable to suppose
that there could have been premeditated deceit on the part of the boy,
and such a boy, in his simple statement of what he saw and heard? No;
neither could the answer which the heavenly messenger gave to him,
have been composed in the child's own mind. Joseph Smith's testimony
concerning his heavenly manifestation, in later life, was as simple,
straight-forward, plain, and true, as it had been in childhood; the
fidelity, courage, and love implanted in and characteristic of his life
in boyhood neither faltered nor changed with maturity. His wisdom came
in revelations of God to him.

One marked illustration of his character was his love for children.
He never saw a child but he desired to take it up and {619} bless it
and many he did so bless, taking them in his arms and upon his knee.
I have myself sat upon his knee. He was so fond of children that he
would go far out of his way to speak to a little one, which is to me a
striking characteristic of true manhood. He had a like true love for
the human race. I know, and have known from my childhood, that he was a
prophet of God, and I believe in his divine mission with all my heart;
and in the authenticity and inspiration of the revelations which he
received, and the Book of Mormon which he was instrumental in bringing
forth.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 21, December, 1917, p. 167.

JOSEPH SMITH, A RESTORER. I think it is wrong to count Joseph the
Prophet one who fought old forms, in the sense that he established
new principles and doctrines. He fought existing religious forms,
it is true, but he merely became the means, in God's providence, to
restore the old truths of the everlasting gospel of Jesus Christ, the
plan of salvation, which is older than the human race. It is true,
also, that his teachings were new to the people of his day because
they had apostatized from the truth--but the principles of the
gospel are the oldest truths in existence. They were new to Joseph's
generation, as they are in part to ours, because men had gone astray,
been cast adrift, shifted hither and thither by every new wind of
doctrine which cunning men--so-called progressives--had advanced. This
made the Prophet Joseph a restorer, not a destroyer, of old truths.
And this does not justify us in discarding the simple, fundamental
principles of the gospel and running after modern doctrinal ads and
notions.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 15, June, 1912, p. 737.

PLURAL WIVES OF JOSEPH SMITH, THE PROPHET. I can positively state, on
indisputable evidence, that Joseph Smith was the author, under God,
of the revelation on plural marriage. On this subject, we have the
affidavit of William Clayton, private secretary of Joseph Smith, that
he wrote {620} the revelation as it was given through the lips of the
prophet and that he himself sealed to Joseph Smith as a plural wife,
Lucy Walker, at Joseph Smith's own residence, on May 1, 1843. This
lady is still living, in Salt Lake City, and is willing to testify
at any moment to this fact. Following are some of the names of young
ladies who were sealed to the Prophet Joseph Smith in Nauvoo, as
testified to under oath by themselves--this during the lifetime of
the prophet: Eliza R. Snow, Sarah Ann Whitney, Helen Mar Kimball,
Fanny Young (sister to Brigham Young), and Rhoda Richards (sister to
Willard Richards who was with the prophet at his martyrdom in Carthage
jail). All these noble women have testified, under oath, giving names
and dates, that they were sealed during his lifetime, to the Prophet
Joseph Smith. These facts have been published in Jenson's _Historical
Record,_ and in the _Deseret News,_ in years past; and I know, by the
established and virtuous character of these noble women, that their
testimonies are true.

A careful reading of the revelation on plural marriage should convince
any honest man that it was never written by Brigham Young, as it
contains references to Joseph Smith himself, and his family, which
would be utterly nonsensical and useless if written by President Young.
The fact is, we have the affidavit of Joseph C. Kingsbury, certifying
that he copied the original manuscript of the revelation within three
days after the date on which it was written. I knew Joseph C. Kingsbury
well. Furthermore, the revelation was read by Hyrum Smith to a majority
of the members of the High Council, in Nauvoo, at about the time it was
given, to which fact we have the sworn statements of the members of the
High Council.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 5, October, 1902, p. 988.

WHAT DOES THE MARTYRDOM OF JOSEPH AND HYRUM TEACH US? What does the
martyrdom teach us? The great lesson that "where a testament is there
must also of {621} necessity be the death of the testator" (Heb.
9: 16) to make it of force. Moreover, that the blood of martyrs is
indeed the seed of the Church. The Lord permitted the sacrifice, that
the testimony of those virtuous and righteous men should stand as a
witness against a perverse and unrighteous world. Then, again, they
were examples of the wonderful love of which the Redeemer speaks:
"Greater love hath no man than this, that a man lay down his life for
his friends." (John 15:13) This wonderful love they manifested to
the Saints and to the world; for both realized and expressed their
conviction, before starting on the journey to Carthage, that they were
going to their death. They might have escaped; in fact, had but a few
days before made the start for the Rocky Mountains, but were recalled
by the groundless fears of false friends who made the accusation that
they were fleeing from dangers that were equally as great towards the
peace and happiness of the members of the Church as they could possibly
be towards themselves.

Satan said to Job: "All that a man hath will he give for his life."
Of the true servant, and where perfect love abides, that is not true!
Joseph and Hyrum Smith returned and calmly went to their death, feeling
that their lives were of no value to themselves if unvalued by their
friends, or if they were needed as a sacrifice for the protection of
their worthy followers. Their courage, their faith, their love for the
people were without bounds, and they gave all that they had for their
people. Such devotion and love left no doubt in the minds of those who
enjoyed the companionship of the Holy Spirit that these good men and
true were indeed the authorized servants of the Lord.

This martyrdom has always been an inspiration to the people of the
Lord. It has helped them in their individual trials; has given them
courage to pursue a course in righteousness and to know and to live the
truth, and must ever be held in sacred memory by the Latter-day Saints
who {622} have learned the great truths that God revealed through his
servant Joseph Smith.--_Juvenile Instructor,_ Vol. 51, June, 1916, p.
381.

DIVINE AUTHORITY OF JOSEPH SMITH AND HIS SUCCESSORS. I bear my
testimony to you and to the world that Joseph Smith was raised up by
the power of God to lay the foundations of this great latter-day work,
to reveal the fulness of the gospel to the world in this dispensation,
to restore the priesthood of God to the world, by which men may act
in the name of the Father and of the Son and of the Holy Ghost, and
it will be accepted of God; it will be by his authority. I bear my
testimony to it; I know that it is true.

I bear my testimony to the divine authority of those who have succeeded
the Prophet Joseph Smith in the presidency of the Church. They were men
of God; I knew them; I was intimately associated with them and as one
man may know another, through the intimate knowledge that he possesses
of him, so I can bear testimony to the integrity, to the honor, to the
purity of life, to the intelligence, and to the divinity of the mission
and calling of Brigham, of John, of Wilford and of Lorenzo. They were
inspired of God to fill the missions to which they were called, and
I know it. I thank God for that testimony, and for the spirit that
prompts me and impels me toward these men, toward their mission, toward
this people, toward my God and my Redeemer. I thank the Lord for it,
and I pray earnestly that it may never depart from me--worlds without
end.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14, Nov., 1910, p. 74.

GOD'S GUIDING HAND SEEN IN CHURCH HISTORY. In connection with this
thought it may be proper, consistent and timely, for me to remark that
each individual member of the Church assembled here this morning is
a free man or a free woman, possessing to the utmost degree all the
qualifications and characteristics of freedom, independent with {623}
reference to individual action and choice, of every other man and of
every other woman present. This being a fact, which is a fact, the
unanimity exhibited on the part of the audience, with reference to the
actions that have been taken, vindicate the belief and the assertion
which I make, that the members of this congregation are certainly in
harmony with the will of the Father. They are united; they see eye
to eye; their sympathy is with one another and with the cause they
represent. Their hearts are in the work in which they are engaged,
and that because of their choice, because they have fully weighed all
matters connected with their standing in the Church, and with regard
to the course which they have taken today; they have, voluntarily,
without coercion, without compulsion, without any restraint, except the
restraint of their own consciences, shown that they see eye to eye,
that they are one and are therefore entitled to be acknowledged of the
Master as his own and as of him. I believe that there is not a freer,
more independent nor a more intelligent people to be found anywhere in
the world, who are more independent in choosing the course which they
pursue, in the work that they perform and in everything that they have
to do with, than the Latter-day Saints.

There is not a member of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints, in good standing, anywhere in all the world today that is not
such by reason of his independence of character, by reason of his
intelligence, wisdom and ability to judge between right and wrong and
between good and evil. There is not a member of the Church of Jesus
Christ anywhere, in good standing, living a proper life, that would
not hold up his hand against evil, against wrong, against sin, against
the transgression of the laws of God, against unrighteousness or vice
of any kind, with as much freedom and independence and with as firm
determination as any other man or woman in the world.

I am thankful to have the privilege, this moment, of expressing {624}
this my view and firm belief and my knowledge of the real character of
the Latter-day Saints throughout the world. And, when I say Latter-day
Saints, I mean members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints founded by God, through the instrumentality and agency of the
Prophet Joseph Smith, who was chosen of God and ordained and qualified
and authorized to lay the foundations of the Church of Jesus Christ,
never more to be destroyed nor left to other people, never more to
cease but to continue until the purposes of God shall ripen and be
accomplished for the salvation of the children of men and for the
redemption of the living, and of the dead who have died without a
knowledge of the plan of life and salvation. In stating this I state
results of my experience in associations with such men as those who
laid the foundations of the Church of Jesus Christ, from the Prophet
Joseph Smith down to this moment.

As a child I knew the Prophet Joseph Smith. As a child I have listened
to him preach the gospel that God had committed to his charge and
care. As a child I was familiar in his home, in his household, as I
was familiar under my own father's roof. I have retained the witness
of the Spirit that I was imbued with, as a child, and that I received
from my sainted mother, the firm belief that Joseph Smith was a prophet
of God; that he was inspired as no other man in his generation, or for
centuries before, had been inspired; that he had been chosen of God
to lay the foundations of God's Kingdom as well as of God's Church;
that by the power of God he was enabled to bring forth the record of
the ancient inhabitants of this continent, to revive and to reveal to
the world the doctrine of Jesus Christ, not only as he taught it in
the midst of the Jews, in Judea, but as he also taught it, and it was
also recorded, in greater simplicity and plainness upon this continent,
among the descendants of Lehi. As a child I was impressed, deeply,
{625} with the thought, and firmly with the belief, in my soul that the
revelations that had been given to and through Joseph the Prophet, as
contained in this book, the Book of Doctrine and Covenants, were the
word of God, as were the words of the ancient disciples when they bore
record of the Father and of the Son. That impression made upon me in
my childhood has followed through all the vicissitudes of more than
sixty years of actual and practical experience in the mission field,
throughout the nations of the world, and at home in the midst of the
authorized servants of God, who officiated in the name of the Father
and of the Son to propagate, to build up, and to push forward the work
inaugurated by the instrumentality of the boy Joseph Smith.

In my childhood, too, I was instructed to believe in the divinity
of the mission of Jesus Christ. I was taught by my mother, a Saint
indeed--that Jesus Christ is the Son of God; that he was indeed no
other than the Only Begotten of God in the flesh, and that, therefore,
no other than God the eternal Father is his Father and the author of
his existence in the world. I was taught it from my father, from the
Prophet Joseph Smith, through my mother who embraced the gospel because
she believed in the testimony of Joseph Smith, and she believed in the
honor, integrity and truthfulness of her husband; and all my boyhood
days and all my years in the world I have clung to that belief; indeed,
I have never had any serious dubiety in my mind, even in childhood; and
when I could only imperfectly understand things with reference to the
divinity of the mission of the Son of God, I accepted it as being true
in the sense in which only it can be true; for in no other than the
literal sense, as it is described in the scriptures of divine truth and
in the testimonies of the prophets, can it be true that Jesus Christ is
the Son of God. I believe it. I have believed it all my life; but I owe
to the Prophet Joseph Smith the fixed and unalterable confirmation of
that belief, until it has come to be, {626} in my soul, a knowledge of
the truth; and in so far as I have continued in the word of the Lord,
I believe, I have been led to know the truth. I believe that I possess
that freedom that comes from a knowledge of the truth, which teaches
all men righteousness, virtue, honor, faith, charity, forgiveness,
mercy, longsuffering patience and devotion to that which is good, and
abstinence from that which is evil.

"The truth will make you free." Free from what? From error, free from
doubt, and uncertainty, free from unbelief, free from the powers of
darkness, free from the possibility of being tempted beyond your
strength; but to resist error and to shun even the appearance of sin.
This truth makes a man a Latter-day Saint. This knowledge of the truth
makes you free to worship God and to love him with all your heart and
mind and strength, and to do the next best thing--to love your neighbor
as nearly as you possibly can as you love yourselves.

The truth that I have received teaches me that Joseph Smith was a
prophet of God, teaches me to accept without recourse, other than the
full and free acceptance of that truth, that God Almighty, the Father
of Jesus Christ, the Father of our spirits, the maker of heaven and
earth, condescended to come down to this our mother earth, in person,
in company with his beloved Son, and show themselves to Joseph Smith.
I believe it. The truth has made me feel that this must be true. It
cannot be error, for the Lord God Almighty could never build the
structure that he has built upon the testimony of the Prophet Joseph
Smith, if it had been founded in error or untruth. This people never
could have combined and adhered together, never could have been
united, never could have seen eye to eye, never could have been one,
in order that they might be acknowledged of God as his own, if we had
been building upon error. If our foundations were laid in untruth
and unrighteousness this could not be. But the Lord is at the bottom
of this. Joseph {627} Smith was not at the foundation of it. He was
not responsible, only so far as he was obedient to the will of the
Father. God is responsible for this work. The Lord Almighty has made
the promises concerning this work, not Joseph Smith, not Hyrum Smith.
No other man has made true promises with reference to the future of
Zion and to the building up of the kingdom of God in the earth, except
God inspired him to do it. Not of himself has man ever done anything
of that kind. The Lord is at the bottom; the Lord is at the top; the
Lord is all the way through this work, and every fibre of it is in his
keeping and is moved by his magic power and by the inspiration of his
Holy Spirit. That is my testimony to you.

I believe in the divinity of Jesus Christ, because more than ever I
come nearer the possession of the actual knowledge that Jesus is the
Christ, the Son of the living God, through the testimony of Joseph
Smith contained in this book, the Doctrine and Covenants, that he saw
Him, that he heard Him, that he received instructions from Him, that he
obeyed those instructions, and that he today stands before the world
as the last great, actual, living, witness of the divinity of Christ's
mission and His power to redeem man from the temporal death and also
from the second death which will follow man's own sins, through
disobedience to the ordinances of the gospel of Jesus Christ. Thank God
for Joseph Smith. I believe in his mission, having accepted this great
truth and his narration of it.

The greatest event that has ever occurred in the world, since the
resurrection of the Son of God from the tomb and his ascension on high,
was the coming of the Father and of the Son to that boy Joseph Smith,
to prepare the way for the laying of the foundation of his kingdom--not
the kingdom of man--never more to cease nor to be overturned. Having
accepted this truth, I find it easy to accept of every other truth that
he enunciated and declared during {628} his mission of fourteen years
in the world. He never taught a doctrine that was not true. He never
practiced a doctrine that he was not commanded to practice. He never
advocated error. He was not deceived. He saw; he heard; he did as he
was commanded to do; and, therefore, God is responsible for the work
accomplished by Joseph Smith--not Joseph Smith. The Lord is responsible
for it, and not man.

I am happy to express to this audience my knowledge of the successors
of Joseph Smith. They reared me, in part, so to speak. In other words,
with them I journeyed across the deserts, by the side of my ox-team,
following President Brigham Young and his associates to these barren
wastes, barren as they were when we first entered this valley. I
believed in him then, and I know him now! I believed in his associates,
and I know them now; for I lived with them; I slept with them; I
traveled with them; I heard them preach and teach and exhort, and I saw
their wisdom which was not the wisdom of man but the wisdom of Almighty
God. When President Young set his foot down here, upon this desert
spot, it was in the midst of persuasion, prayers and petitions on the
part of some Latter-day Saints who had gone forward and landed upon
the coast of California, that beautiful, rich country, semi-tropical,
abounding in resources that no inland country would possess, inviting
and appealing for settlers at that time, and just such settlers as
President Brigham Young could have taken there--honest people, people
who were firm in their faith, who were established in the knowledge of
truth and righteousness, and in the testimony of Jesus Christ, which is
the spirit of prophecy, and in the testimony of Joseph Smith which was
a confirmation of the spirit of Christ and of his mission.

These people pleaded with President Young: "Come with us," they said,
"and go to the coast. Go where roses bloom all the year round, where
the fragrance of flowers {629} scents the air, from May until May;
where beauty reigns; where the elements of wealth are to be found, and
only need to be developed. Come with us."

"No," said President Young, "we will remain here, and we will make
the desert blossom like the rose. We will fulfil the Scriptures by
remaining here."

I heard him tell one of the Battalion boys who came back from
California with a little buckskin sack of gold nuggets, and who shook
them in the face of President Young, and said to him: "Look what we
could get if we were to go to California! The land is full of gold;"
but President Young pointed his finger (I was there and saw and heard
it), and he said: "Brother --------, you may go to California, if
you will. Those who want to go there can go, but we will remain here;
and I want to tell you that those who remain here and obey counsel,
in a few years will be able to buy out every one of you who go to
California--ten-fold over."

(Bishop George Romney: "That is true; I know the man.")

Why, bless your soul, what did President Young know about Utah, at
that early day? We did not know that there was even a lump of coal in
existence in the land. I myself passed the first fall and winter after
our entrance into this valley hauling wood out of Mill Creek canyon and
Parley's canyon; and during that fall and winter I hauled forty loads
of wood with my oxen and wagon out of these canyons. Every load I cut
and hauled diminished the supply of wood for fuel for the future; and I
said to myself: What will we do when the wood is all gone? How will we
live here when we can't get any more fuel, for it is rapidly going? I
followed that pursuit until it took me three days in the mountains with
my ox-team and wagon, to get a load of wood for winter fuel; and what
were we to do? Yet President Young said, "This is the place."

Well, ordinarily, our judgment and our faith would {630} have been
tried, in the decision of the president, if we had not implicit
confidence in him. If we had not known that he was the mouthpiece of
God, that he was the real and legitimate successor of the Prophet
Joseph Smith in the Presidency of the Church of Jesus Christ of
Latter-day Saints, we would have doubted his wisdom and we would have
faltered in our faith in his promise and word; but no, we believed
him, and we stayed; and so far as I am concerned, I am here yet; and I
propose to remain here as long as the Lord wants me to stay. And what
has developed?

Our good friends from the east used to come out here in the early days,
and upbraid us. They said: "Why, it is the fulfilment of the curse of
God upon you. You have been driven away from the rich lands of Illinois
and Missouri into a desert, into a salt land."

I said: "Yes, we have salt enough here to save the world, thank God,
and we may find use for it by and by."

Well, before the wood gave out entirely in the mountains, we discovered
coal up here in Summit county, and then we began to discover it all
along the mountains here, and we kept on discovering it, until at last
we have learned that we have coal enough in Utah to furnish fuel for
the whole world for a hundred years, if they want to come and get it.
We have it right here, any amount of it; and they haven't got that in
California; they come up here to get their coal.

We have discovered that this country was really the gold-mine country
of the world; that here abounded silver as well as gold in greater
abundance than in California. We have discovered now that some of our
mountains here are practically made of copper, and men are hewing
copper out of the mountains by millions of tons, so to speak, and
coining it in the way of business into money; and thank the Lord, we do
not have to go to Liverpool for the salt we use in making butter. We
have it right here, just as good and {631} pure as the best they can
fetch from England or anywhere else in the world; and this salt land
has proven to be a boon, a consolation and a blessing beyond all power
of description.

When the army came out here, in 1858, we wanted some bullets to go out
and meet General Johnston and his forces that were coming in--not to
kill them; we did not want the bullets to kill them; we just wanted the
bullets to scare them with. Some of the boys went out here into the
mountains with a pick and shovel, and they dug up lead, impregnated
somewhat with silver. They brought it in, improvised a little furnace
and ran out a few tons of lead. I had the honor of being associated
with that little company of men, and I brought home with me some thirty
or forty pounds of lead that we just quarried out of the hill with a
pick and shovel.

When I rode up to the office here, to report to President Young my
return from my mission over three years, the army was approaching, and
he said to me: "Well, Joseph, have you got a horse?"

I said, "Yes, sir."

"Have you got a gun?"

I said, "Yes, sir."

"Have you got any ammunition?"

I said, "No, sir."

"Well," he said, "you report to Brother Rockwood, at the commissary
office, and he will furnish you with ammunition, and you take your gun
and go out to the front."

So I went home and sat up all that night, running bullets out of my
mountain lead; reported the next day to Brother Rockwood, received a
chunk of Mother Cadbury's cheese and some crackers, and started on my
horse, with a brother-in-law, for the front. I spent part of the winter
of 1858, and all of the spring and a portion of the summer of 1859,
guarding Uncle Sam's troops; and we never hurt one of them, not one.
We never molested a single individual of them; but we hedged up their
way, and they camped out at {632} Fort Bridger all winter long, and we
sent them salt to save them; and they rejected it, because they were
afraid there was something in the salt, more than the savor of it. But
I assure you the salt was pure and good.

Now, just before that time, I was a farmer. I had to plow my land and
farm it, but I did not have a spear of grass or hay to feed my team,
and how was I going to do my spring work? This valley produced mighty
little hay at that time. I hitched up my team, my brother and I, and
we drove sixty miles to the north and bought a couple of loads of wild
grass hay, and carted that hay down sixty miles to feed our teams in
order to plow our land. I used to think, how in the world are we going
to live in Utah without feed for our teams. Just then the Lord sent
a handful of alfalfa seed into this valley, and Christopher Layton
planted it, watered it, and it matured; and from that little beginning,
Utah can now produce a richer crop of hay than Illinois or Missouri
can do. So the hay question was settled, and the coal question was
settled. Then the question of producing food from the land. Why, it was
a marvel. One good man cultivated his little farm for thirty years,
without a change, and raised from fifty to sixty bushels of wheat per
acre each year on his farm, during that entire period. So the soil is
rich, and everything is favorable for Zion here where President Young
determined that he would stay; if we had not stayed here, it is clear
we would have been overwhelmed and swallowed up by the multitudes who
rushed to California.

Now, my brethren and sisters, I know whereof I speak with reference
to these matters, for I have come down through every atom of it, at
least from the expulsion from the city of Nauvoo; in February, 1846,
I stood upon the bank of the river and saw President Young and the
Twelve apostles, and as many of the people of Nauvoo as had teams or
could possibly migrate, cross the Mississippi {633} river on the ice.
The river froze within a day or two, because of heavy frost, which
enabled them to cross as they did, and thus the first real marvel and
manifestation of the mercy and the power of God was manifest, in making
a roadway across the Mississippi a mile wide at that place by which
our people could go on their journey to the West. I saw them go. My
brother was with them, and I wondered if I would ever see him again.
We remained there in Nauvoo until September, 1846, when the city was
besieged, at the mouth of the cannon and musket, and my mother and
her family were compelled to take all that they could move out of the
house--their bedding, their clothing, the little food they possessed,
leaving the furniture and everything else standing in the house, and
fled across the river, where we camped without tent or shelter until
the war was over. The city was conquered, and the poor people that were
left there were compelled to seek shelter somewhere else. From that
moment on, I have been in the conflict. I have seen it and experienced
it all the way through; and I am satisfied with my experience.

I bear record to you of the divinity of the work in which you are
engaged, and, I bear record to you and testify that it has been the
power of God, not that of President Young or of his associates, that
has kept the people together and united them. By that power you have
been able to come here this morning and with one united voice, and
uplifted hands, sustain in the positions to which they have been chosen
the men who have been called and appointed and ordained by virtue of
authority from God, to preside over you and teach you things that are
good to be taught and good to be known and observed, which will bring
life and salvation to those who will hearken and be obedient.

The Lord bless you; the Lord bless the pure in heart throughout the
world. May the Lord have mercy upon the suffering nations that are
afflicted by this terrible calamity {634} of war. May he save the poor
and the needy and the honorable among the children of men, to come
eventually to a knowledge of his truth, that they may be saved in his
kingdom.

Much could be said. Joseph Smith taught the building of temples. I
can scarcely quit. Joseph Smith was the instrument in the hand of God
in revealing the ordinances of the house of God that are essential to
the salvation of the living and the dead. Joseph Smith taught these
principles, and his brethren to whom he taught them have carried out
his views. They have put his doctrine to the test. They have obeyed his
counsel, and they have honored him and his mission and sustained him as
man has never been sustained by any other people under God's heavens.
So we will continue to sustain Joseph the prophet, and his work that he
has accomplished among the children of men, and we will abide in the
truth forever, by the help of God. Even so. Amen.--_Sermon, Salt Lake
Assembly Hall,_ July 8, 1917.

{635}



CHAPTER XXVI

PERSONAL TESTIMONIES AND BLESSINGS

A TESTIMONY. I declare unto you in all candor, and in all earnestness
of soul, that I believe with all my heart in the divine mission of
Joseph Smith, the Prophet, that I am convinced in every fiber of my
being that God raised him up to restore to the earth the gospel of
Christ, which is indeed the power of God unto salvation. I testify
to you that Joseph Smith was instrumental in the hand of the Lord in
restoring God's truth to the world, and also the holy priesthood, which
is his authority delegated unto man. I know this is true, and I testify
of it to you. To me it is all-in-all; it is my life, it is my light;
it is my hope, and my joy; it gives me the only assurance that I have
for exaltation, for my resurrection from death, with those whom I have
loved and cherished in this life, and with whom my lot has been cast
in this world--honorable men, pure, humble men, who were obedient unto
God and his commands, who were not ashamed of the gospel of Christ,
nor of their convictions or knowledge of the truth of the gospel; men
who were made of the stuff of which martyrs are made, and who were
willing at any moment to lay down their lives for Christ's sake, and
for the gospel, if need be, which they had received with the testimony
of the Holy Spirit in their hearts. I want to be reunited with these
men when I shall have finished my course here. When my mission is done
here, I hope to go beyond into the spirit world where they dwell, and
be reunited with them. It is this gospel of the Son of God that gives
me the hope that I have of this consummation, and of the realization
of my desire in this direction. I have staked all on this gospel, and
I have not done it in vain. I know {636} in whom I trust. I know that
my Redeemer lives, and that he shall stand upon the earth in the latter
days, and, as Job has expressed it, "Though after my skin worms destroy
this body, yet in my flesh shall I see God."--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1907, pp.
4, 5.

THIS IS GOD'S WORK--A TESTIMONY. My brethren and sisters, I desire to
bear my testimony to you; for I have received an assurance which has
taken possession of my whole being. It has sunk deep into my heart; it
fills every fiber of my soul; so that I feel to say before this people,
and would be pleased to have the privilege of saying it before the
whole world, that God has revealed unto me that Jesus is the Christ,
the Son of the living God, the Redeemer of the world; that Joseph Smith
is, was, and always will be a prophet of God, ordained and chosen to
stand at the head of the dispensation of the fulness of times, the keys
of which were given to him, and he will hold them until the winding up
scene--keys which will unlock the door into the kingdom of God to every
man who is worthy to enter and which will close that door against every
soul that will not obey the law of God. I know, as I live, that this is
true, and I bear my testimony to its truth. If it were the last word
I should ever say on earth, I would glory before God my Father that I
possess this knowledge in my soul, which I declare unto you as I would
the simplest truths of heaven. I know that this is the kingdom of God,
and that God is at the helm. He presides over his people. He presides
over the president of this Church, and has done so from the Prophet
Joseph down to the Prophet Lorenzo, and he will continue to preside
over the leaders of this Church until the winding--up scene. He will
not suffer it to be given to another people, nor to be left to men. He
will hold the reins in his own hands; for he has stretched out his arm
to do this work, and he will do it, and have the honor of it. At the
same time God will honor and magnify his servants in the sight of the
people. He will sustain them in righteousness. He will {637} lift them
on high, exalt them into his presence, and they will partake of his
glory forever and ever.

It is the Lord's work, and I plead with you not to forget it. I implore
you not to disbelieve it; for it is true. All that the Lord said
concerning this latter-day work will come to pass. The world cannot
prevent it. The blind that will not see, the deaf that will not hear,
cannot prevent the work from going on. They may throw blocks before
the wheels, they may ridicule, they may malign, they may stir up the
spirit of persecution and bitterness against the Saints, they may do
all in their power to deceive the people and lead them astray; but God
is at the helm, and he will lead his people to victory. Men and women
may be deceived by the craftiness of the adversary and by the spirit
of darkness that is in the world; they may be deceived with Christian
Science, with hypnotism, with animal magnetism, with mesmerism, with
spiritualism, and with all the other man-made and demon-stimulated isms
which exist in the world; but the elect of God shall see and know the
truth. They will not be blind, because they will see; they will not be
deaf, because they will hear; and they will walk in the light, as God
is in the light, that they may have fellowship with Jesus Christ and
that his blood may cleanse them from all their sins.

May God help us to realize this. May he deliver us from secret
combinations, and from the snares that are set to entrap our feet and
to win our affections from the kingdom of God. I repeat what I have
said scores of times, the kingdom of God is good enough for me. This
organization of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints meets
all my wants, and I have no need to fly to organizations that are
gotten up by men for the purpose of making money. I pray God that his
kingdom may be sufficient for you, that you may abide in the truth, and
not be led away {638} by those deceptive spirits that have gone forth
in the world to lead men astray.

Spiritualism started in the United States about the time that Joseph
Smith received his visions from the heavens. What more natural than
that Lucifer should begin revealing himself to men in his cunning
way, in order to deceive them and to distract their minds from the
truth that God was revealing? And he has kept it up pretty well ever
since. May God bless Israel, and preserve us in the truth. May he
bless our president, prolong his years, and continue unto him the
strength of body and mind that he possesses this day, and even more
vigor as the years roll by. May the Lord have mercy upon our beloved
brother, President Cannon, who is absent from us, and return him once
more to his home, and to the bosom of the Church, if he has not willed
otherwise. This is my humble prayer, in the name of Jesus. Amen.--_Apr.
C. R.,_ 1901, pp. 72,73.

A TESTIMONY. There is no salvation but in the way God has pointed out.
There is no hope of everlasting life but through obedience to the law
that has been affixed by the Father of life, "with whom there is no
variableness, neither shadow of turning;" and there is no other way by
which we may obtain that light and exaltation. Those matters are beyond
peradventure, beyond all doubt in my mind; I know them to be true.
Therefore, I bear my testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, that
the Lord God Omnipotent reigneth, that he lives and that his Son lives,
even he who died for the sins of the world, and that he arose from the
dead; that he sits upon the right hand of the Father; that all power
is given unto him; that we are directed to call upon God in the name
of Jesus Christ. We are told that we should remember him in our homes,
keep his holy name fresh in our minds, and revere him in our hearts; we
should call upon him from time to time, from day to day; and, in fact,
every moment of our lives we should live so that the desires {639} of
our hearts will be a prayer unto God for righteousness, for truth, and
for the salvation of the human family. Let us guard ourselves so that
there may not come into our souls a single drop of bitterness, by which
our whole being might be corroded and poisoned with anger, with hatred,
envy and malice, or any sort of evil. We should be free from all these
evil things, that we may be filled with the love of God, the love of
truth, the love of our fellowmen, that we may seek to do good unto all
men all the days of our lives, and above all things be true to our
covenants in the gospel of Jesus Christ.--_Apr. C. R.,_ 1909, p. 6.

THE PLEDGE OF MY LIFE. I feel happy, this morning, in having the
privilege to say to you that in the days of my childhood and early
youth, I made a pledge with God and with his people that I would be
true to them. In looking over the experiences of my life, I cannot
now discern, and do not remember a circumstance, since the beginning
of my experience in the world, where I have felt, for a moment, to
slacken or relax in the pledge and promise that I made to God and to
the Latter-day Saints, in my youth. And if there is a man, or a woman,
in the world that can point out to me an instance, in all my life,
where I have been untrue to my pledge, or promise, or covenant, I
shall be glad to receive that information from that man or woman. As
an elder in Israel I tried to be true to that calling; I tried to my
utmost to honor and magnify that calling. When I became a seventy, I
felt in my heart to be true to that calling, and I strove, with all
the intelligence and fervor of my soul, to be true to it. I have no
knowledge nor recollection of any act of mine, or any circumstance in
my life where I proved untrue or unfaithful to these callings in the
priesthood of the Son of God. Later in my life, when I was called to
act as an apostle, and was ordained an apostle, and set apart to be one
of the Twelve, I strove to honor that calling, to be true to it, and to
my brethren, to the household of faith, and to {640} the covenants and
obligations involved in receiving this holy priesthood which is after
the order of the Son of God. I am not aware that I ever violated one
of my obligations or pledges in these callings to which I have been
called. I have sought to be true and faithful to all these things. I
have endeavored to be true to my family; and if ever I have violated
one pledge or promise, or neglected one obligation that rests upon me
in these relationships, I do not know it. And when I have made pledges
to the people of God, or to the world, if ever I have violated those
pledges I do not know it. Furthermore, I do not believe there is a man
living who does know it, who can truthfully testify that I ever did
violate those pledges.

I stand before you today, my brethren and sisters and friends, on
the ground that I have tried to be true to God, to the utmost of my
knowledge and ability; that I have tried to be true to my people,
to the utmost of my knowledge and ability; and I have been true to
the world in every pledge and promise that I have made to the world,
notwithstanding there have been men who have shown a disposition to
make it appear that I was a hypocrite, that I was two-faced; that I
was one thing to the world and another thing in secret. I want it
distinctly understood that those who have conveyed such an idea as this
to mankind have been wilfully injuring me, wronging me, and falsifying
me and my character before the people, and I want it distinctly
understood those things must stop. They must stop at least among men
who profess to be members of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints. I can endure to be maligned and persecuted by my enemies,
who are also enemies of the Kingdom of God, but I do not want to be
maligned and belied by men who profess to be members of the Church of
Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, neither intentionally nor otherwise.
Now, I trust that you understand clearly what I mean. I do not know
how I can make it much plainer or clearer, with the knowledge {641}
that I have of language. Then, I repeat, as the Lord has helped me in
the past to be true to my covenants, that I have entered into with him
and with you, with my brethren, and with, the Church of Jesus Christ
of Latter-day Saints, so by his help and by his blessing I propose to
be true throughout the future of my life, whether I am permitted to
live long or short; it matters not to me. While I live, I hope to be a
true man, an honest man, a man who can face all mankind and, at last,
who can stand before God, the judge of the quick and the dead, and not
quail for what I have done in the world.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1910, pp. 2,3.

A BLESSING. I bless you with all my soul, because you love the truth,
and you manifest it. There is nothing in God's world that draws men
and women so near to my heart as that they love the truth and that
they love God, that they love the cause of Zion and are devoted to the
interests of the Church. This endears men and women to my heart; I love
them when they love this work and when they show their interest in it.
It lifts my soul to heaven and fills it with joy unspeakable.--_Oct. C.
R.,_ 1908, p. 97.

A TESTIMONY. My brethren and sisters, I know that my Redeemer lives. I
know, as I know I live, that in person he has visited man in our time
and day, and that we are not now dependent alone on the history of the
past for the knowledge that we possess, of which record is borne by
the Spirit of God, shed abroad in the hearts of all who enter into the
covenant of the gospel of Christ. But we have the renewed and later
witness and manifestation of heavenly visions and of the visitation
of God the Father and Christ the Son to this their footstool; and
they have in person declared their entity, their being, and they have
manifested their glory. They have stretched forth their hands to
accomplish their work--the work of God, and not the work of man--and
while those who have been faithful shall be crowned with glory and
honor in the presence of God, the {642} honor and the glory, the credit
and the praise, for the continuance and for the advancement and growth
of the kingdom of God in the earth, will be due to the Father and the
Son and the Holy Spirit, whose power and whose agency, whose influence
and purpose, have been behind the work of God every moment since it was
first given to man. It is by his power that it has grown and continued,
and has become what it is, and it will continue to grow and spread,
until it shall fill the earth with the glory of God, and with the
knowledge of the Father and of the Son, whom to know is life eternal.
This is my testimony to you, my brethren and sisters, and I bear
witness of it in the name of the Lord Jesus Christ. Amen.--_Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 12, September, 1909, p. 914.

I KNOW THAT MY REDEEMER LIVES. I know that my Redeemer lives. We have
all the testimony and all the evidence of this great and glorious
truth that the world has, that is, all that the so-called Christian
world possesses; and in addition to all that they have, we have the
testimony of the inhabitants of this western continent, to whom the
Savior appeared and delivered his gospel, the same as he delivered it
to the Jews. In addition to all this new testimony, and the testimony
of the holy scriptures from the Jews, we have the testimony of the
modern prophet, Joseph Smith, who saw the Father and the Son, and who
has borne record of them to the world, whose testimony was sealed with
his blood and is in force upon the world today. We have the testimony
of others, who witnessed the presence of the Son of God in the Kirtland
temple, when he appeared to them there, and the testimony of Joseph,
and of Sidney Rigdon, who declared that they were the last witnesses of
Jesus Christ. Therefore I say again, I know that my Redeemer lives; for
in the mouths of these witnesses this truth has been established in my
mind.

Besides these testimonies, I have received the witness {643} of the
Spirit of God in my own heart, which exceeds all other evidences,
for it bears record to me, to my very soul, of the existence of my
Redeemer, Jesus Christ. I know that he lives, and that in the last day
he shall stand upon the earth, that he shall come to the people who
shall be prepared for him, as a bride is prepared for the Bridegroom
when he shall come. I believe in the divine mission of the Prophet
Joseph Smith, and I have every evidence that I need--at least enough to
convince me, of the divinity of his mission.

I am proud to say that I have accepted, and have tried to keep and
honor, every word that has proceeded from the mouth of God through him.
As it is written, "Man shall not live by bread alone, but by every word
that proceedeth out of the mouth of God," no one will dare to accuse
me of side-tracking from or refusing to obey any doctrine taught by or
revealed through the Prophet Joseph Smith.--_Improvement Era,_ Vol. 14,
1910, p. 73.

TESTIMONY. Now, there are many other things, but I cannot tell them all
to you. I begin to feel that I am getting to be an old man, or rather
a young man in an old body. I think I am just about as young as I ever
was in my life in spirit. I love the truth today more than I ever did
before, because I see it more clearly, I understand it better from day
to day by the promptings and inspiration of the Spirit of the Lord that
is vouchsafed to me; but my body gets tired, and I want to tell you,
sometimes my poor old heart quivers considerably.--_Oct. C. R.,_ 1917,
pp. 6, 7.

{644}



PRESIDENT JOSEPH F. SMITH

AN APPRECIATION

President Joseph Fielding Smith, sixth and beloved President of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints, has without question
seen longer service in the Church than has any other living man. For
sixty-five years he has been in the active ministry, under a great
variety of callings; for fifty-one years he has held the apostolic
calling; since 1867 he has been one of the general authorities of the
Church; during seventeen years he has been President of the Church.
No other man is so beloved in the Church. To advertise that President
Smith will be at a meeting is to warn the people that standing room
will be at a premium. His words are accepted as of inspired authority;
his acts as of an honest man, tried long and severely in the crucible
of life.

The confidence of the people in their President, Prophet, Seer and
Revelator, has not come alone from the exalted positions he has so long
occupied. The Latter-day Saints have been gathered from all comers of
the earth, and from all walks, after they had become convinced that
the gospel as restored through the Prophet Joseph Smith is of certain
truth. Intelligence rules in the earthly Zion. The leaders of the
people are subjected to searching consideration by the people, and
the confidence given them is in proportion to their deserts. It is,
therefore, a noble tribute to the worthiness of the man Joseph F. Smith
that he is the synonym for all that the people respect and hold dear.

Surely, this man who presides over the Church, and {645} whose life is
an open book, has been prepared for his labor. If weakness were in him
he would have had ample opportunity to fall. From his birth, the spirit
of the great latter-day work has hovered over him; and with every
passing year he has been immersed in the history of the Church.

When he was born, in Far West, on November 13, 1838, apostasy,
jealousy, persecution and the beckoning hands of untruth were shaking
the Church. The Church did not fall, but the hearts of the faithful
were sorely tried, and even the baby, Joseph F., must have assimilated
some of the solemnity of those days when the Church was being purified
for its future work It was a preparation of noble extent to sit, in
those early years, on the knees of his patriarch father or of his
prophet uncle, even though the wide import of their conversation was
not understood by the boy. It was a training in steely strength, even
for the child, to witness the homecoming of the bodies of his murdered
father and uncle. For such robbery of the dearest in life the human
breast naturally and instinctively clamors for revenge. Yet, the whole
life of the boy, grown to manhood, has been that of forgiving and
loving, so that all may be made to see the truth. Who knows at what
cost the man within has been conquered? The Church has suffered such
unjust yet persistent opposition from the beginning that one wonders
that it retains its gentle love for all the children of men.

It was splendid preparation for the man who was to be in God's harness
all the years of a long life to witness the exodus of Nauvoo. Home and
lands, household property and trinkets of sentiment--all had to be left
behind. The driven people were in the desert with their God, and lo!
their faith waxed strong. It was during the exodus that President Smith
learned lessons of faith that never have been forgotten. Their cattle
were lost and their hope was gone, but the praying mother, in communion
with the Source of Truth, arose and went directly to the place where
the {646} oxen had strayed. Though only eight years old, the boy drove
an ox team across Iowa.

"In 1848, when nine years old, I drove a four-ox team across the plains
to Salt Lake City," writes President Smith, in an album of a friend.
That was training for the boy! From the days of that blistering, dusty
journey there was no relapse to a longing for the easy things of life.
After the arrival in the valley came the toilsome conquest of Widow
Smith's farm. The father was gone and the children were young. Our
President, from his own life, can understand the lot of the widow and
the fatherless.

Then the mother died. The strong spirit and wise mind could no longer
guide the boy. The father had been murdered in cold blood because he
was fearless in the cause of truth; the mother had died from the strain
and sorrow of a life tossed in the furious storm of those days; no
material wealth was his. Thus stood the fourteen-year-old boy who was
to become the leader of his people. Men are shorn of earthly support
that they may grow strong in Godly ways!

The training had been severe, but of infinite value. When the boy was
only fifteen years old he was called to go on a mission to the Sandwich
Islands. By the labor of his hands he worked his way to California; by
more labor, earned his passage to the islands. To object or to question
was not possible for one who had survived his training. During that
first mission the spirit of the work came upon him. In sermon, by
visit, through his quiet influence, he led men and women into the way
of everlasting truth. By the power of the priesthood he held, he healed
the sick, drove out evil spirits, and brought peace to the souls of
those who were heavy laden.

After nearly five years he was allowed to return home. Again he had to
work his way. At last he was again with the body of his people in Salt
Lake City, but penniless. The Lord does not always reward in gold and
silver. He was not {647} permitted to remain home long, for mission
succeeded mission. From the Sandwich Islands he was called to England
for three years; then from England again to the Sandwich Islands. To
preach the gospel without purse and scrip became the order of his life.

Joseph F. Smith's ceaseless devotion to the gospel did not escape the
notice of the watchful, keen-eyed leader, Brigham Young, who loved
with a mighty love the memory of the martyrs Joseph and Hyrum Smith.
It was a joy to the Prophet Brigham Young to find one of the blood
of the martyrs giving himself to the cause for which they died. In
various ways did President Young test the materials of which Joseph
F. Smith was made. However, the long and hard training of boyhood and
the insistent discipline in the mission field had not been in vain.
President Young found him loyal to his family, his country, his Church
and his God. Not even his bitterest enemy will deny that President
Smith is loyal.

After some years, on July 1, 1866, a beautiful and solemn day,
President Brigham Young ordained Joseph F. Smith to the apostleship.
A year later, in October, 1867, he was admitted to the quorum of the
Twelve. If there can be any talk in the Church of Christ of earning a
position, Joseph F. Smith had earned his place in the apostolic quorum,
by his purity, his intelligence, his integrity and his activity in
behalf of the Church. Moreover, the people of the Church delight to
honor the blood of the Prophet who was God's instrument in the mighty
work of the restoration of the gospel. Welcome was he, when he entered
upon his work as one of the general authorities of the Church.

As a member of the quorum of the Twelve, Joseph F. Smith showed the
same activity that had so emphatically characterized his former labors.
From settlement to settlement he traveled, to counsel, to preach and
to take active part in the building of the West, which was yet in its
swaddling {648} clothes of conquest. Vigorous were his words wherever
he went. Without doubt was his faith. His testimony of the gospel was
as the highest knowledge. He was then as now a fearless champion of
truth.

At the time Apostle Smith assumed a place among the general authorities
of the Church, Utah conditions were rapidly changing. Many non-members
of the Church, who had come in to share in the bounties of the desert
made to blossom by the Saints, could not content themselves with
their rich material harvest, but must needs take up arms against the
Church. When the leaders of the Church were charged with disloyalty
to the country, when their motives were painted as those of devils,
when the whole system of "Mormon" faith was branded as the rottenest
immorality, the people who remembered the days of Carthage and Nauvoo
had difficulty to keep down the cry of vengeance. Across the weary
desert they had trailed, leaving many by the way; in the sweat of their
brows they had won the wilderness to their use, and all this that they
might serve unmolested their holy God, in a worship founded on purity
and truth. It was then that the clear-visioned, clear-thinking leaders
raised their voices in protest against further injustice. Apostle
Smith, a man of deep affections, had fought away from himself the
desire for revenge for the beastly murder of his manly father; but,
being a man of strength, he could not submit indifferently to the new
injustice that was proposed. The Fighting Apostle they called him,
as he hurled back the untruths about "Mormonism," and his relentless
watchfulness became a deterrent power among those who planned evil for
a good and peaceful people.

A fighting apostle he has always been--fighting for the cause of truth.
Yet, Joseph F. Smith is temperamentally a man of peace. Gentle and kind
are his ways. A gentleman, is the instinctive appellation bestowed
upon him by all who meet him. In character, voice and manner he is
{649} the dignified peace maker. Nevertheless, his loyalty is such,
and his convictions are so firmly established, that evil may not be
spoken about truth without arousing the lion within him. To measure
the ground; to give the foe full place and warning, to try strength
according to the laws of decency, but never to give quarter to evil or
untruth or injustice--that is the method of Joseph F. Smith.

In time, the years of toil wore upon President Brigham Young, who asked
that more counselors, to act as assistants, be given him. Among those
whom he chose for this purpose was Joseph F. Smith. This indicated that
during his apostolic career he had not forfeited the confidence of the
president which he had won earlier in his life. When, at length, the
great founder of Utah passed away, and the first presidency was again
reorganized, the abilities and character of Apostle Smith made him,
under God's inspiration, a counselor to President John Taylor. Under
the administrations of Presidents Taylor, Woodruff, and Snow, for
twenty-one years, President Smith remained as a counselor in the first
presidency, until at length, in the providence of God, he became the
president of the Church.

The vast gathering in the great Tabernacle, November 10, 1901, will
ever be remembered by those present. The priesthood of the Church
were seated according to their offices in the priesthood. One by one
the quorums arose, elders, seventies, high priests and the others,
and voted to sustain the appointment of Joseph Fielding Smith to the
Presidency. In his vigorous, later manhood, his eye clear, his voice
distinct, his spirit compelling, he was vividly the greatest among
the thousands of able men, the flower of a vigorous people, who had
assembled there that day.

The day was the fulfilment of prophecy, for, many years before, his
attainment of the exalted position of the Presidency had been predicted
with the voice of authority.

Of the administration of the affairs of the Church under {650} Joseph
F. Smith's presidency nothing need be said--for we live in it and
know its eloquent message. The stakes at home, the missions in Europe
and in the islands of the sea, have been visited by the President in
his official capacity. Prosperity, good will, spiritual power and
growth, overshadow the Church. The stakes of Zion have been increased,
the wards multiplied, hundreds of beautiful meeting-houses have been
constructed, the priesthood has risen to a fuller recognition of its
place in the Church, the temples have become crowded, new temples are
being built, new converts have been added in mighty numbers, and in a
thousand other ways has the Church prospered; and above all, in the
face of a most bitter persecution, which has been heralded throughout
the world, the faith of the people has increased until it is nigh unto
impregnable. If any doubt all this, let him journey over the Church
then visit one of the general conferences of the Church. There is faith
in Israel!

Not only long but varied has been the experience of this great man
who presides over the Church. True to the genius of "Mormonism," he
has been closely identified with all the affairs of the community in
which he has lived. For seven successive terms he was a member of the
Utah legislature. When the Johnston army pantomime was in progress,
President Smith joined the militia and assisted in making preparations
to protect the homes of the people. He has helped to locate settlements
and to find ways for bringing water upon the thirsting land. He has
encouraged all legitimate business and, as far as time has permitted,
has taken part in it. From his earliest life he has managed his farm,
and even today, with his sons, has built one of the most modern
livestock farms in the West, as an example to others.

Education, guided in schools, was largely denied him, but educated
is President Smith. He has read widely, spoken with many men of many
minds, and has thought deeply. {651} Of broad and generous sympathies
with everything that is noble and good, he has acquired a culture,
which none dares question. Schools, the public press, the theater,
music and the fine arts have been encouraged by him. As a most
illuminating sidelight upon his wisdom is the fact that if not all of
a family can be educated, he insists that the girls must be given the
first chance, for they are the mothers and makers of men.

To those who do not know President Smith, it must seem strange that
the honors that have almost overwhelmed him have all come unsought.
President Smith is a modest man. Like all truly great men he is not
immersed in thoughts of his own greatness. Rather does he admiringly
place the power he observes in other men above his own. Nevertheless,
and most naturally, position after position involving trust has come to
him, though he has never sought one. Those who must find flaws in the
Church point out that President Smith is officially connected with many
business enterprises. Yet, those who find fault with this condition
will not realize that men who can be absolutely trusted to guard the
affairs of others as they would their own, are everywhere sought after.
President Smith's demonstrated integrity has brought many offices which
no doubt he would gladly relinquish to others. But "Mormon," Jew, and
Gentile know that as far as President Smith can control things, only
honor and justice and simple honesty will prevail wherever he is found.

During the Smoot investigations it seemed as if the whole United
States was arrayed against the relatively few people who, during half
a century, had given themselves to the conquest of the Great American
Desert. The charges filed against this people, if sustained, would make
the "Mormon" people unfit to dwell in the "land of the free and the
home of the brave." To face the investigating Committee on Privileges
and Elections, composed of the best minds of the Senate and House
of {652} Representatives of the United States Congress, many were
subpoenaed. The first witness was President Smith. Fortunately, the
hearing is preserved and printed so that all may read it. Matching
mind and will and heart and sense against the great ones of the land,
President Smith was easily their compeer. Read it. Who has ever heard
of that hearing used as a campaign document against "Mormons"? When
Joseph F. Smith's history is written, his mighty contest with the most
authoritative body in the land will make his figure stand out in noble
relief. Among the men of earth, high or low, President Smith is never
at a disadvantage.

Those who had even slight acquaintance with President Smith were not
surprised at the evidence of his power among men. In all his public
work he is masterful. He is endowed with high physical attractiveness,
his musical voice is compelling, his language chaste and correct, and
his thoughts appeal to the intellect as well as to the emotions. Those
who have seen him before the ten thousand, at the great Tabernacle in
Salt Lake City, have no fear that he may not be measured with the men
he meets.

Perhaps the best evidence of the high intellect of President Smith is
shown in his clear understanding and explanation of the principles of
the gospel. Men often sink to oblivion in quagmires of theological
vagueness. In matters of theological doctrine the President is lucid
as the noon-day light. Some few years ago, certain men, loving to
conjecture the improbable, insisted on knowing what would happen if
all the men holding the priesthood were to die, save one elder. At
one of the great conferences (general), before ten thousand assembled
Saints, President Smith, in one-half dozen sentences cleared up the
whole subject. It would be the privilege and duty of the one remaining
elder to organize again the whole Church with apostles, prophets,
etc., according to the revelation. The powers and purpose and duty
of the priesthood were thus driven into the understandings {653} of
the people, as they never had been before. His sermons abound in such
clarifying statements, backed by a simple, unfailing faith that looks
for simplicity rather than mystery in the things of God.

Perhaps enough has been said. The man of whom we write is tender and
gentle, and withal does not love much praise. To him and his families
many children have been born. To them he is loyal with all his power,
for he well knows that loyalty, with all other virtues, begins at home.
Over his families he watches with tender solicitude. They in turn
love him with an invariable love. It is common knowledge that when
the children were young, his rest was not easy if he had not seen the
little ones properly tucked away for the night. The same father-heart
beats for the people whose accepted leader he is. The hearts of the
people ache over the long hours he spends in the office working out the
affairs of the Church, especially now that he is no longer as young as
he once was. But, he is not to be dissuaded. He must see his people
tucked away for the night, before his heart will be at peace. So works
love! and who shall say him nay, whose care from boyhood has been the
welfare of his people?

"Has this man no faults?" asks the green-eyed critic. To be sure he
has, for he is mortal. But, this writing is not to show his faults;
and indeed, the writer does not know them, any more than he knows the
full virtue of this man who for eighty long years has lived his life
openly among his people, and who is the freest from adverse criticism
in his community. Men are not measured by their faults, but by their
worthy deeds and qualities. In the scales of eternal justice the main
requirement is that our virtues outweigh our failings. Curiously
enough, the only current criticism of President Smith, among those who
oppose him, is that he is too loyal to his people, his friends, his
convictions. Is not that the eternal cry of the enemy who reaches out
for deserters? {654} In every manly quality, friend and foe agree that
he reaches above the majority of men.

Sure is our President of his reward. For him God will richly provide.
Our question may rather be, has he had during the earth's journey, his
full measure of reward? Have we done our full duty? For the cause of
the Church he was bereft of father and mother. In the service of the
Church he has been unable to use his splendid talents for the gathering
of wealth--in our day he might justly be called a poor man. The ease of
life has been denied him, for almost daily he has been "under orders."
Above all, as a leader in Israel, the calumny and hatred of the Church
have been heaped upon him. Only a few years ago, when past his prime,
the most heartless persecution to which any member of the Church has
been submitted was his. For several years an influential newspaper,
standing at that time for the persecution of the Church, by means fair
or foul, printed daily vile cartoons of President Smith and equally
vile editorials about him and his work. Every indignity conceivable to
the human mind was offered him because he was the embodiment of the
Church.

Should the question be put to him, he would answer that he has had a
rich reward. Perhaps he feels, let it be hoped he does, the outpouring
of loving thoughts from the people whenever his name is mentioned. He
has been blessed to serve. That is also a great reward for effort. His
life has been crowned with the assurance, from all, that his work has
been well done. That is the most satisfying reward.

May his health be preserved and his life be lengthened out. There is
much work yet to be done, and men do not frequently rise to the fulness
of his measure! At the beginning of his eighty-first year, the people
give loving greetings and good wishes and heartfelt gratitude to
Joseph F. Smith, President of the Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day
Saints.--_Dr. John A. Widtsoe,_ 1918; also in _Improvement Era,_ Vol.
18, November, 1914, pp. 38-45.

{655}



REMINISCENCES

The _Era_ has asked me to write a few remembrances of incidents
connected with my personal association with the late President Joseph
F. Smith, while they are yet fresh in memory, and it is a pleasure to
comply.

The first time I ever remember seeing Joseph F. Smith was in the then
little village of Wellsville, in the year 1867. He was twenty-eight
years of age, and had recently been chosen one of the twelve apostles.
President Brigham Young and company were making a tour of the northern
settlements, and the new apostle, Joseph F. Smith, was among the
number. I heard him preach in the old meetinghouse at Wellsville,
and I remarked at the time what a fine specimen of young manhood he
was--strong, powerful, with a beautiful voice, so full of sympathy and
affection, so appealing in its tone, that he impressed me, although I
was a youth of but eighteen. He was a handsome man.

At that time I was clerking in a little store owned by Father Ira Ames,
one of the old Kirtland veterans of the Church. Apostle George A. Smith
was one of that company and he was entertained at Brother Ames' home,
where I also lived. I recall that at the dinner table, Father Ames
asked George A. who of the Smiths this young man Joseph F. was.

George A. replied that he was Hyrum's son; his mother, Mary Fielding
Smith.

Brother Ames remarked that he looked like a likely young fellow, and
George A. replied in about these words:

"Yes, I think he will be all right. His father and mother left him when
he was a child, and we have been looking after him to try and help
him along. We first sent him to school, but it was not long before he
licked the {656} schoolmaster, and could not go to school. Then we sent
him on a mission, and he did pretty well at that. I think he will make
good as an apostle."

Some years ago I related this incident to President Smith, and he told
me that the reason he had trouble with the schoolmaster was that the
schoolmaster had a leather strap with which he used to chastise the
children. He was a rather hard-hearted schoolmaster, one of the olden
type that believed in inflicting bodily punishment.

President Smith said: "My little sister was called up (Aunt Martha, now
living in Provo) to be punished. I saw the schoolmaster bring out the
leather strap, and he told the child to hold out her hand. I could not
stand for that. I just spoke up loudly and said, 'Don't whip her with
that,' and at that he came at me and was going to whip me, and instead
of him whipping me, I licked him good and plenty."

At the time of this incident, Joseph F. (for, by that name he was
affectionately called) was about fifteen years of age. But he was a
strong, powerful youth, and his big heart could not tolerate such
punishment, especially if it bordered on the cruel, to be inflicted
upon a little child.

Another incident which I have heard him relate which shows his courage
and integrity, occurred when he was returning from his mission to the
Sandwich Islands, in the fall of 1857. He came home by way of Los
Angeles, by what was called the Southern Route. In that year Johnston's
Army was on the move for Utah, and naturally enough there was much
excitement and bitterness of feeling concerning the "Mormons." In
southern California, just after the little train of wagons had traveled
only a short distance and made their camp, several anti-"Mormon" toughs
rode into the camp on horseback, cursing and swearing and threatening
what they would do to the "Mormons." Joseph F. was a little distance
from the camp gathering wood for the fire, but he saw that the few
members of his own party had {657} cautiously gone into the brush down
the creek, out of sight. When he saw that, he told me, the thought
came into his mind, "Shall I run from these fellows? Why should I
fear them?" With that he marched up with his arm full of wood to the
campfire where one of the ruffians, still with his pistol in his band,
shouting and cursing about the "Mormons," in a loud voice said to
Joseph F.:

"Are you a 'Mormon'?"

And the answer came straight, "Yes, siree; dyed in the wool; true blue,
through and through."

At that the ruffian grasped him by the hand and said:

"Well, you are the ---- ---- pleasantest man I ever met! Shake, young
fellow, I am glad to see a man that stands up for his convictions."

These incidents show the inherent bravery, courage, integrity of the
man, and also tenderness and pity for the little helpless sister. These
are the qualities upon which great men are builded.

In the spring of 1877, I was called to accompany President Smith on
a mission to Europe. I was called by him to labor in the business
affairs of the Liverpool office, and from that time until the day of
his death, I think I have enjoyed his personal confidence more than any
man living. When I look back on it all now, I can see what a treasure,
a blessing, a favor from the Almighty it has been to me.

During the last eleven years, especially, I have traveled with him
almost constantly whenever he has gone from home. I have been with him
on three different trips to Europe, including the first missionary trip
above mentioned, and on four trips to the Sandwich Islands. Everywhere,
on all occasions, I have found him the same great, brave, true-hearted,
noble and magnificent leader, so simple and unaffected, so entirely
democratic and unassuming.

He was always careful with his expenditures, too. He abhorred debt, and
no man have I ever known who was {658} so prompt to pay an obligation
to the last penny. He could not rest until the Church was out of debt,
and though hundreds of schemes, and many of them extra good schemes,
too, were presented to him, which no doubt would have meant an increase
of wealth for the Church, yet he resolutely set his face against debt;
and would not, under any conditions or circumstances, involve the
Church in that way. Neither would he himself become involved in debt in
his own individual affairs, but he stuck persistently to the old motto,
"Pay as you go."

Many of the older people now alive can recall that forty years ago, or
even less, he was considered a radical, and many a one of that time
shook his head and said, "What will become of things if that fiery
radical ever becomes president of the Church?" But from the time he was
made president of the Church, and even before that time, he became one
of the most tolerant of men, tolerant of others' opinions; and while he
would denounce sin with such righteous wrath as you would seldom see in
any man, yet for the poor sinner he had compassion and pity, and even
forgiveness, if sincere repentance were shown. None more ready than he
to forgive and forget.

One touching little incident I recall which occurred on our first trip
to the Sandwich Islands. As we landed at the wharf in Honolulu, the
native Saints were out in great numbers with their wreaths of leis,
beautiful flowers of every variety and hue. We were loaded with them,
he, of course, more than anyone else. The noted Hawaiian band was there
playing welcome, as it often does to incoming steamship companies.
But on this occasion the band had been instructed by the Mayor to go
up to the "Mormon" meetinghouse and there play selections during the
festivities which the natives had arranged for. It was a beautiful
sight to see the deep-seated love, the even tearful affection, that
these people had for him. In the midst of it all I noticed a {659} poor
old blind woman, tottering under the weight of about ninety years,
being led in. She had a few choice bananas in her hand. It was her
all--her offering. She was calling, "Iosepa, Iosepa." Instantly, when
he saw her, he ran to her and clasped her in his arms, hugged her, and
kissed her over and over again, patting her on the head saying, "Mama,
Mama, my dear old Mama."

And with tears streaming down his cheeks he turned to me and said,
"Charlie, she nursed me when I was a boy, sick and without anyone to
care for me. She took me in and was a mother to me."

Oh, it was touching--it was pathetic. It was beautiful to see the
great, noble soul in loving, tender remembrance of kindness extended
to him, more than fifty years before; and the poor old soul who had
brought her love offering--a few bananas--it was all she had--to put
into the hand of her loved Iosepa!

On these ocean trips there was much spare time, and we often whiled
away an hour or two playing checkers. He could play a good game of
checkers, much better than I. In fact, he could beat me four times out
of five, but once in a while, when I played more cautiously, and no
doubt when he was more careless, I could beat him. If he was beating
me right along and I made an awkward move, and could see instantly
that I had moved the wrong checker, he would allow me to draw it back
if I noticed it immediately; but on the other band, if I had beaten
him for a game or two and should put my finger on a checker to draw it
back, even though it were on the instant, he would call out with force
enough, and that positive way of his, "No you don't, you leave it right
there." It is in these little incidents that we show the human side of
our natures.

He loved sport--manly sport. He was a natural athlete; and in his youth
at foot-racing, jumping, wrestling, which were among the primitive
sports of primitive days, he {660} was a match for anyone. In later
years I had induced him to take up with the ancient and royal Scottish
game of golf. He got so that he could play a very good game, excellent
indeed for a man of his years. But on one occasion, down at Santa
Monica, when we were playing, we were up within about one hundred feet
of the flag at the hole we were making for. A light stroke should have
driven the ball nearer the flag, but the inclination to look up as one
tries to hit the ball got the best of him, and the consequence was he
topped the ball and it rolled only a couple of feet or so. He bent over
for the next stroke, and the one thing which all golfers most fear,
and the hardest to overcome, is that habit of looking up or taking the
eye off the ball just as you go to strike. This he did, the second
time, when he topped it again and it moved but a few feet further. The
third time he went up to it and hit it a whack that sent it rolling one
hundred feet beyond the flag. His son, Wesley, who was playing with us,
called out, "Why, papa, what did you do that for? You knew it would
roll away down there in the ditch!" The President straightened up and
said, with a smile, "Well, I was mad at it!" I have laughed hundreds of
times at that, "I was mad at it."

Of course, we agreed well together, otherwise we would not have been
companionable during all these years. But sometimes I could not fully
agree with him on some matters that we discussed. I recall one night
we were on shipboard returning from Europe, in 1906. It was a bright,
moonlight night, and we stood there leaning over the railing enjoying
the smooth sea and balmy summer night air. The Smoot investigation,
which had just occurred a little while before and which had stirred
up so much controversy throughout the land, was fresh in our minds,
and we were talking of it. I took the position that it would be unwise
for Reed Smoot to be re-elected to the United States Senate. I was
conscientious in my objection, and I had marshaled {661} all the facts,
arguments, and logic that I could; and I was well informed, I thought,
on the subject, and had presented them to him in as clear and yet in
as adroit a manner as I possibly could. It would take too much space
here to go over the arguments, but it seemed to me that I had the best
of it. I could see he began to listen with some little impatience, and
yet he let me have my say, but he answered in tones and in a way that
I shall never forget. Bringing his fist down with some force on the
railing between us, he said, in the most forceful and positive manner:

"If ever the Spirit of the Lord has manifested to me anything clear and
plain and positive, it is this, that Reed Smoot should remain in the
United States Senate. He can do more good there than he can anywhere
else."

Of course, I did not contend further with him, but accepted from that
hour his view of the case and made it mine, too. Twelve years have
passed since that time, and looking back on it now, I cannot help but
think how marvelously and splendidly the inspiration of the Almighty
has been vindicated, while my arguments, facts and logic have all
fallen to the ground.

During the last six or eight years, hundreds of prominent people,
Democrats as well as Republicans, passing through Salt Lake City,
even Secretary McAdoo, himself, among them, have stated to President
Smith that Utah had a great big man in the United States Senate in the
person of Senator Reed Smoot. President Smith's judgment, or rather his
inspiration in this matter, has been vindicated to the last degree.

As a preacher of righteousness, who could compare with him? He was the
greatest that I ever heard--strong, powerful, clear, appealing. It was
marvelous how the words of living light and fire flowed from him. He
was a born preacher, and yet he did not set himself up to be such. He
never thought highly of his own good qualities. Rather, he {662} was
simple, plain and unaffected to the last degree; and yet, there was
dignity with it all which enabled anyone and everyone to say: "He is a
man among men!" I ask, as preacher, leader, teacher, husband, father,
citizen and man, who among our mighty ones can be likened unto him?

He loved a good story and a good joke. There was a good laugh in him
always. He had no patience with vile stories, but there was a fine
vein of humor in him, and could relate incidents of his early life and
entertain the crowd about him as few men ever could.

He was the most methodical in all his work of any person I ever knew.
Every letter that he received had to be indorsed by him with the date
and any other information, and all carefully filed away. He could not
stand for disorder. Everything in connection with his work was orderly.
He could pack his suitcase or a trunk and line out and smooth every
piece of clothing in it so it would bold more and be better packed than
if anybody else had done it. His clothes, too, were always clean. Most
men as they grow old are likely to have their clothes more or less
spotted through dropping food on their clothing. But not so with him.
To his last day his clothes were as clean and as well taken care of as
if he had been a young man of thirty.

He was a most strenuous worker and never considered saving himself
at all. You could go up to his little office in the Beehive most any
night when he was well, and find him writing letters or attending to
some other work. Perhaps some dear old soul had written him a personal
letter, and he would work into the night answering it with his own
hand. Indeed, he over-worked himself and no doubt injured his strong
constitution.

He was careless about eating--careless as to what he ate and when he
ate. His living was exceedingly simple and plain. He rarely got to bed
before midnight, and the consequence was he did not get sufficient
sleep and rest.

{663} He was very fond of music and loved to sing the songs of Zion.

His love for little children was unbounded. During the trip we took
last year down through the southern settlements to St. George and
return, when the troops of little children were paraded before him, it
was beautiful to see how he adored these little ones. It was my duty to
try and get the company started, to make time to the next settlement
where the crowds would be waiting for us, but it was a difficult task
to pull him away from the little children. He wanted to shake hands
with and talk to every one of them.

Once in a while someone would come up to him and say, "President Smith,
I believe I am a kinsman of yours."

I knew then that we were good for another ten minutes' delay, for that
great heart of his, that went out to every kinsman as well as to the
little children, could not be torn away quickly from anyone claiming
kinship with him.

I have visited at his home when one of his children was down sick. I
have seen him come home from his work at night tired, as he naturally
would be, and yet he would walk the floor for hours with that little
one in his arms, petting it and loving it, encouraging it in every way
with such tenderness and such a soul of pity and love as not one mother
in a thousand would show.

While he was a hard-headed, successful business man, yet very few in
this dispensation have been more gifted with spiritual insight than
he. As we were returning from an eastern trip, some years ago, on the
train just east of Green River, I saw him go out to the end of the car
on the platform, and immediately return and hesitate a moment, and then
sit down in the seat just ahead of me. He had just taken his seat when
something went wrong with the train. A broken rail had been the means
of ditching the engine and had thrown most of the cars off the track.
In the sleeper we were shaken up pretty badly, but our car remained on
the track.

{664} The President immediately said to me that he had gone on the
platform when he heard a voice saying, "Go in and sit down."

He came in, and I noticed him stand a moment and he seemed to hesitate,
but he sat down.

He said further that as he came in and stood in the aisle he thought,
"Oh, pshaw, perhaps it is only my imagination;" when he heard the voice
again, "Sit down," and he immediately took his seat, and the result was
as I have stated.

He, no doubt, would have been very seriously injured had he remained
on the platform of that car, as the cars were all jammed up together
pretty badly. He said, "I have heard that voice a good many times in my
life, and I have always profited by obeying it."

On another occasion, at a function which was held in the palatial
home of Mr. and Mrs. A. W. McCune, he made an extended talk to the
gathering. He then said that when a certain brother who had been called
to a responsible position in the Church was chosen for that position,
he himself had never heard this spiritual voice more plainly and more
clearly telling him what to do, than in this naming of the individual
who was to be called for that certain office.

He lived in close communion with the Spirit of the Lord, and his life
was so exemplary and chaste that the Lord could easily manifest himself
to his servant. Truly he could say, "Speak, Lord, for thy servant
heareth." Not every servant can hear when He speaks. But the heart of
President Smith was attuned to the Celestial melodies--he could hear,
and did hear.

What shall I say of the grand and glorious work that he has done in
rearing the large and splendid family that he leaves behind? What a
noble work for any man! Indeed no man without great nobility of soul
could have accomplished it. Is not this bringing up a good family, and
a large {665} family of good citizens, good men and women, good for the
Church, for the State, and for the Nation? Is not this, I say, about
the most God-like piece of work that a man can do in this world? The
thinking mind, who goes into this question deep enough, will see that
here is the work, not only of a man, of a great man, but of a God in
embryo. The whole Church can take pride in the vindication of this
great principle which he had so successfully wrought out. No ordinary
man could accomplish that. Happy the wife who can call him husband.
Happy and blessed indeed the children who call him father. Never was
man more moral and chaste and virtuous to the last fiber of his being
than he. Against all forms or thoughts of licentiousness, he was set,
and as immovable as a mountain. "Blessed are the pure in heart," and as
he was the very purest--he shall see God.

It is written that a truly great man is known by the number of beings
he loves and blesses, and by the number of beings who love and bless
him. Judged by that standard alone, where is his equal to be found in
all this world!

I can say of Joseph F. Smith as Carlyle said of Luther, that he was
truly a great man, "great in intellect, in courage, in affection,
and in integrity. Great, not as a hewn obelisk, but as an Alpine
mountain." No heart ever beat truer to every principle of manhood and
righteousness and justice and mercy than his; that great heart, encased
in his magnificent frame, made him the biggest, the bravest, the
tenderest, the purest and best of all men who walked the earth in his
time!

  "His life was gentle, and the elements
  So mix'd in him, that Nature might stand up
  And say to all the world, 'This was a Man!'"

--_Charles W. Nibley,_ Presiding Bishop of the Church, _Improvement
Era,_ Vol. 22, January, 1919, pp. 191-198.

{666}



A BIOGRAPHICAL SKETCH

It was John Locke, the great characteristic English philosopher, who,
at the age of thirty, wrote:

"I no sooner perceived myself in the world, but I found myself in a
storm which has lasted hitherto."

To Joseph F. Smith, who is among the greatest and most unique and
notable individualities of that peculiar people, the Latter-day Saints,
this sentence of Locke's is especially applicable. Only, his was
enveloped in storm before he could perceive. He is the son of Hyrum
Smith, the second patriarch of the Church, and brother of the Prophet
Joseph. His mother was Mary Fielding, of English origin, a woman
of bright and strong mind and of excellent business administrative
qualities.

It was during the Missouri troubles. Governor Boggs had issued his
order to exterminate the "Mormons." On the first day of November, 1838,
through the heartless treachery of Colonel Hinkle, Joseph and Hyrum
and several other leaders of the people were betrayed into the hands
of an armed mob under General Clark. They were to be taken prisoners,
and confined in jail, and perhaps shot. On the following day, these
betrayed leaders were given a few moments to bid farewell to their
families. Under a strong guard of militia mobocrats, Hyrum was marched
to his home in Far West, and, at the point of the bayonet, with oaths
and curses, was ordered to take his last farewell of his wife; for his
"doom was sealed" and he was told that he would never see her again.
Imagine such a shock to his companion! It would have overpowered and
come near ending the life of an ordinary person. But with the natural
strength of her mind, coupled with the sustaining care of God, she was
upheld in this fiery trial with its added miseries {667} to follow. It
was on the 13th day of the same month of November, 1838, in the midst
of plunderings, and scenes of severest hardships and persecution, that
she gave birth to her first-born, who was named Joseph Fielding Smith.
In the cold of the following January, leaving four little ones, under
the care of her sister, Mercy R.--children of her husband by a former
wife, then dead--she journeyed in a wagon with her infant to Liberty
Jail in Clay county, where the husband and father was confined, without
trial or conviction, his sole offense being that he was a "Mormon." She
was permitted to visit him in jail, but was later compelled to continue
her flight from Missouri with her children, to seek shelter in Illinois.

Such were the stormy environments of birth, and such was the first
pilgrimage of the infant Joseph who has since compassed the earth and
the islands of the sea, promulgating and defending the principles for
which his father endured imprisonment and later martyrdom, and for
which his mother suffered untold persecution and distress.

Joseph's early years were spent amidst the agitations which culminated
in the martyrdom of his uncle and his father on the memorable 27th
day of June, 1844. After the abandonment of the city by the Twelve,
and when the majority of the Saints had been driven from Nauvoo, in
September, 1846, his mother fled from the city and camped on the
west side of the Mississippi River, among the trees on its banks,
without wagon or tent, during the bombardment of the city by the mob.
Having later succeeded in making exchanges of property in Illinois
for teams and an outfit, she set out for Winter Quarters, on the
Missouri River. Joseph, a lad of only about eight years, drove a yoke
of oxen and a wagon most of the distance through the state of Iowa to
Winter Quarters, and his other occupation, after leaving Nauvoo, was
principally that of herd boy.

On these western plains he drank in the freedom of {668} the spirit of
the West, and developed that physical strength which, notwithstanding
his later sedentary occupation, is still observable in his robust,
erect and muscular form.

He is a lover of strength and a believer in work. "Labor is the key
to the true happiness of the physical and spiritual being. If a man
possesses millions, his children should still be taught how to labor
with their hands; boys and girls should receive a home training which
will fit them to cope with the practical, daily affairs of family life,
even where the conditions are such that they may not have to do this
work themselves; they will then know how to guide and direct others,"
said he, in a recent conversation with the writer.

The great and overpowering desire of all the Saints was to obtain means
to gather to the Valley. For this purpose various kinds of labor were
sought in Iowa and neighboring states, from farming to school teaching.
In the fall of 1847, he drove a team for his mother to St. Joseph for
the purpose of securing provisions to make the coveted journey to the
Salt Lake Valley, in the spring following. The trip was successfully
made.

It was in the fall of that year, while tending his mother's cattle near
Winter Quarters, that he experienced one of the most exciting incidents
of his life. The cattle were their only hope of means for immigration
to the Valley. This fact was deeply impressed upon the boy, so that he
came to view them as a precious heritage, as well as a priceless charge
given to him as a herd boy. He understood the responsibility; and that
is much, for neither Joseph, the boy, nor Joseph, the man, was ever
known to shirk a duty or prove recreant to a responsibility.

One morning, in company with Alden and Thomas Burdick, he set out upon
the usual duties of the day. The cattle were feeding in the valley
some distance from the settlement, which valley was reached in two
ways, one {669} over a "bench" or plateau, the other through a ravine
or small canyon. The boys each had a horse. Joseph's was a bay mare,
swifter than the others. Alden suggested that Thomas and Joseph go
the short route to the left, over the "bench," and he would go up the
canyon to the right, so that they would meet in the valley from the two
directions. The suggestion was gladly adopted, and the two set out with
youthful frolic, and soon arrived at the upper end of the valley, where
the cattle could be seen feeding by a stream which divided it in the
center and wound down the canyon from the direction of the settlement.
Having the day before them, they amused themselves with "running" their
horses, and, later, in "jumping" them over a little gully in the upper
part of the valley. As they were engaged in this amusement, suddenly a
band of twenty or thirty Indians came into view around a point in the
lower end of the valley, some distance below the cattle. Thomas first
saw them, and frantically yelled, "Indians," at the same time turning
his horse for the "bench" to ride for home. Joseph started to follow,
but the thought came to his mind, "My cattle, I must save my cattle!"
From that moment, only this thought filled his mind; everything else
was blank and dark. He headed his horse for the Indians, to get around
the herd before the reds should reach it. One Indian, naked like the
others, having only a cloth around the loins, passed him, flying to
catch Thomas. Joseph reached the head of the herd, and succeeded in
turning the cattle up the ravine just as the Indians approached. His
efforts, coupled with the rush and yells of the Indians, stampeded the
herd, followed by Joseph, who by keeping his horse on the "dead" run,
succeeded for some time in keeping between the herd and the Indians.
Here was a picture! the boy, the cattle, the Indians, headed on the
run for the settlement! Finally the reds cut him away from the herd,
whereupon he turned, going down stream a distance, then circling around
{670} the ravine to the right, to reach the cattle from the other side.
He had not gone far in that direction when other Indians were seen.
They started for him, overtaking him as he emerged from the valley. He
still spurred his horse, going at full speed, and while thus riding,
two of the naked reds closed up beside him in the wild race, and took
him, while the horses were going at full speed, one by the left arm
and the other by the right leg, and lifted him from the saddle, for a
moment holding him in the air, then suddenly dropping him to the ground.

Undoubtedly he would have been scalped but for the timely appearance of
a company of men going to the hay fields, on the opposite side of the
ravine, which scared the thieving Indians away, they having obtained
both the boys' horses for their pains. In the meantime Thomas had given
the alarm. Two relief companies were formed in the settlement, one a
posse of horsemen under Hosea Stout, who went up the canyon and found
the cattle with Alden Burdick (the pursuing Indians having abandoned
the chase from fright), while the other took the "bench" route, and
discovered Joseph, who with them spent the day in a fruitless search
for the Indians and the cattle supposed to have been stolen. "I
remember, on my way home," says Joseph, "how I sat down and wept for my
cattle, and how the thought of meeting mother, who could not now go to
the Valley, wrung my soul with anguish." But happily, his bravery and
fidelity to trust, which are indissolubly interwoven with his character
as a man, had saved the herd.

Leaving Winter Quarters in the spring of 1848, they reached the Salt
Lake Valley on September 23, Joseph driving two yoke of oxen with a
heavily loaded wagon the whole distance. He performed all the duties of
a day watchman, herdsman and teamster, with other requirements imposed
upon the men. Arriving in Salt Lake City, he again had charge of the
herds, interchanging with such labors as {671} plowing, canyon work,
harvesting and fencing. During this whole time he never lost an animal
entrusted to his care, this notwithstanding the numerous large wolves
abounding in the country.

His education was obtained from his mother who early taught him, in the
tent, in the camp, on the prairie, to read from the Bible. He has had
no other, save that sterner education gathered from the practical pages
of life. But his opportunities in later years have not gone unused, and
there are few college-bred men who delight more in books than Joseph.
He is, too, a fair judge of the manner and matter of books. His leisure
for reading is limited, owing to his constant employment in the affairs
of the Church; but he loves to read books of history, philosophy,
science; and has specially delighted in such authors as Seiss and
Samuel Smiles, who may be said to be his favorites. He is fond of
music, of which, though not a judge, he is a great lover, especially
enjoying the music of the human voice.

In 1852 his mother died, leaving him an orphan at the age of fourteen.
When fifteen years of age, he, with other young men, was called on his
first mission to the Sandwich Islands. The incidents of the journey to
the coast by horses, his work in the mountains at a shingle mill for
means to proceed, and the embarkment and journey on the _Vaquero_ for
the islands, are sufficient for a long chapter in themselves; while
his labors in the Maui conference, under President F. A. Hammond, his
efforts to learn the language in the district of Kula, his attack of
sickness, the most severe of his life, caused by the Panama fever, and
his other labors and varied, trying experiences while there, would fill
a volume. He says, "Of the many gifts of the Spirit which were manifest
through my administration, next to my acquirements of the language, the
most prominent was perhaps the gift of healing, and by the power of God
the casting out of evil spirits, which frequently occurred."

{672} One incident shows how the Lord is with his servants: Joseph was
studying the language, being alone with a native family in Wailuku.
One night, while he sat by a dismal light poring over his books in
one corner of the room where dwelt a native and his wife, the woman
was suddenly possessed; she arose and looking toward Joseph made the
most fearful noises and gestures, accompanied by terrible physical
contortions. Her husband came on his bended knees and crouched beside
him, frightened to trembling. The fear that our young missionary felt
under those circumstances was something indescribable, but presently
it all left him, and he stood up facing the maniac woman, exclaiming:
"In the name of the Lord Jesus Christ, I rebuke you." Like a flash, the
woman fell to the floor like one dead. The husband went to ascertain if
she were alive, and pronounced her dead. Then he returned, and set up a
perfect howl, which Joseph likewise rebuked. What should Joseph do? His
first impression was to get away from the horrid surrounding, but upon
reflection he decided that such action would not be wise. His feelings
were indescribable, but having rebuked the evil, it was subdued, peace
was restored, and he proceeded again with his studies. These are the
class of experiences that bring a lone missionary, young as he was,
close to the Lord.

After his release, and while returning from the mission in Hawaii, this
incident occurred: At Honolulu he went on board the barque _Yankee,_ on
October 6, 1857, and with a company of elders landed in San Francisco,
about the end of the month. With Edward Partridge, he went down the
coast to Santa Cruz County, Cal., and from thence with a company of
Saints, under Captain Charles W. Wandell, southward to the Mojave
river, where he and others left the company and made a visit to San
Bernardino on their way to the Salt Lake Valley. It must be said that
the feeling against the "Mormons," first, on account of the exaggerated
{673} reports of the Mountain Meadows massacre, and secondly, because
of the coming of Johnston's army to Utah, was exceedingly bitter on
the coast. As an illustration: While they were in Los Angeles, a man,
William Wall by name, came near being hung because he had confessed
he was a "Mormon." A mob of men had passed sentence on him, and had
prepared every detail to hang him. It was only through the wise counsel
of a man among them, whose better judgment prevailed, that he was not
hung. This man pointed out to the mob that here was a man who had not
been near Utah when the massacre took place, a man who had no sympathy
with it, who could in no way be counted as a criminal. Why should he
suffer? And so Wall was finally discharged and given time to get out
of the country. It was under such conditions, and such prevailing
sentiment, that President Smith, then a lad of nineteen, found himself
on his journey home, and on his trip to San Bernardino.

With another man, and a mail carrier, he took passage in a mail
wagon. They traveled all night, and at daylight stopped near a ranch
for breakfast. The passenger and the mail carrier began to prepare
breakfast, while Joseph went a short distance from camp to look after
the horses. Just while the carrier was frying eggs, a wagon load of
drunken men from Monte came in view, on their road to San Bernardino to
kill the "Mormons," as they boasted.

The oaths and foul language which they uttered, between their shooting,
and the swinging of their pistols, were almost indescribable and
unendurable. Only the West in its palmiest frontier days could produce
anything like its equal. They were all cursing the "Mormons," and
uttering boasts of what they would do when they met them. They got out
at the ranch, and one of them, tumbling around, caught sight of the
mail wagon, and made his way towards it. The passenger and the mail
carrier, fearing for their safety, had retired behind the chaparral,
leaving all the {674} baggage and supplies, including the frying eggs,
exposed and unprotected.

Just as the drunken man approached, President Smith came in view on his
way to the camp, too late to hide, for he had been seen. The ruffian
was swinging his weapon, and uttering the most blood-curdling oaths
and threats ever heard against the "Mormons." "I dared not run," says
President Smith, "though I trembled for fear which I dared not show.
I therefore walked right up to the camp fire and arrived there just a
minute or two before the drunken desperado, who came directly toward
me, and, swinging his revolver in my face, with an oath cried out: 'Are
you a ---- ---- ---- "Mormon?"'"

President Smith looked him straight in the eyes, and answered with
emphasis: "Yes, sir'ee; dyed in the wool; true blue, through and
through."

The desperado's arms both dropped by his sides, as if paralyzed,
his pistol in one hand, and he said in a subdued and maudlin voice,
offering his hand: "Well, you are the ---- ---- pleasantest man I
ever met! Shake. I am glad to see a fellow stand for his convictions."
Then he turned and made his way to the ranch house. Later in the day,
on seeing President Smith, he only pulled his slouch hat over his eyes,
and said not a word.

In 1858, Joseph F. Smith joined the militia which intercepted
Johnston's army, serving until the close of hostilities, under Colonel
Thomas Callister. He was later chaplain of Colonel Heber C. Kimball's
regiment, with the rank of captain. He took part in many Indian
expeditions, and was in every sense a minute man in the Utah militia.

In the spring of 1860, though only about 22 years of age, he was sent
on a mission to Great Britain. As he had no money, he and his cousin
Samuel H. B. Smith, each drove a four-mule team over the plains to
Winter Quarters to pay their way. It happened that the owners of these
teams were {675} rank apostates, so that when the young men arrived at
their destination, it was very well known that they were Latter-day
Saints. They were moneyless, and decided finally to go to Des Moines
where they tried without success to get something to do. They hunted
for work in the harvest fields, but found no one who wished to employ
them. The feeling was still bitter against the "Mormons" in this
region, for it was only about fourteen years since the remnant of the
Saints had been driven from Nauvoo. One day they met a man who asked
them who they were, and where they were going, and having been told
that they were going to England on a mission, the man stated that he
had a sister in England whom he wished to emigrate, and asked that
they take the money with them for her emigration. He stated that they
might use it as they saw fit; provided on arrival they would let his
sister have the money to pay her passage to America. They agreed to
this, and immediately went on their way to Burlington where they took
a steamer for Nauvoo; but when they got on board they learned that the
steamer would not land at that place, as they had been told; and they
also heard the most bitter imprecations against the Latter-day Saints,
uttered in the most profane and indecent language.

Landing at Montrose, where the boat took on freight, the feeling was
still more bitter. The Saints were cursed, and boasts were made of what
evil would befall any "Mormon" who would dare to make his appearance.
Getting on board the skiff next morning, which was to carry them over
to Nauvoo, the young men found that the spirit of the mob was just as
bitter as ever, but it was not known here that they were "Mormons."
Several men asked them who they were, and their replies were evasive.
Finally, a Catholic priest came to them and asked where they were from.
"Oh! from the West," was the reply.

"How far West?"

{676} "From the Rocky Mountains."

But the priest finally pinned them down by asking, "Are you 'Mormon'
elders from Utah?"

President Smith says that under those circumstances, for a moment,
never had temptation to deny the truth come to him with stronger force,
but it was only for a moment. He answered, "Yes, sir, we are 'Mormon'
missionaries on our way to England."

The reply seemed to satisfy the priest; and, contrary to expectations,
it did not in the least increase the imprecations of the passengers.
When they landed at Nauvoo, they went directly to the Mansion House,
and, strange to say, the Catholic priest also stayed there. If they had
not truthfully answered the queries on the boat, he would have found
them out here, to their shame.

"I had never felt happier," says President Smith, "than when I saw
the minister there, and knew that we had told him the truth about our
mission."

On this mission he served nearly three years, returning in the summer
of 1863; it was during these years that the intimacy between President
George Q. Cannon, who presided over the mission, and Joseph F. Smith
began; friendship and love for each other were engendered, which have
since grown stronger through the intimate careers of two beautiful
lives. On his return, President Young proposed at a priesthood meeting
that Joseph and his cousin, Samuel, each be given a present of $1,000
to begin life with. President Smith realized in the neighborhood of $75
in provisions and merchandise, but mostly a legacy of much annoyance
from certain people who entertained the current thought that he had
thus obtained a small fortune. With the exception of the cost of his
passage and stage fare home, which was sent him by his aunt, Mercy R.
Thompson, amounting to about $100, he paid his own expenses throughout,
as he had done on previous missions.

{677} President Smith has been too busy with his work to make money,
and his temporal affairs are a strong testimony to his exclusive
devotion to the public good.

He had only been at home a short time, when, in the early spring of
1864, he was called to accompany Ezra T. Benson and Lorenzo Snow on
a second mission to the Sandwich Islands to regulate the affairs of
that mission, which had been greatly disarranged by the well-known,
shrewd and covetous actions of Walter M. Gibson. In this mission he
acted as principal interpreter for the apostles. After Gibson was
excommunicated from the Church, Joseph was left in charge of the
mission, with W. W. Cluff and Alma L. Smith as his fellow-laborers. It
was many months after Gibson had been cut off before his people left
his jurisdiction and returned to the standard of the Church. Among the
works accomplished by Joseph and his associates on this mission was the
selection of the Laie plantation as a gathering place for the Saints,
which was afterwards on their recommendation, purchased by a committee
sent for that purpose by President Young, and which has proven a
valuable possession for the mission, and for the Church in a general
way. Joseph and his aids returned in the winter of 1864-1865.

It was while on this mission that the drowning incident occurred,
mentioned in Whitney's sketch of President Lorenzo Snow. President
Smith's part in the affair has never been fully told. The ship upon
which they arrived lay anchored in the channel in which the sea was
nearly always rough. A breakwater had been built, under shelter of
which the natives skilfully steered their boats ashore. There was much
danger, however, in approaching it. When it was proposed that the
party should land in the ship's unwieldy freight-boat, President Smith
strongly opposed the proposition, telling the brethren that at the
breakwater there was great danger of capsizing, the boat being a clumsy
old tub, {678} unfit for such a load. He refused to go ashore, and
tried to prevail upon the others to abandon the attempt until a better
boat could be obtained. He offered to go ashore alone, and to return
with a safer boat to land the party. So persistent, however, were some
of the brethren, that he was chided for his waywardness, and one of the
apostles even told him: "Young man, you would better obey counsel." But
he reiterated his impression of danger, refusing positively to land in
that boat, and again offering to go alone for a better boat. But the
brethren persisted, whereupon he asked that they leave their satchels
with their clothes and valuables on the anchored ship with him, and
that he be permitted to stay. This they reluctantly consented to do,
and set out for land.

Joseph stood upon the ship and saw them depart, filled with the
greatest apprehension for their safety. When the party reached the
breakwater, he saw one of the great waves suddenly overturn the boat,
dropping the company into twenty or thirty feet of water. A boat came
out from shore, manned with natives, who set to work to gather them up,
and obtained all but President Snow, when the boat which picked them
up started for land. It was then that Elder W. W. Cluff demanded that
they return for Brother Snow, who would otherwise have been abandoned
and left for drowned. He was found and dragged into the boat for dead,
his life being thus saved by Brother Cluff. All this time, Joseph stood
in the greatest agony as a witness, helpless, on the deck of the ship.
His first information of his companions' fate came from some passing
natives who replied to his inquiry that one of the men (Brother Snow)
was dead. But through the blessings of God and self-effort it was,
fortunately, not quite so serious, his life having been restored.

Joseph had saved himself and the satchels, and he has always considered
that while the brethren fatefully said of the incident: "It was to
be," that a prevention in this case {679} would have been much better
than a cure. The incident illustrates two predominating traits in his
character: When he is convinced of the truth, he is not afraid to
express himself in its favor to any man on earth. When he does express
himself, it is often with such earnestness and vigor that there is
danger of his giving offense.

On his return home, he labored in the Church historian's office for a
number of years; also as clerk in the endowment house, succeeding Elder
John V. Long in that capacity; being in charge, after the death of
President Young, until it was closed. He had been ordained an apostle
under the hands of President Young, on July 1, 1866, and on the 8th of
October, 1867, he was appointed to fill a vacancy in the quorum of the
Twelve Apostles. In the year following, he was sent with Elder Wilford
Woodruff of the Council of the Twelve and Elder A. O. Smoot to Utah
county. Here he served one term in the Provo city council.

On February 28, 1874, he went on his second mission to England, where
he presided over the European mission, returning in 1875, after the
death of President George A. Smith. On his return he was appointed to
preside over the Davis stake, until the spring of 1877, when he left
on his third British mission, having first witnessed the dedication of
the first temple in the Rocky Mountains, at St. George, April, 1877. He
arrived in Liverpool, May 27, and was joined a short time afterwards
by Elder Orson Pratt, who had been sent to publish new editions of the
Book of Mormon and the Doctrine and Covenants. When news arrived of
the death of President Young, they were released, and returned home,
arriving in Salt Lake City, September 27.

In August of the following year, he was sent with Elder Orson Pratt on
a short eastern mission, visiting noted places in the history of the
Church in Missouri, Ohio, New York and Illinois. It was on this trip
that they had their {680} famous interview with David Whitmer. When the
First Presidency was organized, in October, 1880, he was chosen second
counselor to President John Taylor, who died July 25, 1887. He was
chosen to the same position in the Presidency under President Woodruff;
and holds it at present under President Snow.

It would require too much space to name his various civil positions
held in Salt Lake City, and in the legislature of the territory, where
he served the people long and faithfully. All my readers are familiar
with the work of his recent years; it is like an open book to the whole
people.

So he has been constantly in the service of the public, and by his
straightforward course has won the love, confidence and esteem
of the whole community. He is a friend of the people, is easily
approached, a wise counselor, a man of broad views, and contrary to
first impressions, is a man whose sympathies are easily aroused. He
is a reflex of the best character of the "Mormon" people--inured to
hardships, patient in trial, God-fearing, self-sacrificing, full
of love for the human race, powerful in moral, mental and physical
strength.

President Joseph F. Smith has an imposing physical appearance. Now
completing his 62nd year, he is tall, erect, well-knit and symmetrical
in build. He has a prominent nose and features. When speaking, he
throws his full, clear, brown eyes wide open on the listener who may
readily perceive from their penetrating glimpse the wonderful mental
power of the tall forehead above. His large head is crowned with an
abundant growth of hair, in his early years dark, but now, like his
full beard, tinged with a liberal sprinkling of gray. In conversation,
one is forcibly impressed with the sudden changes in appearance of his
countenance, under the different influences of his mind; now intensely
present, with an enthusiastic and childlike interest in immediate
subjects and surroundings; now absent, the {681} nobility of his
features, set in that earnest, almost stern, majesty of expression so
characteristic of his portraits--so indicative of the severity of the
conditions and environments of his early life.

As a public speaker, his leading trait is an intense earnestness. He
impresses the hearer with his message more from the sincerity and
simplicity of its delivery, and the honest earnestness of his manner,
than from any learned exhibition of oratory or studied display of
logic. He touches the hearts of the people with the simple eloquence
of one who is himself convinced of the truth presented. He is a pillar
of strength in the Church, thoroughly imbued with the truths of the
gospel, and the divine origin of God's great latter-day work. His whole
life and testimony are an inspiration to the young.

I said to him: "You knew Joseph, the prophet; you are old in the work
of the Church; what is your testimony to the youth of Zion concerning
these things?" And he replied slowly and deliberately:

"I was acquainted with the Prophet Joseph in my youth. I was familiar
in his home, with his boys and with his family. I have sat on his knee,
I have heard him preach, distinctly remembering being present in the
council with my father and the Prophet Joseph Smith and others. From my
childhood to youth I believed him to be a Prophet of God. From my youth
until the present I have not believed that he was a Prophet, for I
have known that he was. In other words, my knowledge has superceded my
belief. I remember seeing him dressed in military uniform at the bead
of the Nauvoo Legion. I saw him when he crossed the river, returning,
from his intended western trip into the Rocky Mountains, to go to his
martyrdom, and I saw his lifeless body together with that of my father
after they were murdered in Carthage jail; and still have the most
palpable remembrance of the gloom and sorrow of those dreadful days.
{682} I believe in the divine mission of the prophets of the nineteenth
century with all my heart, and in the authenticity of the Book of
Mormon and the inspiration of the book of Doctrine and Covenants, and
hope to be faithful to God and man and not false to myself, to the end
of my days."--_Edward H. Anderson,_ in _Lives of Our Leaders,_ and
_Juvenile Instructor,_ 1901.

{683}



LAST OF THE OLD SCHOOL OF VETERAN LEADERS.

Surrounded by members of his family, President Joseph F. Smith
peacefully closed his active life upon earth, on Tuesday morning, at
4:50 o'clock, November 19, 1918, at his home, the Beehive House, Salt
lake City, Utah. His noble work on earth is ended. He served the people
of the Church in almost every useful private and public capacity all
his life. He mounted, round by round, on the ladder of experience, as
herd boy, pioneer, teacher, missionary, legislator, counselor; and for
the past seventeen wonderful years was leader and mouthpiece of the
Church of Jesus Christ of Latter-day Saints.

President Smith's administration began October 17, 1901, when he was
chosen by the Twelve and set apart as President of the Church of Jesus
Christ of Latter-day Saints, the choice being ratified by a special
conference and solemn assembly of the priesthood, on Sunday, November
10, 1901. Hence, for a few days more than seventeen years, he stood at
the head of God's "marvelous work and a wonder," upon the earth. His
leadership was characterized by a steady growth of the people in both
spiritual and temporal affairs. Much of their progress was stimulated
by his forethought and consideration, by his inspiration from the Lord
freely granted to the people, and by his ability to gather men about
him who willingly co-operated with him for the advancement and progress
of the Church, the state and the community. In both religion and
business, he was conservative, staunch, firm, and yet progressive--a
leader beloved and respected by all. Every Church worker among his
nearest associates, as well as in the stakes of Zion, and in the {684}
far flung missions of the world, fairly loved and admired him, and so
did the members of the Church.

As editor of the _Improvement Era_ and the _Juvenile Instructor,_ and
general superintendent of the Sunday Schools and Young Men's Mutual
Improvement Associations, he was a stimulating power, a fountain of
wisdom to his associates. Had he devoted himself to literary work,
his success in that line would have been quite as marked as in public
discourse and leadership.

He showed great tenderness and love for his large and honorable family.
In his last address to his children, November 10, 1918, his heart's
dearest sentiments were expressed to them in these words: "When I
look around me, and see my boys and my girls whom the Lord has given
to me,--and I have succeeded, with His help, to make them tolerably
comfortable, and at least respectable in the world--I have reached the
treasure of my life, the whole substance that makes life worth living."

He was ever anxious for the welfare of the young people, as well as the
old, and every good effort for their advancement was sanctioned and
supported by him. Even in the midst of the cares, burdens and anxieties
of his active life weighing heavily upon him, he was never known to
be too busy to give counsel, experience, testimony, helpful ideas,
sympathetic consideration to workers or members of the Church who
called upon him. His courtesy to all was proverbial.

The passing of President Joseph F. Smith marks an epoch in the history
of the Church. He was the last of the old school of veteran leaders
who pioneered and founded our commonwealth. The patience with which he
bore the arduous labors of his life, fully, bravely, and cheerfully,
will be a lasting inspiration to all who knew him. The story of his
achievements for the Church, in spiritual and temporal {685} affairs,
during his long administration, would make a volume of thrilling
interest. His mortal lips are sealed in death, but his spirit lives
forever. Beloved by all, the noble workman has gone to his rest, having
done his full duty for the advancement of the "marvelous work and a
wonder," established of the Lord, which must ever continue upon its
triumphant march.--_Edward H. Anderson,_ May, 1919.



INDEX.

  Abraham, 39.
  Adam, 39.
  Administration, to sick, 256,
  Advancement, personal, helps Church, 131.
  Agriculture, 434.
  Almighty, see _God_.
  Amusements, 400, 401.
  Angel, 548.
  Anger, 268.
  Animal, 333.
  Apostle, 221, 222.
      labors in spirit world, 581.
  Apostleship, proselyting office, 217.
  Appetite, 300.
  Army, conduct of boys in, 531.
      message to boys in, 535.
  Atonement, 120.
  Authority, 125, 170.
      all should exercise, 208.
      gives power, 186.
      how administered, 186.
      know duties of, 187.
      man's relation to, 56.
  Authorities, pray for, 279.
  Auxiliary organizations, 179.
      place in Church, 479.
      relation to ward, 480.

  Backbiting, 330.
  Baptism, see _Ordinances_.
  Baptism, 111, 117, 118, 121.
      when to b. children, 120.
  Bible, 57.
  Birth control, see _Children_.
  Birth control, 349, 362.
  Bishop, 225, 230, 233, 234.
  Blessing, how obtained, 60, 84, 296.
      for truth, 12.
      personal, 181, 635, 641.
  Books, 295, 405.
  Book of Mormon, witnesses to, 590.
  Boys, how achieve greatness, 419.
      lesson for, 418.
      taught industry, 432.

  Calamity, Lesson in, 67.
  Calvin, 39, 500.
  Card playing, 410, 411, 412, 413, 415, 416.
  Chance, 408.
  Charity, see _Poor_, see also _Tithing_.
  Charity, 294.
  Child, see Birth control.
  Children, be true to, 353, 398.
      condition of in heaven, 569.
      consult parents, 201.
      do not pledge, 373.
      duties to teach, 365.
      filial affection, 393.
      how to give to, 371.
      in the resurrection, 574.
      relation to parents, 342.
      responsible for, 359.
      teach gospel, 369.
      teach Jesus' death, 370.
      training at home, 367.
      treatment of family members, 355.
      watch your, 365.
      what to teach, 365.
      when to baptize, 120.
  Church, see _Officers_.
  Church, see _Priesthood_, also _Kingdom of God_.
  Church ample for all organizations, 442.
      contempt is heritage, 425.
      democratic institution, 84.
      desires to be known, 139.
      destiny of, 91.
      devil against it, 464.
      duties paramount, 323.
      government, 178.
      house in order, 477.
      how officers chosen, 188.
      how vote in, 196.
      identity unchanged, 140.
      in advance of members, 131.
      is kingdom of God, 87.
      loyal, 518.
      man and, 131.
      message of, 89.
      mission to save, 88.
      no nationalities in, 141, 511.
      no neutrals in, 142.
      no classes in, 141.
      not in politics, 519.
      not man-made, 171.
      not partisan, 170, 517.
      offers peace, 89.
      personal advancement helps, 131.
      political parties and, 519.
      privilege to be associated with, 133.
      purpose and duty of, 87, 191.
      what it stands for, 192.
      worth of standing in, 133.
  Church Leaders, see _Church Officers_.
  Church Leaders, help them, 223.
      be courageous, 193.
      goodness of, 210.
      not self called, 209.
      purpose of visits, 250.
      what advocate, 114.
  Church Records, names to be in, 134.
  Church Schools, agriculture in, 435.
      object of, 441, 485.
      value of, 441.
  Christ, see also _Jesus_.
  Christ the great example, 22.
      his rest, 155.
      taught gospel to Adam, 39.
  Citizen, Saint good, 518.
  Classes, no classes in Church, 141.
  Clubs, no exclusive in Church, 418.
  College, see _School_, see _University_.
  Columbus, 39.
  Comforter, see _Holy Ghost_ and _Holy Spirit_.
  Comforter, Holy Ghost, Holy Spirit, 73.
  Commandments, two great, 339.
  Commencement address, 334.
  Consecration, 299.
  Constitution, loyalty to, 512.
  Contention, 465.
  Cooperation, 443.
  Counsel, 200.
  Courage, leaders must have, 193.
      be not discouraged, 147.
  Courts, avoid, 322.
  Covenants, of Latter-day Saints 132.
  Criminals, 469.

  Daughter, education of, 429.
  Dead, vision of redemption of, 596.
      work for, 593.
  Death and eternal progress, 371.
      nature of, 553.
      spiritual, 544.
  Debt, 325.
  Devil, arrayed against truth, 464.
      his knowledge, 464.
  Difficulty, settlement of, 53.
  Discouragement, 147, 421.
  Disobedience, treatment of, 139.
  Disturbance, Gospel causes, 146.
  Doctrine and Covenants, 56.
  Doctrine, where to expect false, 466.
  Duty, first to household, 386.

  Earth, typical of heaven, 26.
  Edison, 39.
  Education, see _School_.
  Education, danger of false, 392.
      defined, 337.
      for eternity, 338.
      for women, 439.
      industrial pursuits, 427.
      practical, 430.
      value of practical, 428.
  Elders, 230.
      to proclaim gospel, 230.
  Elohim, 85.
  Enemy, in God's hands, 422, 423.
      love your, 421.
      our debt to, 423.
      prayer for, 424.
      those to fear, 426.
  Estates of, exaltation, 85.
  Eternal, life, 538.
      nature of salvation, 13.
      progress and death, 371.
      relations of family, 342.
  Eternity, educate for, 338.
      we live for, 348.
  Evidence, revelation and legal, 49.
  Evil, not caused by God, 69.
      fashions, 416.
      retreat from, 468.
      unchastity dominant, 386.
  Exaltation, estates of, 85.
  Excess, see _Temperance_, _Moderation_.
  Experiments, to be avoided, 337.

  Faith, see _Testimony_.
  Faith, 122.
      be true to, 322.
      reality of, 6.
  False teachings, 464.
  Family, 341.
      basis of government, 203.
      eternity of, 348.
      father presiding authority, 359.
      governed by love, 393.
      importance of filial affection, 393.
      large f. desirable, 352.
      mutual treatment, 355.
      should be example to, 357.
  Fashions, 349, 400, 416, 417.
  Fast day, 298, 306.
  Fasting, 299, 305.
  Father, duties of, 361.
  Father presiding authority of family, 359.
  Female, and male in heaven, 346.
  Final Judgment, and resurrection, 566.
  Find, search and, 151.
  First Presidency, not always apostles, 216.
      relation of members, 219.
      when to organize, 214.
  First Principles, 116, 121.
  Flattery, danger of, 392.
  Food, spirit needs, 262.
  Forestry, 437.
  Forgiveness, 421.
  Franklin, 39.
  Free agency, 58.
  Freedom, use of, 59.
  Saints to exercise, 59.
  Freeze, Mary A., funeral services of, 577.
  Future life, see _Life Hereafter_.
  Future life, condition in, 543.

  Gambling, 407, 408.
  General authorities, see Church Leaders.
  General authorities, questions to, 223.
      temporal support of, 224.
  Gift of Holy Ghost, 124.
  Gift of tongues, 251.
  Gifts of Spirit, 471.
  Giving, to children, 371.
  God, directs work, 64.
      an eternal being, 78.
      attain blessings of, 60.
      at the helm, 168.
      do not limit, 69.
      extent of power, 69.
      fatherhood of, 37.
      fatherly love, 498.
      Father and Son distinct, 83.
      his rest, 71.
      his warfare, 71.
      how to secure blessings of, 84.
      inspires man, 75.
      man, and, 64.
      man in image of, 71.
      need of trust in, 79.
      not author of evil, 69.
      nothing temporal with, 85.
      purposes unchangeable, 41.
      personal knowledge of, 64.
      right to rule, 66.
      Saints to serve, 515.
      speaks to honest, 65.
      Spirit of, 73.
      strives with warring nations, 530.
      this God's work, 636.
      will to exalt men, 66.
      warfare, 71.
      work cannot be stopped, 94.
  Golden Rule, 424.
  Good, foundation in home, 380.
  Good Will, Church stands for, 192.
  Government, family at basis of, 203.
  Gospel, see _Gospel principles_.
  Principles of Gospel, 36.
  Gospel, all comprehensive, 104
      be as broad as, 150.
      causes disturbance, 146.
      designed for temporal, 261.
      divinity of, 95.
      first principles of, 116, 121.
      greatest thing, 392.
      is simple, 11.
      men not ready for, 450.
      message, 89.
      message of love, 114.
      most important, 131.
      principles eternal, 14.
      preached in spirit world, 595.
      shield from terror, 109.
      should study, 323.
      taught to Adam, 39.
      teach to children, 369.
      trumpet, 110.
      where leads, 90.
  Gossip, 136.
  Grant, Heber J., 36.
  Grant, Rachel, 29.
  Gratitude, 328.
  Grave, redemption beyond, 550.
  Greatness, truest, 358.

  Harmony, 159.
  Hate, of truth, 464.
      why Church is hated, 425.
  Heaven, condition of children in, 569.
      male and female in, 346.
      no marriage in, 350.
      typical of earth, 26.
  Heal, wounds, 331.
  High Council, duty of, 226.
  High priests, duties of, 225, 227.
      duties of quorums, 227.
  History, 295.
  Hobbies, 143.
  Holy Ghost, blasphemy against, 18.
      Holy Spirit, Comforter, 73.
      personage of spirit, 74.
      religion fruit of, 112.
      Spirit of Lord, 82.
  Holy Spirit, see _Comforter_, _Holy Ghost_.
      nature of influence, 72.
  Holy, venerate h. things, 355.
  Home, see _Household_.
  Home, 341.
      basis of, 378.
      child, and, 398.
      first duty to, 386.
      foundation of good in, 380.
      ideal, 378.
      motherhood, foundation of, 361.
      no substitute for, 375.
      not mortgage, 374, 382.
      secure, 380.
      training of children, 367.
      worship in, 377.
  Honest, God speaks to, 65.
  Honor, Church stands for, 192.
      reward of all, 10.
  Hopelessness, 146.
  Household, see _Home_.
  House of the Lord, see _Temple_.
  House of the Lord, children have rights in, 374.
  Husband, depends on wife, 363.
      duty to wife, 392.
      treatment of family, 355.
      wife in eternity, 392.

  Identity, immortal, 28.
  Idler, 295.
      no place, 296.
  Ignorance, address on, 427.
  Image, man in God's, 71.
  Industry, 282.
      learn arts of, 432.
  Ingratitude, sin of, 339.
  Immortality, see Eternal.
  Immortality, indestructible identity, 28.
  Immortality of man, 16, 27.
  Injustice, how avoid, 268.
  Inspires, God i. man, 75.
  Inspiration, spirit of, 42.
  Intelligence, eternal, 32.
  Israel, to flourish, 91.

  Jehovah, see _Jesus_.
  Jesus, see also Christ.
  Jesus, eternal, 39.
      first born, 85.
      is the Son, 85.
      teachers must believe in, 502.
      teach story of to children, 370.
  Judgment, use of judgment, 59.

  Keys of Priesthood, distinction
      between and priesthood, 168.
  Kill, only for need, 334.
  Kimball, Heber C, 212.
      tribute to, 246.
  Kindliness, 332.
  Kingdom of God, see _Church_.
  Kingdom of God, is Church, 87.
      to continue, 92.
  Knowledge, is limited, 11.
      of devil, 464.
      of sin unnecessary, 467.
  Labor, blessings obtained by, 296.
      morals and, 430.
      unions, 521, 522.
  Language, use good, 333.
  Latter-day Saints, see _Saints_.
  Latter-day Saints, character of, 163.
      are as leaven, 90.
      Church in advance of, 131.
      conduct of boys in army, 531.
      covenants of, 132.
      free people, 58.
      good citizens, 518.
      law-abiding, 114.
      loyal to U. S., 512.
      must be workers and thinkers, 140.
      may know truth, 8.
      message to boys in army, 535.
      no cause for worry, 107.
      possess spirit of salvation, 91.
      requirements of, 326.
      to serve God, 515. .
  Latter-day work, God directs, 64.
  Leaders, see _Officers_, _Church_.
  Learning, ever learning, 427.
  Lesser Priesthood, see Priesthood.
  Lesser Priesthood, 234.
      be active, 233.
  Life, 333.
  Life hereafter, see _Future Life_.
  Life hereafter, 540, 542.
      our relation to, 540.
  Life, main purpose of, 338.
      not destroy wantonly, 333.
      the test of, 86.
  Light, let shine, 106.
  Lincoln, 39.
  Love, gospel message of, 114.
      your enemies, 421.
      govern family by, 393.
      one another, 425.
  Loyalty of Church, 518.
      United States proud of, 512.
  Luther, 39, 500.

  Man, broad as Gospel, 150.
      cause versus, 90.
      destiny of, 77.
      dual being, 337.
      eternal spirit, 40.
      eternally responsible, 27.
      experiences like God's, 78.
      God and, 64.
      God inspires, 75.
      God's will to exalt, 66.
      greatest achievement, 4.
      his three conditions, 20.
      honor himself, 321.
      an immortal being, 86.
      love one another, 425.
      master of appetite, 300.
      to be master, 311.
      origin and destiny, 114.
      personal advancement helps Church, 131.
      possibilities, 83.
      respect rights, 354.
      settlement of difficulties, 53.
  Male, and female in heaven, 346.
  Manual training, 434.
  Marriage, 129, 341.
      eternal, 347.
      God-ordained, 341.
      none in heaven, 350.
      necessity of, 341.
      plural forbidden, 351.
      purpose of, 347.
      righteousness and, 343.
  Marriage, within Church, 350.
  Master, man to be, 311.
  Mechanic arts, 435.
  Melanchthon, 39, 500.
  Melchizedek Priesthood, restoration of, 236.
  Members, checks upon, 205.
  Messiah craze, 473.
  Ministering angels, 548.
  Misfortune not caused by God, 69.
  Missionaries, advice to, 454.
      all men not ready for gospel, 450.
      care of returned, 462.
      caution to, 460.
      duty when called, 463.
      elders as, 230.
      guard health, 461.
      how called, 444.
      kind wanted, 445.
      people generous to, 453.
      qualifications of, 445, 446.
      requirements of, 444.
      to teach, 447.
      what to teach, 447.
      Word of Wisdom, 457.
      work for returned, 463.
  Mob, danger of, 521.
      shun Spirit of, 520.
  Morals, and labor, 430.
  "Mormonism," defined, 87.
  Mortality, how rise above weakness of, 264.
  Moderation, 300, 305.
  Mortgage, do not mortgage home, 374, 382.
      evils of, 384.
  Mother, her love, 395.
  Motherhood, foundation of nation, 361.
  Mutual Improvement Associations, see _Young Men's
      Mutual Improvement Associations, see Young Ladies'
      Mutual Improvement Associations_.
  Mutual Improvement Associations, importance of, 487.
      purpose of, 491.

  Nationality, none in Church, 141, 511.
  Nation, foundation of, 361.
      God strives with warring, 530.
  Neglects, correct our, 281.
  Neighbor, honor your, 321.
      how to love, 339.
  Nephite apostles, 475.
  Neutrals, none in Church, 142.

  Obedience, 129, 263.
      blessings from, 272.
      to ordinances indispensable, 265.
      value of, 267.
  Occupation, how to prepare for, 336.
      most desirable, 429.
  Officers, Church see _Leaders_.
  Officers, all necessary, 204.
      dependent on people, 197.
      duties of, 190, 193.
      how chosen, 188.
      order of vote for, 197.
      consult parents about children, 201.
      qualities of, 191.
      to set example, 195.
  One Mighty and Strong, 477.
  Ordinance, see _Baptism_, etc.
  Ordinance, obedience to indispensable, 265.
      sanctity of, 177.
  Organization, necessity of, 185.

  Parents, in eternity, 79.
      consult, 201.
      duties of, 364.
      relation to children, 342.
      responsible for children, 359.
      of spirits, 85.
  Partisan, Church not, 517.
  Patent Medicines, 302.
  Patriarch, duties of, 225.
  Patriotism, importance of, 517.
      true, 516.
  Peace, key to, 529.
      when to come, 525.
  People determine officers, 197.
  Perfection, 163.
  Persecution, follows revelation, 57.
  Persistence, 165.
  Personal blessings, 635.
  Personal testimonies, 635.
  Philosophers, inspired by God, 39.
  Philosophy, 48, 295.
  Plan of Life, 88.
  Plan of Salvation, eternal nature of, 13.
  Pleasure hunting, 404.
  Pledge, do not p. children, 373.
      of my life, 639.
  Plural marriage forbidden, 351.
      wives of Joseph Smith, 619.
  Political Government, 503.
  Politics, and the Church, 519.
      Church not in, 519.
  Poor, see _Charity and Tithing_.
  Poor, 282.
      place in Church, 296.
      should be tithe-payers, 289.
  Prayer, 269, 273, 274.
      blessings follow, 281.
      for authorities, 279.
      how to pray, 275.
      practical, 276.
  Preexistence, 14, 114.
  Preside, who fit to, 206.
  President of Church, authority of, 219.
      all under his direction, 217,
      divine missions of, 211.
      inspired, 213.
  Presiding authority, father in family, 359.
  Presiding Bishopric, 222.
  Presiding officers, authority of, 230.
      composition, 478.
  Priesthood, 168.
      all officers necessary, 204.
      all should exercise authority, 208.
      authority of, 218.
      blessing upon, 224.
      conferring of, 169.
      definition and purpose of, 174.
      distinction between keys and, 168.
      duty of, 196.
      explanation of, 181.
  Priesthood, greater than its offices, 184.
      held alone by Joseph, 55.
      how authority administered, 186.
      how honor, 207.
      its offices, 216.
      jurisdiction of quorums, 188.
      keys held by Joseph alone, 55.
      keys of, 176.
      Lesser, 234.
      Lesser, be active, 233.
      many hold, 198.
      membership rolls, 207.
      mission of, 174.
      must be called, to preside, 217.
      nearly all hold, 197.
      obligations of, 206.
      order of, 215.
      order of presidency, 179.
      presiding authority, 178.
      privileged to bless, 182.
      responsibilities of quorums, 199.
      serious acceptance of, 185.
      sanctity of ordinances, 177.
      study Section 107, 205.
      truth will unite, 195.
      use of titles, 203.
      vote in, 196.
      what it is, 199, 173.
  Principles of the Gospel, not new, 36.
  Profanity, 303.
  Prohibtion, 302.
  Prosperity, foundation of, 443.
  Purity, see _Unchastity_.
  Purity, 390.
      Church stands for, 192.

  Question, when to submit, 223.
  Quorum, see _Priesthood_.
  Quorum, responsibility of, 199.

  Raffling, 407.
      gambling, 410,
  Reading, 295, 407.
  Recompense, the law of, 468,
  Redeemer, see _Jesus_.
  Redeemer, I know he lives, 80, 84, 642.
  Redemption, beyond grave, 550.
      vision of dead, 596.
  Relief Society, 179.
      duties of, 482.
      duty and purpose of, 484.
      object of, 483.
      purpose of, 482.
  Religion, be true to, 322.
      fruits of true, 90.
      spirit of, 152.
  Religion Classes, purpose and
      duties of, 502.
  Religious, not naturally, 148.
  Repentance, 123.
      change with, 117.
      fallacy of death-bed, 116.
  Responsibility, man's eternal, 27.
      personal, 84.
  Rest, for followers of Christ, 155.
      God's, 71.
  Resurrected beings parents, 85.
  Resurrection, 29, 85, 547, 564, 577, 584.
      condition of children, 569.
      final judgment, 566.
      status of children, 574.
  Retreat from evil, 468.
  Revelation, 128.
      enjoyed by all, 43.
      legal evidence and, 49.
      modern necessary, 45.
      new, 43.
      persecution follows, 57.
      proper channels for, 50.
      theory and divine, 47.
      value of, 42.
      when expect new, 46.
  Righteousness and marriage, 343.
      will prevail, 5.
  Rights, respect others', 354.
  Reward, according to works, 155.
  Rule, God's right to, 66.
  Sabbath, see _Sunday_.
  Sabbath, 300, 303.
      don't rob, 310.
  Sabbath, keep holy, 307.
      meaning of, 304.
      purpose of, 304.
      what do on, 304.
  Sacrament, 252.
  Saints, see _Latter-day Saints_.
  Salvation, see _Plan of salvation_.
  Salvation, 538.
      spirit of, 91.
      spiritual and temporal, 260.
  Saloon, 301.
  Saturday's work, 303.
  Save, mission of Church, 88.
  School, address to graduates, 334.
      need manual training, 432.
  Science, 48.
      defined, 6.
  Search, 151.
  Secret societies, 135.
  Secret organizations, 134.
  Seventy, duties of, 228, 229.
      how to replenish quorums, 229.
  Sick, order of administration to, 256.
  Singing, 324.
  Sin, degrees of sexual, 388.
      how cleansed, 116.
      knowledge of, unnecessary, 467.
      pardonable, 545.
      washed away by atonement, 120.
  Smith, Hyrum, meaning of martyrdom, 620.
  Smith, Joseph, 39, 604.
      Joseph, the boy, 617.
      Joseph, meaning of martyrdom, 620.
      a resource, 619.
      Joseph, name will not perish, 605.
      Joseph, plural wives of, 619.
      Joseph, prediction fulfilled, 614.
      Joseph, reality of first vision of, 604.
  Joseph will reveal himself, 52.
  Joseph restorer, 619.
      service of, 604.
      testimony about, 210.
  Smith, Joseph F., an appreciation, 644.
      a biographical sketch, 666.
      editorial on his death and life, 683.
      reminiscences, 655.
  Snow, Erastus, tribute to, 249.
  Snow, Lorenzo, 212.
  Social duties, 402.
  Soul, test of greatness, 332.
  Spirit, memories, 15.
      needs food, 262.
      preexistence of, 114.
  Spirit of God vs. Holy Ghost, 82.
  Spirit world, labors in, 581.
      preaching in, 595.
  Spiritual death, 20, 544.
  Spiritual gifts, 251.
  Spiritual and temporal, 260.
  Staines, W. C., 29.
  Stake, jurisdiction, 189.
  Stake Presidents, Counsel to, 225.
      duties of, 225.
  Stake Sunday School Board, 487.
  Stephenson, 39.
  Strong drinks, 301.
  Study the gospel, 323.
  Success, defined, 152.
  Sunday, see _Sabbath_.
  Sunday, need of worship, 305.
  Sunday School, how to teach, 368.
      object of, 485.
      principle of teaching, 485.
      qualification of teachers, 485.
      Stake Board, 487.
      teacher essential, 485.
      training of children, 367.
  Superstitions, 470, 472.
  Sympathize, with unfortunate, 294.

  Tasks, respect daily, 358.
  Taylor, John, 212.
  Teach, what, 366.
  Teacher, dignity of calling, 235.
      beware of false, 466.
      essential in Sunday School, 485.
  Teacher, must believe in Christ, 502.
      principle of Sunday School, 485.
      qualification for Sunday
      School, 485.
      value of work, 236.
  Temperance, 300, 301, 305.
  Temple, care and need of, 594.
     ordinances unchanged, 593.
  Temporal death, 20.
  Temporal, gospel designed for, 261.
      and spiritual, 260.
      nothing, with God, 85.
      spiritual and, 260.
  Terror, gospel shield from, 109.
  Testimony, see _Faith_.
  Testimony, 158, 636, 638, 641, 643.
      how to acquire, 158.
      personal, 635.
      purpose of bearing, 258.
      use of, 257.
  Theory, 47.
  Thinkers, Latter-day Saints must be, 140.
  Time, cease to waste, 295.
  Tithe-payers, books open to, 293.
      a Church help, 289.
  Tithing, 282.
      commercialism and, 291.
      how used and accounted for, 293.
      law of revenue, 283.
      test a, 283.
      use of, 291.
      why instituted, 282.
      widow and, 286, 289.
  Tobacco, 301.
  True to family, 353.
  Truth, 1.
      blessings for, 12.
      Church stands for, 192.
      foundation of gospel, 1.
      from God, 6.
      gospel on foundation of, 112.
      how foundation laid, 9.
      how may know, 8.
      man saved by, 2.
      not superseded, 3.
      the fountain of, 36, 497.
      why hated, 464.
      will prevail, 5.
      will unite, 195.
  Twelve apostles, labors in spirit world, 581.

  Unchastity, see Purity.
  Unchastity, danger of, 392.
      degrees of, 388.
      dominant evil, 386.
      how avoid, 263.
  Unfortunate, respect, 355.
      should sympathize with, 294.
  Unions, see _Labor unions_.
  United States, loyalty to Constitution, 512.
      loyalty of Saints, 512.
      origin and destiny, 512.
      Saints loyal to, 512.
  Unpardonable Sin, 545.
  Untruth, where to expect it, 466.
  Utah, guided to, 515.
      possibilities of, 630.

  Venerate, 355.
  Violence, shun spirit of, 520.
  Virtue, Church stands for, 192.
  Vision, redemption of dead, 596.
  Vitality and patent medicines, 302.
  Vote, how in Church, 196.
      order of, 197.
  Vulgarity, 303.

  War, attitude towards, 524.
      cause of, 523.
      conduct of boys in, 531.
      God strives with nations, 530.
      message to boys in, 535.
  Ward, relation to auxiliary organizations, 450.
      jurisdiction, 189.
  Warfare, God's, 71.
  Washington, 39, 500.
  Waste, 295.
  Watts, 39.
  Weakness, how rise above, 264.
  Wealth, 144.
  West, guided to, 515.
  Wicked, keep from, 426.
  Wife, and husband in eternity, 392.
      be true to, 353.
      determines husband, 363.
      treatment of family members, 355.
  Wisdom in everything, 305.
  Witchcraft, 470, 472.
  Woodruff, Wilford, 212.
  Women, practical preparation of, 439.
  Word of Wisdom, 305.
      missionaries and, 457.
  Work of Lord will grow, 92.
  Workers, Latter-day Saints must be, 140.
  World, not love Church, 425.
  Worry, no cause for, 107.
  Wounds, not inflict, 331.

  Young, Brigham, 211.
      testimony to, 628.
  Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations,
      see _Mutual Improvement Associations_
      see _Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations.
  Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Association, 179.
      order of presiding, 180.
  Young Men's Mutual Improvement Associations,
      see _Mutual Improvement Associations_
      see _Young Ladies' Mutual Improvement Associations.
  Young Men's Mutual Improvement Association, 179.
      field of, 488.
      order of presiding, 180.
  Youth, address to, 334.
      look forward, 400.

  Zion, no place for idlers, 296.
      to remain, 92.





End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Gospel Doctrine, by Joseph F. Smith

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK GOSPEL DOCTRINE ***

***** This file should be named 47109.txt or 47109.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/1/0/47109/

Produced by Noah Read and the Mormon Texts Project
(MormonTextsProject.org)

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark. Project Gutenberg is a registered trademark,
and may not be used if you charge for the eBooks, unless you receive
specific permission. If you do not charge anything for copies of this
eBook, complying with the rules is very easy. You may use this eBook
for nearly any purpose such as creation of derivative works, reports,
performances and research. They may be modified and printed and given
away--you may do practically ANYTHING in the United States with eBooks
not protected by U.S. copyright law. Redistribution is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
www.gutenberg.org/license.

Section 1. General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works

1.A. By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement. If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or
destroy all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement. See
paragraph 1.C below. There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this
agreement and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works. See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C. The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the
Foundation" or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection
of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting
free access to electronic works by freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm
works in compliance with the terms of this agreement for keeping the
Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with the work. You can easily
comply with the terms of this agreement by keeping this work in the
same format with its attached full Project Gutenberg-tm License when
you share it without charge with others.

1.D. The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1. The following sentence, with active links to, or other
immediate access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear
prominently whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work
on which the phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed,
performed, viewed, copied or distributed:

  This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
  most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is posted with permission of the
copyright holder), the work can be copied and distributed to anyone in
the United States without paying any fees or charges. If you are
redistributing or providing access to a work with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the work, you must comply
either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 or
obtain permission for the use of the work and the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.3. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any
additional terms imposed by the copyright holder. Additional terms
will be linked to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works
posted with the permission of the copyright holder found at the
beginning of this work.

1.E.4. Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5. Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6. You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including
any word processing or hypertext form. However, if you provide access
to or distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format
other than "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official
version posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site
(www.gutenberg.org), you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense
to the user, provide a copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means
of obtaining a copy upon request, of the work in its original "Plain
Vanilla ASCII" or other form. Any alternate format must include the
full Project Gutenberg-tm License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7. Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8. You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
provided that

* You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
  the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
  you already use to calculate your applicable taxes. The fee is owed
  to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he has
  agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation. Royalty payments must be paid
  within 60 days following each date on which you prepare (or are
  legally required to prepare) your periodic tax returns. Royalty
  payments should be clearly marked as such and sent to the Project
  Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the address specified in
  Section 4, "Information about donations to the Project Gutenberg
  Literary Archive Foundation."

* You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
  you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
  does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
  License. You must require such a user to return or destroy all
  copies of the works possessed in a physical medium and discontinue
  all use of and all access to other copies of Project Gutenberg-tm
  works.

* You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of
  any money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
  electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days of
  receipt of the work.

* You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
  distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9. If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work or group of works on different terms than
are set forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing
from both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and The
Project Gutenberg Trademark LLC, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm
trademark. Contact the Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1. Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
works not protected by U.S. copyright law in creating the Project
Gutenberg-tm collection. Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may
contain "Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate
or corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other
intellectual property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or
other medium, a computer virus, or computer codes that damage or
cannot be read by your equipment.

1.F.2. LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees. YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3. YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3. LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from. If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium
with your written explanation. The person or entity that provided you
with the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in
lieu of a refund. If you received the work electronically, the person
or entity providing it to you may choose to give you a second
opportunity to receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund. If
the second copy is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing
without further opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4. Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO
OTHER WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT
LIMITED TO WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5. Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of
damages. If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement
violates the law of the state applicable to this agreement, the
agreement shall be interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or
limitation permitted by the applicable state law. The invalidity or
unenforceability of any provision of this agreement shall not void the
remaining provisions.

1.F.6. INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in
accordance with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the
production, promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works, harmless from all liability, costs and expenses,
including legal fees, that arise directly or indirectly from any of
the following which you do or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this
or any Project Gutenberg-tm work, (b) alteration, modification, or
additions or deletions to any Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any
Defect you cause.

Section 2. Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of
computers including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers. It
exists because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations
from people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come. In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future
generations. To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation and how your efforts and donations can help, see
Sections 3 and 4 and the Foundation information page at
www.gutenberg.org Section 3. Information about the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service. The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541. Contributions to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent permitted by
U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is in Fairbanks, Alaska, with the
mailing address: PO Box 750175, Fairbanks, AK 99775, but its
volunteers and employees are scattered throughout numerous
locations. Its business office is located at 809 North 1500 West, Salt
Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887. Email contact links and up to
date contact information can be found at the Foundation's web site and
official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:

    Dr. Gregory B. Newby
    Chief Executive and Director
    gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4. Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment. Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States. Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements. We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance. To SEND
DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any particular
state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States. U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses. Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations. To
donate, please visit: www.gutenberg.org/donate

Section 5. General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project
Gutenberg-tm concept of a library of electronic works that could be
freely shared with anyone. For forty years, he produced and
distributed Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of
volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as not protected by copyright in
the U.S. unless a copyright notice is included. Thus, we do not
necessarily keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper
edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search
facility: www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

