Project Gutenberg's The Romance of Rubber, by United States Rubber Company

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: The Romance of Rubber

Author: United States Rubber Company

Editor: John Martin

Posting Date: September 4, 2009 [EBook #4759]
Release Date: December, 2003
First Posted: March 13, 2002

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF RUBBER ***




Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.










THE ROMANCE OF RUBBER

EDITED BY JOHN MARTIN


EDITOR OF JOHN MARTIN'S BOOK THE CHILD'S MAGAZINE


PUBLISHED BY UNITED STATES RUBBER COMPANY




CONTENTS

  1  THE DISCOVERY
  2  CHARLES GOODYEAR
  3  THE HEVEA TREE
  4  WICKHAM'S IDEA
  5  PLANTATION DEVELOPMENT
  6  PLANTATION LIFE
  7  HARVESTING THE RUBBER
  8  A LAST WORD




AN INTRODUCTORY NOTE

We have undertaken to print this booklet, telling you how rubber
is grown, gathered, and then made useful, for this reason:

The United States Rubber Company, as the largest rubber
manufacturer in the world, wants the coming generations of our
country to have some understanding of the importance of rubber in
our every day life.

We hope to interest and inform you. We believe the rubber industry
will be better off if the future citizens of our country know more
about it.




CHAPTER 1

THE DISCOVERY


If you were asked, "What did Columbus discover in 1492?" you would
have but one answer. But what he discovered on his second voyage
is not quite so easy to say. He was looking for gold when he
landed on the island of Hayti on that second trip. So his eyes
were blind to the importance of a simple game which he saw being
played with a ball that bounced by some half-naked Indian boys on
the sand between the palm trees and the sea. Instead of the
coveted gold, he took back to Europe, just as curiosities, some of
the strange black balls given him by these Indian boys. He learned
that the balls were made from the hardened juice of a tree.

The little boys and girls of Spain were used to playing with balls
made of rags or wool, so you may imagine how these bouncing balls
of the Indians must have pleased them. But the men who sent out
this second expedition gave the balls little thought and certainly
no value. Since Columbus brought back no gold, he was thrown into
prison for debt, and he never imagined that, four hundred years
later, men would turn that strange, gummy tree juice into more
gold than King Ferdinand and Queen Isabella and all the princes of
Europe ever dreamed of.

In the next century after Columbus's travels the Portuguese
founded the colony of Brazil on the continent of South America.
Their settlements were near the coast and they did not begin to
explore the great Amazon region for a hundred years or so. The
journey down this great river--which Theodore Roosevelt took so
many years later--was first made by a Portuguese missionary, who
found the same kind of gummy tree juice as that of the West
Indies. But the natives along the Amazon had discovered that
besides being elastic it was waterproof, and they were making
shoes that would keep out water. You can picture a native boy
spilling some of this liquid on his foot, then covering it, as he
might with a mud pie, and when it dried wiggling his toes to find
that, he had the first and perhaps the best fitting gum shoe that
ever was made.

Little by little samples of this new substance found their way to
Europe. It was another hundred years before thoughtful men
believed it worth while to investigate this gum. In 1731 the Paris
Academy of Science sent some explorers to learn about it. One of
these Frenchmen, La Condamine, wrote of a tree called "Hevea"[1]
"There flows from this tree a liquor which hardens gradually and
blackens in the air." He found the people of Quito waterproofing
cloth with it, and the Amazon Indians were making boots which, when
blackened in smoke, looked like leather. Most interesting of all,
they coated bottle-shaped moulds, and when the gum had hardened they
would break the mould, shaking the pieces out of the neck, leaving
an unbreakable bottle that would hold liquids.


[1] Hevea is pronounced Hee'-vee-uh. Caoutchouc is
pronounced koo'-chook.


It was not long afterwards that Lisbon began to import some of
these crudely fashioned articles, and it is said that in 1755 the
King of Portugal sent to Brazil several pairs of his boots to be
waterproofed. A few years later the Government of Para, Brazil,
sent him a full suit of rubber clothes. For all that, this elastic
gum was for the most part only a curiosity, and few people knew
there was such a thing.

About the year 1770, a black, bouncing ball of caoutchouc, as the
Indians called the gum, after many travels found its way to
England, and Priestley, the man who gave us oxygen, learned that
it would rub out pencil marks. Then and there he named it what you
have probably guessed long before this: "rub-ber." Nearly every
language except English uses in place of the word rubber some form
of the native Word "caoutchouc," which means "weeping tree." After
Priestley's discovery, a one-inch "rubber" sold for three
shillings, or about seventy-five cents, but artists were glad to
pay even that price, because their work was made so much easier.




CHAPTER 2

CHARLES GOODYEAR


In 1800 Brazil was the only country manufacturing rubber articles,
and her best market soon proved to be North America. Probably the
first rubber this country saw was brought to New England in
clipper ships as ballast in the form of crude lumps and balls.
Rubber shoes, water-bottles, powder-flasks, and tobacco-pouches
found buyers in the American ports, but rubber shoes were most in
demand.

Soon some Americans began to import raw rubber and to manufacture
rubber goods of their own, and in the old world a Scotchman named
Macintosh found a way of waterproofing cloth by spreading on it a
thin coating of rubber dissolved in coal naphtha. Many people
still refer to raincoats as mackintoshes. Rubber clothing shared
favor with rubber shoes, but its popularity was short-lived for it
did not wear well and was almost as sensitive to temperature as
molasses and butter. The rubber shoes and coats get hard and stiff
in winter and soft and sticky in summer. A man wearing a pair of
rubber overalls who sat down too near a warm stove soon found that
his overalls, his chair and himself were stuck fast together. The
first rubber coats became so stiff in cold weather that when you
took one off you could stand it up in the middle of the floor and
leave it, for it would stand like a tent until the rubber thawed
out, and when thawed it was almost as uncomfortable as is fly-paper
to the fly.

One day Charles Goodyear, a Connecticut hardware merchant of an
inventive turn of mind, went to a store to buy a life preserver.
He could find only imperfect ones, but they drew his attention to
the study of rubber, and presently he was thinking of it by day
and dreaming of it by night. Rubber became a passion with him. He
felt sure some way could be found to make it firm yet flexible
regardless of temperature, and for ten years he experimented with
different mixtures and processes, hoping to find the right one. So
intent was he on his search that he found time for nothing else.
Due to neglect his business went to pieces and he became very
poor.

Finally, in 1839, when he was on the point of giving up in
despair, he accidentally came upon the solution. He was
experimenting in his kitchen, a place which, through lack of
funds, he was often forced to use as a laboratory. Part of a
mixture of rubber, sulphur and other chemicals, with which he was
working, happened to drop on the top of the stove. It lay there
sizzling and charring until the odor of the burning rubber called
his attention to it. As he stooped to scrape it off the stove he
gave a start of wonder as he noted that a change had come over the
rubber during its brief contact with the stove.

To his surprise the mixture had not melted, but had flattened out
in the shape of a silver dollar. When it had cooled enough to be
handled, he found that it bent and stretched easily, without
cracking or breaking, and that it always snapped back to its
original shape. Strangest of all, it was no longer sticky.
Apparently half the problem was solved. Whether his new mixture
would stand the cold he had yet to find out, so he nailed it on
the outside of the door and went to bed. Probably he slept but
little and was up early. At any rate he found the rubber
unaffected by the cold.

Then he knew that he had made a real discovery and he named the
process "vulcanizing" after Vulcan, the Roman god of fire.
"Vulcanizing" means mixing pure rubber with certain chemicals and
then applying heat. On this process, which is by no means simple,
the great rubber business of the world has been established.
Practically everything made of rubber, or of which rubber is a
part, has to go through the vulcanizing process, whether it is a
pair of Keds, a tire, a fruit jar ring, or a doormat.

So many people had been deceived by previous rubber ventures that
Goodyear had great trouble in finding anyone with enough faith to
invest money in his discovery. It was some time before he was able
to take out the first of the more than sixty patents which he was
granted during his lifetime for applying his process to various
uses. Under these patents he licensed several factories to use the
process in the manufacture of rubber goods, but required them to
stamp all goods with the words "Goodyear patent." Scores of
companies have since used the name Goodyear, but the only
factories that he licensed which are now in existence are parts of
the United States Rubber Company.

Goodyear often had to defend his patents in court. In the most
famous of these suits, he was defended by Daniel Webster and
opposed by Rufus Choate, so that we see interwoven in the story of
rubber the names of two of the greatest statesmen this country has
produced.




CHAPTER 3

THE HEVEA TREE


For the very first of the rubber story we may thank a little
wood-boring beetle, and the way nature has of helping her children to
protect themselves.

The thistle of the meadow is as safe from hungry cattle as though
fenced in by barbed wire. A cow must be starving that would care
to flavor her luncheon with the needles that the thistle bears.
The common skunk cabbage would make a tempting meal for her after
a winter of dry feeding, had not Nature given it an odor that
disgusts even a spring-time appetite. The milkweed welcomes the
bees and flies that help to distribute her pollen where she wants
it spread, but she has her own way of punishing the useless
thieves that trespass up her stalk. Wherever the hooks of an
insect's feet pierce her tender skin, she pours out a milky juice
to entangle its feet and body, and it is a lucky bug that succeeds
in escaping before this juice hardens, and holds him a prisoner
condemned to die.

All over the world there are plants with the same ability that the
milkweed has, but it is especially true of certain trees and vines
of the tropics. As soon as the little beetle begins to bore into
the bark of one of these trees, there pours out a sticky, milky
fluid that kills the insect at once. If this were all, the wound
would remain open, ready for the next robber who came along. In
order that the break may be healed, a cement is necessary, but not
a hard, unyielding one, for that would crumble away with the
motion of the tree in the wind.

So with Mother Nature's perfection in doing things, the very plant
juice that has done duty as a poison is hardened into an elastic
stopper, with the result that, no matter how far the tree may sway
and tug at the wound, the filling gives and stretches, true to the
task it has to perform.

This was the juice the crafty savage induced the tree to give up.
Wherever the bark was cut, the fluid poured forth to heal the
break and hardened like blood on a cut finger. The native caught
it while it was still soft and applied it to his simple needs.

This juice is not the sap of the rubber tree. Sap, which is the
life-blood of the tree, flows through the wood, but the juice we
are describing is contained in the inner bark, a thin layer
directly below the outer bark.

Scientific men call this juice latex. It is like milk in three
ways: it is white, it contains tiny particles that rise to the top
like cream, and it spoils quickly.

The particles in cow's milk are full of fats which make it good
for us to drink. But a rubber tree's milk has tiny atoms of rubber
and resin and other things, and it took time to discover which of
the vines and trees was the prize milker of the tropics and gave
the largest amount of pure rubber. Finally, the Hevea, the very
tree the Frenchman wrote about, proved to be the best, and,
although by no means the only rubber tree of commercial value, it
is acknowledged the greatest of rubber trees.

The Hevea tree grows sixty feet tall, and when full grown is eight
or ten feet around. It rises as straight as an elm, with high
branching limbs and long, smooth oval leaves. Sprays of pale
flowers blossom upon it in August, followed in a few months by
pods containing three speckled seeds which look like smooth,
slightly flattened nutmegs. When the seeds are ready to drop the
outer covering of the pod bursts with a loud report, the seeds
shooting in all directions.

This is Nature's clever scheme to spread the Hevea family. The
tree grows wild in the hot, damp forests of the Amazon valley and
in other parts of South America that have a similar climate. The
ideal climate for the rubber tree is one which is uniform all the
year round, from eighty-nine to ninety-four degrees at noon, and
riot lower than seventy degrees at night. The Amazon country has a
rainy season which lasts half the year, though the other season is
by no means a dry one, and so for half the time the jungles are
flooded.

These rubber storehouses had been growing for thousands of years
in the Amazon jungle with their wealth securely sealed up in their
bark, the peck of a bird, the boring of a beetle, or the scratch
of a climbing animal being the only draft upon their treasure. The
trees around the mouth of the river supplied whatever was needed
for the little manufacturing that was at first done. But the
discovery that made a universal use for rubber changed all this.
Brazil was surprised to find what great treasure her forests
contained. Large rubber areas were found a thousand miles up the
river and she began in a serious way to develop a large crude
rubber business.

Less than twenty years ago Brazil produced practically all the
rubber used in the world. But to-day she furnishes less than
one-tenth of the world's supply. How Brazil, possessing in her vast
forests millions of rubber trees of the finest quality, has been
forced by unfavorable conditions to permit the Far East to sweep
from her in this short time the crude rubber supremacy of the
world is one of the most unusual chapters in modern industrial
history.




CHAPTER 4

WICKHAM'S IDEA


The story of the success of the East Indies in wresting the crude
rubber supremacy from Brazil, begins with an Englishman named
Wickham, who might be called the father of plantation rubber.

Wickham, who had spent some years in South America, understood the
difficulties of gathering rubber in the jungles. He believed that
if rubber could be cultivated it might prove a good crop on the
coffee plantations in India which a blight had recently rendered
valueless for coffee. What a strange fact it is that this blight
gave Brazil a chance to go into coffee growing, and that while
Brazil was losing the rubber supremacy to the Far East, the Far
East at about the same time was surrendering the leadership in
coffee to Brazil. The latter now holds first place in coffee
growing as firmly as does the Far East in rubber growing.

Wickham saw that there were difficulties that would prevent the
gathering of wild rubber from keeping pace with the growing
demand. Although millions of rubber trees still stood untouched in
the Brazilian forests, only those trees near the river banks could
be tapped because of the impossibility of getting the rubber out
of the dense vegetation. Life in the jungle was dangerous and
lonely, and therefore rubber gatherers were not easy to find. They
were compelled to work far from their families and friends, and in
constant danger from wild beasts, reptiles and death-bearing
fevers. It is no wonder that rubber obtained in this way came to
be known as "wild rubber." Moreover, transporting the crude
product through the jungles was hard and expensive and the rubber
obtained under these conditions was not always so clean or high in
quality as might be wished.

"If rubber trees grow from the seeds which nature scatters in the
jungle," said Wickham to himself, "why should they not grow from
seeds put into the ground by hand?"

"If rubber trees could be raised from seed, they could be planted
in the open in rows where they could easily be tended and tapped,
and the rubber gathered quickly and safely. Instead of having to
brave the dangerous jungles, men could plant and cultivate rubber
in spots of their own choosing so long as they chose places where
the climate was right."

For many years people only laughed at Wickham's great idea, but
like Goodyear he had faith enough to persevere. While in Brazil he
planted some rubber seeds to see what would happen. The seeds DID
grow, and the book which Wickham wrote about his idea and his
experiments finally came into the hands of Sir Joseph Hooker, the
Director of the Botanical Gardens in Kew, near London. So
interested did he become that he called Wickham's plan to the
attention of the Government of India, and finally Wickham was
commissioned to take a cargo of rubber seeds to England, so that
his idea might be tried out.

This commission was more difficult than one might think, and all
of Wickham's faith and perseverance were needed to carry it out.
Indeed for a time it seemed hopeless, principally because the
seeds so quickly dry up and lose their vitality that they must be
planted very soon after being gathered.

But Wickham watched his opportunity, and finally he was able to
charter a ship in the name of the Indian Government. About a third
of the way up the Amazon River he placed in her hold several
thousand carefully packed seeds of the Hevea Braziliensis, or
rubber tree. Let Wickham, himself, tell how he surmounted the next
difficulty:

"We were bound to call in at the city of Para as the port of
entry, in order to obtain clearance papers for the ship before we
could go to sea. Any delay would have rendered my precious freight
quite valueless and useless. But again fortune favored. I had a
'friend at court' in the person of Consul Green, who went himself
with me to call on the proper official, and supported me as I
presented to His Excellency 'my difficulty and anxiety, being in
charge of, and having on board a ship anchored out in the stream,
exceedingly delicate botanical specimens, especially designated
for delivery to Her Britannic Majesty's own Royal Garden of Kew.
Even while doing myself the honor of thus calling on His
Excellency, I had given orders to the captain of the ship to keep
up steam, having ventured to trust His Excellency would see his
way clear to furnishing me with immediate dispatch. An interview
most polite, full of mutual compliments in the best Portuguese
manner, enabled us to get under way as soon as the captain had got
the dinghy hauled aboard."

Can you imagine Wickham's sigh of relief as his vessel, with its
freight of perishable treasure, steamed out of port, and began the
long journey to England?




CHAPTER 5

PLANTATION DEVELOPMENT


The transporting of the rubber seeds from the Brazilian forests to
England was only the first step in Wickham's project. The real
test was still to come. The seeds were planted in the famous
Botanical Gardens of Kew, and on August 12, 1876, the several
thousand seedlings which had been raised from them were packed in
special cases and shipped to Ceylon on the other side of the globe
for the final and most important stage of the experiment.

How long the next five years must have seemed to the anxious
Wickham, for it was that long before the first rubber tree
flowered in the gardens at Heneratgoda, sixteen miles from
Colombo, where the trees had finally been planted. In this year,
1881, experiments in tapping began, and it was plain that
Wickham's dream was to be realized.

From these few trees, so carefully tended in their youth, has
sprung the whole rubber industry of Ceylon and the Far East.
Wickham must indeed have been proud to see the plantations
spreading from Ceylon to Malaya, where rubber was eagerly taken up
by planters who were despairing of ever making a living out of
coffee, and later to Sumatra and Java and Borneo. To-day rubber
plantations cover an area of over 3,000,000 acres, with a yearly
output of almost 360,000 tons, or about ten times the average
yearly output of "wild rubber."

There is a curious coincidence in the fact that Wickham got his
idea about planting rubber trees in India at about the same time
that men in America began to experiment with the horseless
carriage. You may never have stopped to think of it, but
mechanical experts say that without rubber pneumatic tires,
automobiles could never have become the fine, swift vehicles they
are. It was a wonderful thing that when in the early part of this
century the automobile industry suddenly burst forth with a demand
for rubber so great that Brazil could never have hoped to supply
it, there was found ready in the Far East, as a result of the
planting that had been done there, a supply that took care of the
sudden emergency.

A little more than ten years ago American business men began to
take an interest in the rubber plantations. They have shown
characteristic energy in the field, and the greatest single rubber
plantation in the world is owned by an American company, the
United States Rubber Company. This plantation is on the island of
Sumatra in the Dutch East Indies, one of the best governed
colonies in the East. On this island is an orchard of rubber
trees, as beautifully laid out and as well cared for as any
orchard of fruit trees in our own country. For seventy square
miles, an area as large as the District of Columbia, the orderly
ranks of trees fill the gently rolling landscape, every inch of
which is weeded as carefully as a garden. It takes twenty thousand
employees to care for the trees, which number more than 5,000,000.

On this plantation the science of growing rubber trees has been
brought to a perfection known nowhere else in the world. Groups of
botanists, chemists and arboriculturists study constantly tree
diseases, methods of increasing the yield, and the other problems
of growing fine trees that will produce high grade rubber. Here,
by experiment and inspection, the secrets of the rubber tree are
being brought to light, so much so that growers look to this
plantation for leadership in methods of rubber culture. This great
project so far from American soil and in a field so new gives a
thrill of pride to the Americans visiting Sumatra on their way
around the world.




CHAPTER 6

PLANTATION LIFE


The moist but very hot climate which rubber trees require is found
only in a zone around the world between the parallels of latitude
thirty degrees north to thirty degrees south of the equator.
Within this zone there have been found more than 350 rubber
bearing trees, shrubs and vines. For this reason this zone is
called the Rubber Belt. As most of the rubber used commercially is
gathered from trees growing within a zone extending from ten
degrees north to ten degrees south of the equator, this latter
zone is sometimes called the Inner Rubber Belt.

If you will trace this belt on a map of the world you will see
that it includes the Amazon region which produces more than
three-quarters of the wild rubber used in manufacturing. Most of South
America's wild rubber is obtained from Brazil, the remainder from
Bolivia, Peru and Venezuela. Now continue the belt across the
Atlantic Ocean to Africa, where you will strike the Belgian Congo
which produces a small quantity of wild rubber. Partly owing to
the careless manner of gathering and partly to the fact that it is
not originally of as good quality as Brazilian rubber, Congo
rubber is not as valuable for manufacturing as Brazilian. Then
complete the circle by following the belt across the Indian Ocean
to Ceylon and the East Indies which contain the great rubber
plantations where most of the rubber used to-day comes from.

To establish a rubber plantation requires very careful planning.
The choice of a site is of first importance, for the planter must
find a locality having a moist climate with an evenly distributed
rain-fall where the temperature throughout the year does not fall
below seventy degrees Fahrenheit, and where there is protection
from the wind. There must also be, of course, access to a steady
labor supply and a convenient shipping port. As the proper climate
is a tropical one, there is usually dense jungle to be cleared
away. Immense trees and thick bushes, rank straggling weeds and
vines form an almost impenetrable jungle. To turn such a place
into a garden spot means a genuine battle against jungle
conditions. But gradually trees, shrubs and undergrowth are torn
out and burned, laying bare the rich soil ready for the plow of
the planter.

Meantime the rubber seedlings have been sprouted in nurseries.
When the ground is ready they are carefully taken up and
transplanted to the holes which have been made for them in the
field where they are to be permanently planted.

Though the growth of the trees is very rapid, sometimes as much as
twenty feet in the first year, there are five years of anxious
waiting and guarding against winds and disease before they are
ready to be tapped and so begin to reward the planters. At first
the yield of a tree is only about one-half pound of rubber a year,
and this increases so slowly that it is many years before it
amounts to as much as ten pounds a year. The highest yield ever
recorded was given by one of the original trees set out in the
gardens at Heneratgoda, which gave ninety-six and one-half pounds
in one year.

How different is life on the rubber plantations of to-day from the
life of the gatherer of wild rubber in the jungle. In Brazil, the
solitary workers have to plunge at dawn into the perilous forest,
with its lurking wildcats and jaguars, its coiled and creeping
serpents. The dwellings are flimsy huts, food is scarce and
expensive, and disease and fever cause many deaths.

On the other hand, workers on a well-managed plantation live in
comfortable houses in healthy surroundings and are supplied with
plenty of good food. In fact the conditions are so much better
than generally prevail among natives in the Orient that work on a
plantation is considered more desirable than most other forms of
labor. The unmarried men live in barracks, but the men with
families have individual houses with garden plots adjoining. Big
kitchens prepare and cook the food in the best native style.
Schools for the children, recreation centers for old and young,
and hospitals to care for the sick, are all parts of the
plantation organization.

In erecting hospitals and caring for the health of its plantation
workers, as in other branches of the rubber industry, America has
taken the lead. So well is this recognized, that the Dutch
Government has awarded a medal to the United States Rubber Company
for the efficiency and completeness of its plantation hospital,
which happens to be the largest private hospital in the East
Indies, having accommodations for nearly a thousand patients.




CHAPTER 7

HARVESTING THE RUBBER


It is a cheerful sight to see the workers, men and women, dressed
in all the colors of the rainbow, trooping out from their quarters
to begin the day's work. The tapping must be done early in the
day, for the latex or rubber juice stops flowing a few hours after
sunrise.

When the trees reach eighteen inches in girth at a point eighteen
inches from the ground, they are ready for tapping. This growth is
usually attained when the trees are about five years old.

In tapping, a narrow strip of bark is cut away with a knife, the
cut extending diagonally one-quarter of the way around the tree.
At each succeeding day's tapping the tapper widens the cut by
stripping off a sliver of bark one-twentieth of an inch in width.[2]
He must be careful not to cut into the wood of the tree, as such cuts
not only injure the tree but permit the sap to run into the latex
and spoil the rubber. When the tapper has made the proper gash in
the bark he inserts a little spout to carry the dripping latex to
a glass cup beneath.


[2] This method of tapping is shown on the front cover.


Later in the morning the workers make the rounds of the trees with
large milk cans, gathering the latex from the cups. When the cans
are full they are carried to a collecting station, called a
Coagulation Shed. It is as clean and well kept as a dairy. Here
the latex is weighed, and when each collector has been credited
with the amount he has brought, it is dumped into huge vats.

The next step is to extract the particles of rubber from the latex
and to harden them. The jungle method of hardening rubber is to
dip a wooden paddle in the latex and smoke it over a fire of wood
and palm nuts.[3] It is a back-breaking process to cover the paddle
with layer after layer, until a good-sized lump, usually called a
"biscuit," is formed. The plantation method is a quicker and cleaner
one. Into the vats is poured a small quantity of acid, which causes
the rubber "cream" to coagulate and come to the surface. The
"coagulum," as it is called, is like snow-white dough. It is removed
from the vats and run in sheets through machines which squeeze out
the moisture and imprint on them a criss-cross pattern to expose as
large a surface as possible to the air.


[3] See picture, page 12.


These sheets of rubber are then hung in smoke houses and smoked
from eight to fourteen days in much the same way that we smoke
hams and bacon. After being dried in this way they are pressed
into bales or packed in boxes ready for shipment.




CHAPTER 8

A LAST WORD


It would be an adventure to follow a bale of plantation rubber as,
carefully boxed or wrapped in burlap, it starts on its long and
picturesque journey. Bullock carts, railroads, boats and steamers
bring it at last to one of the world markets, Singapore, Colombo,
London, Amsterdam or New York, where it is bought by dealers, and
then sold to factories which make rubber goods.

An equally fascinating story might be told of its progress through
the factory, how it is kneaded and rolled, mixed with chemicals,
rubbed into fabrics, baked in ovens, and finally emerges as any
one of the tens of thousands of articles that are made wholly or
partly from rubber.

Rubber manufacturing is peculiarly an American industry. South
America gave us the original rubber trees, and the one man who,
more than any other, was responsible for making rubber useful was
the American, Charles Goodyear. To-day, two-thirds of the entire
output of rubber is sold to the United States, whose manufactured
rubber goods set the standard for the whole world.

In spite of the wonders which rubber has already accomplished, and
the adventures, which have colored its history, only the beginning
of the romance of rubber has been told. The plantation industry is
still in its infancy, and experiments are constantly being made to
determine the best methods of planting, the most fruitful number
of trees to the acre, the most advantageous way of tapping. In the
laboratories of the great rubber manufacturers, scientists are at
work improving old methods of using rubber and devising new ones.

Rubber is a substance of so many important characteristics that
its uses are countless. It is used for certain purposes because it
stretches, for others because it is airtight and watertight, for
others because it is a non-conductor of electricity, for others
because it is shock-absorbing, and for others because it is
adhesive.

It is on rubber that infants cut their teeth; after all the teeth
are gone old age makes use of rubber in plates for false teeth.
Ten million motorists and other millions of cyclists in the United
States ride on rubber tires that are durable, noiseless and
airtight. Balloons of rubber float aloft, and huge submarines plow
their routes beneath the ocean's surface propelled by electricity
stored in great rubber cells. Sheathed in rubber, the lightning
makes a peaceful way through our homes, offices and factories,
furnishing light and telephone service. Divers sink out of sight
beneath the waves in rubber suits. Rubber air-brake hose on
railroad trains makes safe the travel of a nation, air-drill hose
rivets our ships, fire hose protects the properly in city and town
and garden hose brings nourishment to our growing plants. Rubber
clothing protects against storm and rubber footwear guards us
against cold and wet. Tennis balls and golf balls and rubber-cored
baseballs give healthful sport to the millions. In hospitals and
medical work the uses of rubber are without number.

To select the most important use to which rubber is put would be
difficult. One student of the subject says:

"Of all the applications of rubber, that of packing for the steam
engine and connecting machinery appears to have been the most
important, as it has been an essential condition of the
development and extended use of steam as a motive power."

Even as you read this, rubber may be in the act of performing some
new magic, some fresh service to mankind. And who knows which one
of us will, in the years to come, write a chapter in the story of
rubber more thrilling than we are able to imagine to-day!




A REVIEW AND QUESTIONS


1. Who was the first white man to see rubber?

2 What use were the natives making of it?

3. Who was the first white man to go up the Amazon?

4. Of what nationality were the explorers who were sent to find
out about rubber?

5. Who was the first European monarch to use rubber?

6. How did rubber get its name?

7. How did rubber first come to the United States?

8. Why are some raincoats called mackintoshes?

9. Why is Charles Goodyear called "the father of the rubber
industry"?

10. What is "vulcanizing"?

11. What famous men fought in court over the patents?

12. What has a beetle to do with rubber?

13. Name and describe the liquid in which rubber is found?

14. In what part of the tree is this liquid found?

15. What is the difference between this liquid and the sap of a
tree.

16. Name and describe the best rubber tree.

17. How are the seeds spread?

18. What climate is needed for rubber trees?

19. Which country formerly supplied all the rubber used in the
world?

20. Who first thought of growing rubber trees on plantations?

21. Why did he think it was better to grow them on plantations?

22. How were the rubber seeds taken from Brazil?

23. On what tropical island was the first plantation started?

24. Where are rubber plantations found to-day?

25. What is the yearly output of the plantations?

26. What was the curious coincidence in the growth of the
plantation industry?

27. What is meant by the Rubber Belt around the world?

28. What countries are the principal producers of rubber?

29. Why is the worker on a plantation better off than one who
lives in the jungle?

30. When are trees ready to be tapped?

31. How are trees tapped?

32. How is rubber "cured" in the jungle?

33. How is it "cured" on the plantation?

34. Why is rubber manufacturing peculiarly an American industry?




RUBBER PRODUCTS


There are so many different articles made in whole or part of
rubber that it would not be possible to list them all on this
page. The following list of just a few of the thousands of rubber
products made by the United States Rubber Company, the oldest and
largest rubber organization in the world, will help you to think
of many other articles made of rubber.

TIRES

"U.S." Royal Cord Automobile Tires.

"U.S." Mono-Twin Truck Tires.

"U.S." Traxion Tread Motorcycle Tires.

"U.S." Bicycle Tires.

"U.S." Royal Tubes for Automobile Tires.

CLOTHING

Raynster Raincoats.

Naugahyde Belts for Men, Women and Children.

Bathing Caps and Suits.

FOOTWEAR

Keds, the Standard Canvas Rubber-Soled Shoes.

"U.S." Boots.

"U.S." Arctics and Gaiters.

"U.S." Rubbers.

HARD RUBBER GOODS

Battery Jars.

Radio Parts.

Dye Sticks.

HOUSEHOLD

Hot-water Bags.

Rubber Gloves.

Ice Caps.

Tubing and Sheeting.

Nursing Bottle Nipples.

Toys.

Fruit Jar Rubbers.

MECHANICAL GOODS

"U.S." Rainbow Packing.

"U.S." Rainbow Transmission Belting.

"U.S." Elevator and Conveyor Belts.

"U.S." Hose for all purposes, including Garden, Steam, Suction,
Water, Fire, Oil, Irrigation, etc.

Paracore Insulated Wire and Cable.

Moulded Goods in thousands of varieties, as, for example, Washers,
Gaskets, Plumbers' Rubber Goods, Drainboard Mats, Bath Mats, etc.

"U.S." Tile and Sheet Flooring.

SUNDRIES

Naugahyde Traveling Bags.

"U.S." Royal Golf Balls.

Balloons and Balloon Fabrics.





NOTICE TO TEACHERS


These booklets are intended for presentation to your pupils. A
full supply will be sent to you, free of charge, if you will
indicate the number of students in your class.

Please address

  Educational Department
  United States Rubber Company
  1790 BROADWAY
  New York City









End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of The Romance of Rubber, by 
United States Rubber Company

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE ROMANCE OF RUBBER ***

***** This file should be named 4759.txt or 4759.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        https://www.gutenberg.org/4/7/5/4759/

Produced by Robert Rowe, Charles Franks and the Online
Distributed Proofreading Team. HTML version by Al Haines.


Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License (available with this file or online at
https://gutenberg.org/license).


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH F3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS' WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTIBILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation web page at https://www.pglaf.org.


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Its 501(c)(3) letter is posted at
https://pglaf.org/fundraising.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at
809 North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887, email
business@pglaf.org.  Email contact links and up to date contact
information can be found at the Foundation's web site and official
page at https://pglaf.org

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org


Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit https://pglaf.org

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including including checks, online payments and credit card
donations.  To donate, please visit: https://pglaf.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For thirty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.


Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.


Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     https://www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.
