The Project Gutenberg EBook of Egyptian Tales, First Series, IVth To XIIth
Dynasty, by W. M. Flinders Petrie

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Egyptian Tales, First Series, IVth To XIIth Dynasty
       Translated From The Papyri, Second Edition

Author: W. M. Flinders Petrie

Editor: W. M. Flinders Petrie

Illustrator: Tristram Ellis

Release Date: January, 2005 [EBook #7386]
Last Updated: May 20, 2016

Language: English

Character set encoding: ASCII

*** START OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EGYPTIAN TALES ***




Produced by Eric Eldred






EGYPTIAN TALES, TRANSLATED FROM THE PAPYRI

First Series, IVth To XIIth Dynasty

By W. M. Flinders Petrie, D.C.L., LL.D.., Ph.D., Hon. F.S.A. (Scot.)


Illustrated By Tristram Ellis

Second Edition

London

1899




LIST OF CONTENTS


INTRODUCTION

TALES OF THE MAGICIANS

KHAFRA'S TALE

BAUFRA'S TALE

HORDEDEF'S TALE

REMARKS

THE PEASANT AND THE WORKMAN

REMARKS

THE SHIPWRECKED SAILOR

REMARKS

THE ADVENTURES OF SANEHAT

REMARKS




INTRODUCTION

IT is strange that while literature occupies so much attention as at
present, and while fiction is the largest division of our book-work, the
oldest literature and fiction of the world should yet have remained
unpresented to English readers. The tales of ancient Egypt have appeared
collectively only in French, in the charming volume of Maspero's "Contes
Populaires"; while some have been translated into English at scattered
times in volumes of the "Records of the Past." But research moves
forward; and translations that were excellent twenty years ago may now
be largely improved, as we attain more insight into the language.

For another reason also there is a wide ground for the present volume.
In no case have any illustrations been attempted, to give that basis for
imagination which is all the more needed when reading of an age and a
land unfamiliar to our ideas. When following a narrative, whether of
real events or of fiction, many persons--perhaps most--find themselves
unconsciously framing in their minds the scenery and the beings of which
they are reading. To give a correct picture of the character of each of
the various ages to which these tales belong, has been the aim of the
present illustrations. A definite period has been assigned to each tale,
in accordance with the indications, or the history, involved in it; and,
so far as our present knowledge goes, all the details of life in the
scenes here illustrated are rendered in accord with the period of the
story.

To some purely scholastic minds it may seem presumptuous to
intermingle translations of notable documents with fanciful
illustrations. But, considering the greater precision with which in
recent years we have been able to learn the changes and the fashions
of ancient life in Egypt, and the essentially unhistorical nature of
most of these tales, there seems ample reason to provide such material
for the reader's imagination in following the stories; it may-give
them more life and reality, and may emphasise the differences which
existed between the different periods to which these tales refer.

It will be noticed how the growth of the novel is shadowed out in the
varied grounds and treatment of the tales. The earliest is purely a
collection of marvels or fabulous incidents of the simplest kind. Then
we advance to contrasts between town and country, between Egypt and
foreign lands. Then personal adventure, and the interest in schemes
and successes, becomes the staple material; while only in the later
periods does character come in as the groundwork. The same may be seen
in English literature--first the tales of wonders and strange lands,
then the novel of adventure, and lastly the novel of character.

In translating these documents into English I have freely used the
various translations already published in other languages; but in all
cases more or less revision and retranslation from the original has
been made. In this matter I am indebted to Mr. F. Ll. Griffith, who has
in some cases--as in Anpu and Bata--almost entirely retranslated the
original papyrus. The material followed in each instance will be found
stated in the notes accompanying the tales. As to the actual
phraseology, I am alone responsible for that. How far original idiom
should be retained in any translation is always a debated question, and
must entirely depend on the object in view. Here the purpose of
rendering the work intelligible to ordinary readers required the
modifying of some idioms and the paraphrasing of others. But so far
as possible the style and tone of the original has been preserved, and
whatever could be easily followed has been left to speak for itself. In
many plainnesses of speech the old Egyptian resembled the modern
Oriental, or our own forefathers, more than ourselves in this age of
squeamishness as yet unparalleled in the world. To avoid offence a few
little modifications of words have been made; but rather than give a
false impression by tampering with any of the narrative, I have omitted
the sequel of the last tale and given only an outline of it. The diction
adopted has been the oldest that could be used without affectation when
dealing with the early times. It has been purposely modified in the
later tales; and in the last--which is of Ptolemaic authorship--a
modern style has been followed as more compatible with the later tone of
the narrative.

For the illustrations Mr. Tristram Ellis's familiarity with Egypt has
been of good account in his life-like scenes here used. For each
drawing I have searched for the material among the monuments and
remains of the age in question. The details of the dresses, the
architecture, and the utensils, are all in accord with the period of
each tale. In the tale of Setnau two different styles are introduced.
Ahura is probably of the time of Amenhotep III., whereas Setnau is a
son of Ramessu II.; and the change of fashion between the two
different dynasties has been followed as distinctive of the two
persons, one a _ka_ or double of the deceased, the other a living man.
To the reader who starts with the current idea that all Egyptians were
alike, this continual change from one period to another may seem
almost fanciful. But it rests on such certain authority that we may
hope that this little volume may have its use as an object-lesson in
practical archaeology.

The use and abuse of notes is a matter of dispute. To be constantly
interrupted in reading by some needless and elementary explanation is
an impertinence both to the author and the reader: the one cannot
resent it, the other therefore resents it for both. But what is to be
deemed needless entirely depends on the reader: I have been asked in
what country Pompei is, as it is not in the English Gazetteer. Rather
than intrude, then, on the reader when he is in high discourse with
the ancients, I humbly set up my interpreter's booth next door; and if
he cares to call in, and ask about any difficulties, I shall be glad
to help him if I can. Not even numbers are intruded to refer to notes;
for how often an eager reader has been led off his trail, and turned
blithely to refer to 37 or 186 only to find, "See J. Z. xxxviii.
377," at which he gnashed his teeth and cursed such interruptions. So
those to whom the original tales are obscure are humbly requested to
try for some profit from the remarks after them, that have been
gleaned by the translator.

Much might be said by a "folk-lorist"--in proportion to his ardour. But
as there are folk-lorists and folk-lorists, and the schools of Rabbi
Andrew and Rabbi Joseph write different targums, I have left each to
make his own commentary without prejudice.




TALES OF THE MAGICIANS


One day, when King Khufu reigned over all the land, he said to his
chancellor, who stood before him, "Go call me my sons and my
councillors, that I may ask of them a thing." And his sons and his
councillors came and stood before him, and he said to them, "Know ye a
man who can tell me tales of the deeds of the magicians?"

Then the royal son Khafra stood forth and said, "I will tell thy majesty
a tale of the days of thy forefather Nebka, the blessed; of what came to
pass when he went into the temple of Ptah of Ankhtaui."




KHAFRA'S TALE


"His majesty was walking unto the temple of Ptah, and went unto the
house of the chief reciter Uba-aner, with his train. Now when the wife
of Uba-aner saw a page, among those who stood behind the king, her heart
longed after him; and she sent her servant unto him, with a present of a
box full of garments.

"And he came then with the servant. Now there was a lodge in the garden
of Uba-aner; and one day the page said to the wife of Uba-aner, 'In the
garden of Uba-aner there is now a lodge; behold, let us therein take our
pleasure.' So the wife of Uba-aner sent to the steward who had charge
over the garden, saying, 'Let the lodge which is in the garden be made
ready.' And she remained there, and rested and drank with the page until
the sun went down.

"And when the even was now come the page went forth to bathe. And the
steward said, 'I must go and tell Uba-aner of this matter.' Now when
this day was past, and another day came, then went the steward to
Uba-aner, and told him of all these things.

"Then said Uba-aner, 'Bring me my casket of ebony and electrum.' And
they brought it; and he fashioned a crocodile of wax, seven fingers
long: and he enchanted it, and said, 'When the page comes and bathes in
my lake, seize on him.' And he gave it to the steward, and said to him,
'When the page shall go down into the lake to bathe, as he is daily wont
to do, then throw in this crocodile behind him.' And the steward went
forth bearing the crocodile.

"And the wife of Uba-aner sent to the steward who had charge over the
garden, saying, 'Let the lodge which is in the garden be made ready, for
I come to tarry there.'

"And the lodge was prepared with all good things; and she came and made
merry therein with the page. And when the even was now come, the page
went forth to bathe as he was wont to do. And the steward cast in the
wax crocodile after him into the water; and, behold! it became a
great crocodile seven cubits in length, and it seized on the page.

"And Uba-aner abode yet seven days with the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, Nebka, the blessed, while the page was stifled in the crocodile.
And after the seven days were passed, the king of Upper and Lower Egypt,
Nebka, the blessed, went forth, and Uba-aner went before him.

"And Uba-aner said unto his majesty, 'Will your majesty come and see
this wonder that has come to pass in your days unto a page?' And the
king went with Uba-aner. And Uba-aner called unto the crocodile and
said, 'Bring forth the page.' And the crocodile came forth from the lake
with the page. Uba-aner said unto the king, 'Behold, whatever I command
this crocodile he will do it.' And his majesty said, 'I pray you send back
this crocodile." And Uba-aner stooped and took up the crocodile, and it
became in his hand a crocodile of wax. And then Uba-aner told the king
that which had passed in his house with the page and his wife. And his
majesty said unto the crocodile, 'Take to thee thy prey.' And the
crocodile plunged into the lake with his prey, and no man knew whither
he went.

"And his majesty the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Nebka, the blessed,
commanded, and they brought forth the wife of Uba-aner to the north side
of the harem, and burnt her with fire, and cast her ashes in the
river.

"This is a wonder that came to pass in the days of thy forefather the
king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Nebka, of the acts of the chief reciter
Uba-aner."

His majesty the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Khufu, then said, "Let
there be presented to the king Nebka, the blessed, a thousand loaves, a
hundred draughts of beer, an ox, two jars of incense; and let there be
presented a loaf, a jar of beer, a jar of incense, and a piece of meat
to the chief reciter Uba-aner; for I have seen the token of his
learning." And they did all things as his majesty commanded.




BAUFRA'S TALE


The royal sou Bau-f-ra then stood forth and spake. He said, "I will tell
thy majesty of a wonder which came to pass in the days of thy father
Seneferu, the blessed, of the deeds of the chief reciter Zazamankh. One
day King Seneferu, being weary, went throughout his palace seeking for a
pleasure to lighten his heart, but he found none. And he said,
'Haste, and bring before me the chief reciter and scribe of the rolls
Zazamankh'; and they straightway brought him. And the king said, 'I have
sought in my palace for some delight, but I have found none.' Then said
Zazamankh to him, 'Let thy majesty go upon the lake of the palace, and
let there be made ready a boat, with all the fair maidens of the harem
of thy palace; and the heart of thy majesty shall be refreshed with
the sight, in seeing their rowing up and down the water, and seeing
the goodly pools of the birds upon the lake, and beholding its sweet
fields and grassy shores; thus will thy heart be lightened. And I also
will go with thee. Bring me twenty oars of ebony, inlayed with gold,
with blades of light wood, inlayed with electrum; and bring me twenty
maidens, fair in their limbs, their bosoms and their hair, all
virgins; and bring me twenty nets, and give these nets unto the
maidens for their garments.' And they did according to all the
commands of his majesty.

"And they rowed down the stream and up the stream, and the heart of his
majesty was glad with the sight of their rowing. But one of them at the
steering struck her hair, and her jewel of new malachite fell into the
water. And she ceased her song, and rowed not; and her companions
ceased, and rowed not. And his majesty said, 'Row you not further?' And
they replied, 'Our little steerer here stays and rows not.' His majesty
then said to her, 'Wherefore rowest thou not?' She replied, 'It is for
my jewel of new malachite which is fallen in the water.' And he said to
her, 'Row on, for behold I will replace it.' And she answered, 'But I
want my own piece back in its setting.' And his majesty said, 'Haste,
bring me the chief reciter Zazamankh,' and they brought him. And his
majesty said, 'Zazamankh, my brother, I have done as thou sayedst, and
the heart of his majesty is refreshed with the sight of their rowing.
But now a jewel of new malachite of one of the little ones is fallen in
the water, and she ceases and rows not, and she has spoilt the rowing of
her side. And I said to her, "Wherefore rowest thou not?" and she
answered to me, "It is for my jewel of new malachite which is fallen in
the water." I replied to her, "Row on, for behold I will replace it";
and she answered to me, "But I want my own piece again back in its
setting."' Then the chief reciter Zazamankh spake his magic speech. And
he placed one part of the waters of the lake upon the other, and
discovered the jewel lying upon a shard; and he took it up and gave it
unto its mistress. And the water, which was twelve cubits deep in the
middle, reached now to twenty-four cubits after he turned it. And he
spake, and used his magic speech; and he brought again the water of the
lake to its place. And his majesty spent a joyful day with the whole of
the royal house. Then rewarded he the chief reciter Zazamankh with all
good things. Behold, this is a wonder that came to pass in the days of
thy father, the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Seneferu, of the deeds of
the chief reciter, the scribe of the rolls, Zazamankh." Then said the
majesty of the king of Upper and Lower Egypt, Khufu, the blessed, "Let
there be presented an offering of a thousand cakes, one hundred draughts
of beer, an ox, and two jars of incense to the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, Sene-feru, the blessed; and let there be given a loaf, a jar of
beer, and a jar of incense to the chief reciter, the scribe of the
rolls, Zazamankh; for I have seen the token of his learning." And they
did all things as his majesty commanded.




HORDEDEF'S TALE


The royal son Hordedef then stood forth and spake. He said, "Hitherto
hast thou only heard tokens of those who have gone before, and of
which no man knoweth their truth But I will show thy majesty a man of
thine own days." And his majesty said, "Who is he, Hordedef?" And the
royal son Hordedef answered, "It is a certain man named Dedi, who
dwells at Dedsneferu. He is a man of one hundred and ten years old;
and he eats five hundred loaves of bread, and a side of beef, and
drinks one hundred draughts of beer, unto this day. He knows how to
restore the head that is smitten off; he knows how to cause the lion
to follow him trailing his halter on the ground; he knows the designs
of the dwelling of Tahuti. The majesty of the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, Khufu, the blessed, has long sought for the designs of the
dwelling of Tahuti, that he may make the like of them in his pyramid."

And his majesty said, "Thou, thyself, Hordedef, my son, bring him to
me." Then were the ships made ready for the king's son Hordedef, and he
went up the stream to Dedsneferu. And when the ships had moored at the
haven, he landed, and sat him in a litter of ebony, the poles of which
were of cedar wood overlayed with gold. Now when he drew near to Dedi,
they set down the litter. And he arose to greet Dedi, and found him
lying on a palmstick couch at the door of his house; one servant held
his head and rubbed him, and another rubbed his feet.

And the king's son Hordedef said, "Thy state is that of one who lives to
good old age; for old age is the end of our voyage, the time of
embalming, the time of burial. Lie, then, in the sun, free of
infirmities, without the babble of dotage: this is the salutation to
worthy age. I come from far to call thee, with a message from my father
Khufu, the blessed, for thou shalt eat of the best which the king gives,
and of the food which those have who follow after him; that he may bring
thee in good estate to thy fathers who are in the tomb."

And Dedi replied to him, "Peace to thee! Peace to thee! Hordedef, son of
the king, beloved of his father. May thy father Khufu, the blessed,
praise thee, may he advance thee amongst the elders, may thy _ka_ prevail
against the enemy, may thy soul know the right road to the gate of him
who clothes the afflicted; this is the salutation to the king's son."
Then the king's son, Hordedef, stretched forth his hands to him, and
raised him up, and went with him to the haven, giving unto him his arm.
Then said Dedi, "Let there he given me a boat, to bring me my youths and
my books." And they made ready for him two boats with their rowers. And
Dedi went down the river in the barge in which was the king's son
Hordedef. And when he had reached the palace, the king's son, Hordedef,
entered in to give account unto his majesty the king of Upper and Lower
Egypt, Khufu, the blessed. Then said the king's son Hordedef, "O king,
life, wealth, and health! My lord, I have brought Dedi." His majesty
replied, "Bring him to me speedily." And his majesty went into the hall
of columns of Pharaoh (life, wealth, and health), and Dedi was led
before him. And his majesty said, "Wherefore is it, Dedi, that I have
not yet seen thee?" And Dedi answered, "He who is called it is that
comes; the king (life, wealth, and health) calls me, and behold I
come," And his majesty said, "Is it true, that which men say, that
thou canst restore the head which is smitten off?" And Dedi replied,
"Truly, I know that, O king (life, wealth, and health), my lord." And
his majesty said, "Let one bring me a prisoner who is in prison, that
his punishment may be fulfilled." And Dedi said, "Let it not be a man,
O king, my lord; behold we do not even thus to our cattle." And a duck
was brought unto him, and its head was cut off. And the duck was laid
on the west side of the hall, and its head on the east side of the
hall. And Dedi spake his magic speech. And the duck fluttered along
the ground, and its head came likewise; and when it had come part to
part the duck stood and quacked. And they brought likewise a goose
before him, and he did even so unto it. His majesty caused an ox to be
brought, and its head cast on the ground. And Dedi spake his magic
speech. And the ox stood upright behind him, and followed him with his
halter trailing on the ground.

And King Khufu said, "And is it true what is said, that thou knowest the
number of the designs of the dwelling of Tahuti?" And Dedi replied,
"Pardon me, I know not their number, O king (life, wealth, and health),
but I know where they are." And his majesty said, "Where is that?" And
Dedi replied, "There is a chest of whetstone in a chamber named the
plan-room, in Heli-opolis; they are in this chest." And Dedi said
further unto him, "O king (life, wealth, and health), my lord, it is not
I that is to bring them to thee." And his m'jesty said, "Who, then, is
it that shall bring them to me?" And Dedi answered to him, "It is the
eldest of the three children who are in the body of Rud-didet who
shall bring them to thee." And his majesty said, "Would that it may be
as thou sayest! And who is this Rud-didet?" And Dedi replied, "She is
the wife of a priest of Ra, lord of Sakhebu. And she has conceived
these three sons by Ra, lord of Sakhebu, and the god has promised her
that they shall fulfil this noble office (of reigning) over all this
land, and that the eldest of them shall be high priest in Heliopolis."
And his majesty's heart became troubled for this; but Dedi spake unto
him, "What is this that thou thinkest, O king (life, wealth, health),
my lord? Is it because of these three children? I tell thee thy son
shall reign, and thy son's son, and then one of them." His majesty
said, "And when shall Rud-didet bear these?" And he replied, "She
shall bear them on the 26th of the month Tybi." And his majesty said,
"When the banks of the canal of Letopolis are cut, I will walk there
that I may see the temple of Ra, lord of Sakhebu." And Dedi replied,
"Then I will cause that there be four cubits of water by the banks of
the canal of Letopolis." When his majesty returned to his palace, his
majesty said, "Let them place Dedi in the house of the royal son
Hordedef, that he may dwell with him, and let them give him a daily
portion of a thousand loaves, a hundred draughts of beer, an ox, and a
hundred bunches of onions." And they did everything as his majesty
commanded.

And one day it came to pass that Rud-didet felt the pains of birth. And
the majesty of Ra, lord of Sakhebu, said unto Isis, to Nebhat, to
Meskhent, to Hakt, and to Khnumu, "Go ye, and deliver Rud-didet of these
three children that she shall bear, who are to fulfil this noble office
over all this land; that they may build up your temples, furnish your
altars with offerings, supply your tables of libation, and increase your
endowments." Then went these deities; their fashion they made as that of
dancing-girls, and Khnumu was with them as a porter. They drew near
unto the house of Ra-user, and found him standing, with his girdle
fallen. And they played before him with their instruments of music.
But he said unto them, "My ladies, behold, here is a woman who feels
the pains of birth." They said to him, "Let us see her, for we know
how to help her." And he replied, "Come, then." And they entered in
straightway to Rud-didet, and they closed the door on her and on
themselves. Then Isis stood before her, and Nebhat stood behind her,
and Hakt helped her. And Isis said, "O child, by thy name of User-ref,
do not do violence." And the child came upon her hands, as a child of
a cubit; its bones were strong, the beauty of its limbs was like gold,
and its hair was like true lapis lazuli. They washed him, and prepared
him, and placed him on a carpet on the brickwork. Then Meskhent
approached him and said, "This is a king who shall reign over all the
land." And Khnumu gave strength to his limbs. Then Isis stood before
her, and Nebhat stood behind her, and Hakt helped her.  And Isis said,
"O child, by thy name of Sah-ra, stay not in her." Then the child came
upon her hands, a child of a cubit; its bones were strong, the beauty
of its limbs was like gold, and its hair was like true lapis lazuli.
They washed him, and prepared him, and layed him on a carpet on the
brickwork. Then Meskhent approached him and said, "This is a king who
shall reign over all the land." And Khnumu gave strength to his limbs.
Then Isis stood before her, and Nebhat stood behind her, and Hakt
helped her. And Isis said, "O child, by thy name of Kaku, remain not
in darkness in her." And the child came upon her hands, a child of a
cubit; its bones were strong, the beauty of its limbs was like gold,
and its hair was like true lapis lazuli. And Meskhent approached him
and said, "This is a king who shall reign over all the land." And
Khnumu gave strength to his limbs.  And they washed him, and prepared
him, and layed him on a carpet on the brickwork.

And the deities went out, having delivered Rud-didet of the three
children. And they said, "Rejoice! O Ra-user, for behold three children
are born unto thee." And he said unto them, "My ladies, and what shall I
give unto ye? Behold, give this bushel of barley here unto your porter,
that ye may take it as your reward to the brew-house." And Khnumu loaded
himself with the bushel of barley. And they went away toward the place
from which they came. And Isis spake unto these goddesses, and said,
"Wherefore have we come without doing a marvel for these children, that
we may tell it to their father who has sent us?" Then made they the
divine diadems of the king (life, wealth, and health), and laid them in
the bushel of barley. And they caused the clouds to come with wind and
rain; and they turned back again unto the house. And they said, "Let us
put this barley in a closed chamber, sealed up, until we return
northward, dancing." And they placed the barley in a close chamber.

And Rud-didet purified herself, with a purification of fourteen days.
And she said to her handmaid, "Is the house made ready?" And she
replied, "All things are made ready, but the brewing barley is not yet
brought." And Rud-didet said, "Wherefore is the brewing barley not yet
brought?" And the servant answered, "It would all of it long since
be ready if the barley had not been given to the dancing-girls, and lay
in the chamber under their seal." Rud didet said, "Go down, and bring of
it, and Ra-user shall give them in its stead when he shall come," And
the handmaid went, and opened the chamber. And she heard talking and
singing, music and dancing, quavering, and all things which are
performed for a king in his chamber. And she returned and told to
Rud-didet all that she had heard. And she went through the chamber, but
she found not the place where the sound was. And she layed her temple to
the sack, and found that the sounds were in it. She placed it in a
chest, and put that in another locker, and tied it fast with leather,
and layed it in the store-room, where the things were, and sealed it.
And Ra-user came returning from the field; and Rud-didet repeated unto
him these things; and his heart was glad above all things; and they sat
down and made a joyful day.

And after these days it came to pass that Rud-didet was wroth with her
servant, and beat her with stripes. And the servant said unto those that
were in the house, "Shall it be done thus unto me? She has borne three
kings, and I will go and tell this to his majesty King Khufu the
blessed." And she went, and found the eldest brother of her mother, who
was binding his flax on the floor. And he said to her, "Whither goest
thou, my little maid?" And she told him of all these things. And her
brother said to her, "Wherefore comest thou thus to me?  Shall I agree
to treachery?" And he took a bunch of the flax to her, and laid on
her a violent blow. And the servant went to fetch a handful of water,
and a crocodile carried her away.

Her uncle went therefore to tell of this to Rud-didet; and he found
Rud-didet sitting, her head on her knees, and her heart beyond measure
sad. And he said to her, "My lady, why makest thou thy heart thus?" And
she answered, "It is because of this little wretch that was in the
house; behold she went out saying, 'I will go and tell it.'" And he
bowed his head unto the ground, and said, "My lady, she came and told me
of these things, and made her complaint unto me; and I laid on her a
violent blow. And she went forth to draw water, and a crocodile carried
her away."

_(The rest of the tale is lost.)_




Remarks


The tales or the magicians are only preserved in a single copy, and of
that the beginning is entirely lost. The papyrus was brought from Egypt
by an English traveller, and was purchased by the Berlin Museum from the
property of Lepsius, who had received it from the owner, Miss Westcar:
hence it is known as the Westcar papyrus. It was written probably in the
XIIth Dynasty, but doubtless embodied tales, which had been floating
for generations before, about the names of the early kings. It shows us
probably the kind of material that existed for the great recension of
the pre-monu-mental history, made in the time of Seti I. Those ages of
the first three dynasties were as long before that recension as we are
after it; and this must always be remembered in considering the
authority of the Egyptian records.

This papyrus has been more thoroughly studied than most, perhaps more
than any other. Erman has devoted two volumes to it; publishing the
whole in photographic facsimile, transcribed in hieroglyphs,
transcribed in the modern alphabet, translated literally, translated
freely, commented on and discussed word by word, and with a complete
glossary of all words used in it. This exhaustive publication is named
"Der Marchen des Papyrus Westcar." Moreover, Maspero has given a
current translation in the "Contes Populaires," 2nd edit. pp. 53-86.

The scheme of these tales is that they are all told to King Khufu by his
sons; and as the beginning is lost, eight lines are here added to
explain this and introduce the subject. The actual papyrus begins with
the last few words of a previous tale concerning some other magician
under an earlier king. Then comes the tale of Khafra, next that of
Bau-f-ra, and lastly that of Hor-dedef.

It need hardly be said that these tales are quite fictitious. The king
and his successor Khafra are real, but the other sons cannot be
identified; and the confusion of supposing three kings of the Vth
Dynasty to be triplets born early in the IVth Dynasty, shows what very
vague ideas of their own history the Egyptians had when these tales were
formed. This does not prevent our seeing that they embodied some very
important traditions, and gives us an unequalled picture of the early
civilisation.

In the earliest tale or the three there seems at first sight merely a
sketch of faithlessness and revenge. But there is probably much more
in it. To read it aright we must bear in mind the position of woman in
ancient Egypt. If, in later ages, Islam has gone to the extreme of the
man determining his own divorce at a word, in early times almost the
opposite system prevailed. All property belonged to the woman; all
that a man could earn, or inherit, was made over to his wife; and
families always reckoned back further on the mother's side than the
father's. As the changes in historical times have been in the
direction of men's rights, it is very unlikely that this system of
female predominance was invented or introduced, but rather that it
descends from primitive times. In this tale we see, then, at the
beginning of our knowledge of the country, the clashing of two
different social systems. The reciter is strong for men's rights, he
brings destruction on the wife, and never even gives her name, but
always calls her merely "the wife of Uba-aner." But behind all this
there is probably the remains of a very different system. The servant
employed by the mistress seems to see nothing outrageous in her
proceedings; and even the steward, who is on the master's side, waits
a day or two before reporting matters. When we remember the supremacy
in properly and descent which women held in Egypt, and then read this
tale, it seems that it belongs to the close of a social system like
that of the Nairs, in which the lady makes her selection--with
variations from time to time. The incident of sending a present of
clothing is curiously like the tale about a certain English envoy,
whose proprieties were sadly ruffled in the Nair country, when a lady
sent him a grand shawl with an intimation of her choice. The
priestesses of Amen retained to the last this privilege of choice, as
being under divine, and not human protection; but it seems to have
become unseemly in late times.

The hinging of this tale, and of those that follow it, upon the use of
magic, shows how thoroughly the belief in magic powers was ingrained
in the Egyptians. Now such a belief implies the presence of magicians,
and shows how familiar must have been the claim to such powers, and
the practising of the tricks of witchcraft, so prevalent in Africa in
modern times. The efficacy of a model, such as this crocodile of wax,
is an idea continually met with in Egypt. The system of tomb furniture
and decoration, of _ka_ statues, of _ushabtis_ or figures to work for
the deceased, and the models placed in foundation deposits, all show
how a model was supposed to have the efficacy of an actual reality.
Even in the latest tale of all (written in Ptolemaic times), Setnau
makes a model of a boat and men, to be sunk in the river to work for
him. The reconversion of the crocodile to wax, on being taken up by
the magician, reminds us of the serpent becoming again a rod when
taken up by Aaron.

The punishment of burning alive is very rarely, if ever, mentioned in
Egyptian history, though it occurs in modern Egyptian tales: and it
looks as if it were brought in here rather as a dire horror for the
climax than as a probable incident. The place of the penalty, in front
of the harem, or the private portion of the palace, was evidently for
the intimidation of other ladies.

At the close of each tale, King Khufu, to whom it is told, orders
funerary offerings by the usual formula, to be presented in honour of
the king under whom the wonder took place. On the tablets of the tombs
in the early times, there is usually recorded the offering--or, rather,
the pious desire that there should be offered--thousands of loaves, of
oxen, of gazelles, of cranes, &c., for a deceased person. Such
expression cost no more by the thousand than by the dozen, so thousands
came to be the usual expression in all ordaining of offerings.

We are so accustomed to think of tedium as something modern, that it
seems strange to find in the oldest tales [Page 16] in the world how the
first king of whom we know anything was bored by his pleasures. A reward
for discovering a new pleasure is the very basis of the tale of Sneferu;
and the wise man's remedy of a day in the country is still the best
resource, though all that we know as human history has tried its
experiments in enjoyment since then. The flavour of the ballet thrown
in, by the introduction of the damsels of the household clad in fishing
nets, is not yet obsolete in modern amusements; and even in this century
Muhammed Ali had resource to the same way of killing time, as he was
rowed about by his _harem,_ but on an artificial lake.

The use of two large oars for steering explains the detail of the
story.  The oars were one on each side of the stern, and were each
managed by a steerer. From the tale we see that the steerer led the
song of the rowers, and if the leader ceased, all that side of the
boat ceased also.. The position of the lost jewel upon the hair shows
that it was in a fillet set with inlaying, like that seen on early
figures, such as Nefert at Medum, who wears a fillet of rosettes to
retain the hair; and the position of the steering oar attached to a
post, with the handle rising high in the air, explains how it could
strike the fillet and displace the jewel.

The last tale is really double, a tale within a tale. It begins with
the wonders done by Dedi, and then goes on with the [Page 22] history
or the children about whom he prophesied to Khufu.

The village of Dedi was probably near Medum, as in the temple of Sneferu
at Medum an offering was found presented by a worshipper to the gods
of Ded-sneferu: hence the background which is here given for the scene
of Hordedef leading old Dedi. The translation of "the designs of the
dwelling of Tahuti" is not certain; but the passage seems to refer to
some architectural plan which was desired for the pyramid.

The story of Rud-didet is remarkable historically. She is said to be
wife of the priest of Ra, her children are sons of Ra, and they are the
first three kings of the Vth dynasty, and supplanted the line of Khufu.
This points to the Vth Dynasty having been a priestly usurpation; and on
looking at its history we see two confirmations of this. The title "Son
of Ra" is so common in most ages in Egypt that it is taken for granted,
and is applied in lists to any second cartouche; but it is not found
until well into the Vth Dynasty; the earlier kings were not descendants
of Ra, and it is only on arriving at this dynasty, which claimed descent
from Ra, through the wife of the priest of Ra, that we find the claim
of each king to be a "son of Ra." Another confirmation of this
priestly descent is the abundance of priesthoods established for the
kings of the Vth Dynasty; a care which agrees with their having a
priestly origin; while in the tale it is particularly said that they
would build up the temples, furnish the altars with offerings, supply
the tables of libations, and increase the religious endowments.

The names of the three children are a play upon the names of the first
three kings of the Vth Dynasty. User-kaf is made into User-ref;
Sahu-ra is written Sah-ra; and Kaka is Kaku; thus making allusions to
their births. The comparison of the hair to true lapis lazuli seems
very strange; but there is often a confusion between black aind blue
in uneducated races, and _azrak_ means either dark blue or green, or
black, at present in Arabic. Lapis lazuli is brought in to the name of
the queen of Ramessu VI., who was called "gold and lazuli,"
_Nub-khesdeb;_ recalling the comparison here of personal beauty to
these precious materials.

It is noticeable here that in a tale of the Vth Dynasty, certainly
written as early as the XIIth Dynasty, we find professional dancers
commonly recognised, and going on travels through the country, with a
porter.

From this tale we also learn that Egyptian women underwent a
purification of fourteen days, during which they kept apart and did not
attend to any household matters. The mistress of the house here inquires
if the preparations are made for the feast on her return to household
affairs; and hears then how the beer cannot be made for lack of the barley.

The securing of the sack is just in accord with the remains of this
early period; the use of boxes, of thongs of leather for tying and of
clay sealings for securing property, were all familiar matters in the
XIIth Dynasty, as we learn from Kahun.

The present close of the tale is evidently only a stage in it, when the
treacherous maid meets with the common doom of the wicked in Egyptian
romance. How it was continued is a matter of speculation, but Khufu
ought certainly to reappear and to order great rewards for Dedi, who up
to this has only had maintenance on his requisite scale provided for
him. Yet it is imperative that the children shall be saved from his
wrath, as they are the kings of the Vth Dynasty. There may be a long
episode lost of their flight and adventures.

One reference to a date needs notice. The 25th of the month Tybi is said
to be the predicted birthday of the children; and Khufu refers to going
to Sakhebu about that time apparently, when the banks of the canal are
cut and the land was drying after the inundation, whereon Dedi
threatens that the water shall still be deep there. This points to 25th
Tybi being about the close of the inundation. This would be about
the case both in the beginning of the IVth Dynasty, and also in the
XIIth Dynasty, when the papyrus was perhaps written: hence there is
nothing conclusive to be drawn from this allusion so far. But when we
compare this tale with those following, we see good ground for its
belonging to a time before the XIIth Dynasty The following tale of the
peasant and the workman evidently belongs to the IXth or Xth Dynasties,
when Herakleopolis was the capital, and Sanehat is certainly of the
XIIth Dynasty. Yet in those we see character and incident made the basis
of interest, in place of the childish profusion of marvels of the Tales
of the Magicians. It seems impossible not to suppose that they belong to
very different ages and canons of taste; and hence we cannot refer the
crudities of the Khufu tales to the time of the far more elaborate and
polished recital of the adventures of Sanehat in the XIIth Dynasty.
Being thus obliged to suppose an earlier date for these tales, the
allusion to the month Tybi throws us back to a very early period--the
IVth Dynasty--for their original outlines. Doubtless they were modified
by reciters, and probably took shape in the Vth or VIth Dynasties; but
yet we must regard them as belonging practically to the age to which
they refer.




IN THE SEKHET HEMAT

IXTH DYNASTY




THE PEASANT AND THE WORKMAN


There dwelt in the Sekhet Hemat--or salt country--a peasant called the
Sekhti, with his wife and children, his asses and his dogs; and he
trafficked in all good things of the Sekhet Hemat to Henenseten. Behold
now he went with rushes, natron, and salt, with wood and pods, with
stones and seeds, and all good products of the Sekhet Hemat. And this
Sekhti journeyed to the south unto Henenseten; and when he came to the
lands of the house of Fefa, north of Denat, he found a man there
standing on the bank, a man called Hemti--the workman--son of a man
called Asri, who was a serf of the High Steward Meruitensa. Now said
this Hemti, when he saw the asses of Sekhti, that were pleasing in his
eyes, "Oh that some good god would grant me to steal away the goods of
Sekhti from him!"

Now the Hemti's house was by the dyke of the tow-path, which was
straitened, and not wide, as much as the width of a waist cloth: on the
one side of it was the water, and on the other side of it grew his corn.
Hemti said then to his servant, "Hasten I bring me a shawl from the
house," and it was brought instantly. Then spread he out this shawl on
the face of the dyke, and it lay with its fastening on the water and its
fringe on the corn.

Now Sekhti approached along the path used by all men. Said Hemti, "Have
a care, Sekhti! you are not going to trample on my clothes!" Said
Sekhti, "I will do as you like, I will pass carefully." Then went he
up on the higher side.  But Hemti said, "Go you over my corn, instead
of the path?" Said Sekhti, "I am going carefully; this high field of
corn is not my choice, but you have stopped your path with your
clothes, and will you then not let us pass by the side of the path?"
And one of the asses filled its mouth with a cluster of corn. Said
Hemti, "Look you, I shall take away your ass, Sekhti, for eating my
corn; behold it will have to pay according to the amount of the
injury." Said Sekhti, "I am going carefully; the one way is stopped,
therefore took I my ass by the enclosed ground, and do you seize it
for filling its mouth with a cluster of corn? Moreover, I know unto
whom this domain belongs, even unto the Lord Steward Meruitensa. He it
is who smites every robber in this whole land; and shall I then be
robbed in his domain?"

Said Hemti, "This is the proverb which men speak: 'A poor man's name is
only his own matter.' I am he of whom you spake, even the Lord Steward
of whom you think." Thereon he took to him branches of green tamarisk
and scourged all his limbs, took his asses, and drave them into the
pasture.  And Sekhti wept very greatly, by reason of the pain of what
he had suffered. Said Hemti, "Lift not up your voice, Sekhti, or you
shall go to the Demon of Silence." Sekhti answered, "You beat me, you
steal my goods, and now would take away even my voice, O demon of
silence! If you will restore my goods, then will I cease to cry out at
your violence."

Sekhti stayed the whole day petitioning Hemti, but he would not give ear
unto him. And Sekhti went his way to Khenensuten to complain to the Lord
Steward Meruitensa. He found him coming out from the door of his house
to embark on his boat, that he might go to the judgment hall. Sekhti
said, "Ho! turn, that I may please thy heart with this discourse. Now at
this time let one of thy followers whom thou wilt, come to me that I
may send him to thee concerning it." The Lord Steward Meruitensa made
his follower, whom he chose, go straight unto him, and Sekhti sent him
back with an account of all these matters. Then the Lord Steward
Meruitensa accused Hemti unto the nobles who sat with him; and they said
unto him, "By your leave: As to this Sekhti of yours, let him bring a
witness. Behold thou it is our custom with our Sekhtis; witnesses come
with them; behold, that is our custom.  Then it will be fitting to
beat this Hemti for a trifle of natron and a trifle of salt; if he is
commanded to pay for it, he will pay for it." But the High Steward
Meruitensa held his peace; for he would not reply unto these nobles,
but would reply unto the Sekhti.

Now Sekhti came to appeal to the Lord Steward Meruitensa, and said, "O
my Lord Steward, greatest of the great, guide of the needy:

  When thou embarkest on the lake of truth,--
  Mayest thou sail upon it with a fair wind;
  May thy mainsail not fly loose.
  May there not be lamentation in thy cabin;
  May not misfortune come after thee.
  May not thy mainstays be snapped;
  Mayest thou not run aground.
  May not the wave seize thee;
  Mayest thou not taste the impurities of the river;
  Mayest thou not see the face of fear.
  May the fish come to thee without escape;
  Mayest thou reach unto plump waterfowl.
  For thou art the orphan's father, the widow's husband,
  The desolate woman's brother, the garment of the motherless.
  Let me celebrate thy name in this land for every virtue.
  A guide without greediness of heart;
  A great one without any meanness.
  Destroying deceit, encouraging justice;
  Coming to the cry, and allowing utterance.
  Let me speak, do thou hear and do justice;
  O praised! whom the praised ones praise.
  Abolish oppression, behold me, I am overladen,
  Reckon with me, behold me defrauded."

Now the Sekhti made this speech in the time of the majesty of the King
Neb-ka-n-ra, blessed. The Lord Steward Meruitensa went away straight to
the king and said, "My lord, I have found one of these Sekhti, excellent
of speech, in very truth; stolen are his goods, and he has come to
complain to me of the matter."

His majesty said, "As thou wishest that I may see health! lengthen out
his complaint, without replying to any of his speeches. He who
desireth him to continue speaking should be silent; behold, bring us
his words in writing, that we may listen to them. But provide for his
wife and his children, and let the Sekhti himself also have a living.
Thou must cause one to give him his portion without letting him know
that thou art he who is giving it to him."

There were given to him four loaves and two draughts of beer each day;
which the Lord Steward Meruitensa provided for him, giving it to a
friend of his, who furnished it unto him. Then the Lord Steward
Meruitensa sent the governor of the Sekhet Hemat to make provision for
the wife of the Sekhti, three rations of corn each day.

Then came the Sekhti a second time, and even a third time, unto the Lord
Steward Meruitensa; but he told two of his followers to go unto the
Sekhti, and seize on him, and beat him with staves. But he came again
unto him, even unto six times, and said--

"My Lord Steward-Destroying deceit, and encouraging justice; Raising up
every good thing, and crushing every evil; As plenty comes removing
famine, As clothing covers nakedness, As clear sky after storm warms the
shivering; As fire cooks that which is raw, As water quenches the
thirst; Look with thy face upon my lot; do not covet, but
content me without fail; do the right and do not evil."

But yet Meruitensa would not hearken unto his complaint; and the Sekhti
came yet, and yet again, even unto the ninth time. Then the Lord Steward
told two of his followers to go unto the Sekhti; and the Sekhti feared
that he should be beaten as at the third request. But the Lord Steward
Meruitensa then said unto him, "Fear not, Sekhti, for what thou has
done. The Sekhti has made many speeches, delightful to the heart of his
majesty and I take an oath--as I eat bread, and as I drink water--that
thou shalt be remembered to eternity." Said the Lord Steward, "Moreover,
thou shalt be satisfied when thou shalt hear of thy complaints." He
caused to be written on a clean roll of papyrus each petition to the
end, and the Lord Steward Meruitensa sent it to the majesty of the
King Neb-ka-n-ra, blessed, and it was good to him more than anything
that is in the whole land: but his majesty said to Meruitensa, "Judge
it thyself; I do not desire it."

The Lord Steward Meruitensa made two of his followers to go to the
Sekhet Hemat, and bring a list of the household of the Sekhti; and its
amount was six persons, beside his oxen and his goats, his wheat and his
barley, his asses and his dogs; and moreover he gave all that which
belonged unto the Hemti to the Sekhti, even all his property and his
offices, and the Sekhti was beloved of the king more than all his
overseers, and ate of all the good things of the king, with all his
household.




Remarks


Of the tale of the peasant and the workman three copies, more or less
imperfect, remain to us. At Berlin are two papyri, Nos. 2 and 4,
containing parts of the tale, published in facsimile in the "Denkmaler"
of Lepsius vi. 108-110 and 113; while portions of another copy exist in
the Butler papyrus; and lately fragments of the same have been collated
in the collection of Lord Amherst of Hackney. These last have been
published in the Proceedings of the Society of Biblical Archaeology,
xiv. 558. The number of copies seem to show that this was a popular tale
in early times; it certainly is of a more advanced type than the earlier
tales of magic, though it belongs to a simpler style than the tales
which follow. It has been translated partially by Chabas and Goodwin,
and also by Maspero, but most completely by Griffith in the Proceedings
of the Society of Biblical Archaeology, referred to above.

The beginning of the tale is lost in all the copies, and an introductory
sentence is here added in brackets, to explain the position of affairs
at the opening of the fragment. The essence of the tale is the
difference in social position between the Sekhti, or peasant, and the
Hemti, or workman--the _fellah_ and the client of the noble; and the
impossibility of getting justice against a client, unless by some
extraordinary means of attracting his patron's attention, is the basis
of the action. There is not a single point of incident here which might
not be true in modern times; every turn of it seems to live, as one
reads it in view of country life in Egypt.

The region of the tale is Henenseten, or Herakleopolis, now Ahnas, a
little south of the Fayum. This was the seat of the IXth and Xth
Dynasties, apparently ejected from Memphis by a foreign invasion of the
Delta; and here it is that the High Steward lives and goes to speak to
the king. The district of the Sekhti is indicated by his travelling
south to Henenseten, and going with asses and not by boat. Hence we are
led to look for the Sekhet Hemat, or salt country, in the borders of the
Fayum lake, whence the journey would be southward, and across the
desert. This lake was not regulated artificially until the XIIth
Dynasty; and hence at the period of this tale it was a large sheet of
water, fluctuating with each rise and fall of the Nile, and bordered by
lagoons where rushes would flourish, and where salt and natron would
accumulate daring the dry season of each year. At the present time the
lake of the Fayum is brackish, and the cliffs which border it contain so
much salt that rain pools which collect on them are not drinkable. The
paths and roads of Egypt are not protected by law as in Western
countries. Each person encroaches on a path or diverts it as may suit
his purpose, only checked by the liberties taken by passers-by in
trespassing if a path be insufficient. Hence, it is very usual to see a
house built over half of a path, and driving the traffic into the
field or almost over the river bank. In this case the Hemti had taken
in as much of the path as he could, and left it but a narrow strip
along the top of the canal bank. The frequent use of the public way
for drying clothes, or spreading out property, gave the idea of
choking the way altogether, and leaving no choice but trespassing on
the crops. No sooner does a donkey pause, or even pass, by a field of
corn than he snatches a mouthful, and in a delay or altercation such
as this the beast is sure to take the advantage.  Donkeys carrying
loads by cornfields are usually muzzled with rope nets, to prevent
their feeding; and even sheep and goats are also fended in the same
way.

The proverb, "A poor man's name is only his own matter," refers to the
independent _fellah_ having no patron or protector who will take up and
defend his name from accusations, as the interests of clients and serfs
would be protected. This being the case, Hemti therefore seizes on the
property, and drives the asses into his own pasture field.

The scene of Meruitensa laying the case before the nobles who sat with
him is interesting as showing that even simple cases were not decided by
one judge, but referred to a council. Similarly, Una lays stress on the
private trial of the queen being confided to him and only one other
judge. Apparently, referring cases to a bench of judges was the means of
preventing corruption.

The speeches of the Sekhti were given at full length in the papyrus, but
owing to injuries we cannot now entirely recover them; they are all in
much the same strain, only the first and last are translated here, and
the others are passed over. The style of these speeches was evidently
looked on as eloquent in those days, and this papyrus really seems to
show the time when long-drawn comparisons and flowery wishes were in
fashion. It is far different from later compositions, as it is also from
the earlier simple narration of crude marvels in the tales of the
magicians.

The close of the tale is defective, but from the remains it appears to
have ended by the gift of the Hemti's property to the oppressed Sekhti
and the triumph of the injured peasant.




GOING TO WAWAT, XIITH DYNASTY




THE SHIPWRECKED SAILOR


The wise servant said, "Let thy heart be satisfied, O my lord, for
that we have come back to the country; after we have long been on board,
and rowed much, the prow has at last touched land. All the people
rejoice, and embrace us one after another. Moreover, we have come back
in good health, and not a man is lacking; although we have been to the
ends of Wawat, and gone through the land of Senmut, we have returned in
peace, and our land--behold, we have come back to it. Hear me, my
lord; I have no other refuge. Wash thee, and turn the water over thy
ringers; then go and tell the tale to the majesty."

His lord replied, "Thy heart continues still its wandering words! but
although the mouth of a man may save him, his words may also cover his
face with confusion. Wilt thou do then as thy heart moves thee? This
that thou wilt say, tell quietly."

The sailor then answered, "Now I shall tell that which has happened to
me, to my very self I was going to the mines of Pharaoh, and I went down
on the sea on a ship of 150 cubits long and 40 cubits wide, with 150
sailors of the best of Egypt, who had seen heaven and earth, and whose
hearts were stronger than lions. They had said that the wind would not
be contrary, or that there would be none. But as we approached the land
the wind arose, and threw up waves eight cubits high. As for me, I
seized a piece of wood; but those who were in the vessel perished,
without one remaining. A wave threw me on an island, after that I had
been three days alone, without a companion beside my own heart. I laid
me in a thicket, and the shadow covered me. Then stretched I my limbs
to try to find something for my mouth. I found there figs and grapes,
all manner of good herbs, berries and grain, melons of all kinds,
fishes and birds. Nothing was lacking.  And I satisfied myself; and
left on the ground that which was over, of what my arms had been
filled withal. I dug a pit, I lighted a fire, and I made a
burnt-offering unto the gods.

"Suddenly I heard a noise as of thunder, which I thought to be that of a
wave of the sea. The trees shook, and the earth was moved. I uncovered
my face, and I saw that a serpent drew near. He was thirty cubits long,
and his beard greater than two cubits; his body was as overlayed with
gold, and his colour as that of true lazuli. He coiled himself before me.

"Then he opened his mouth, while that I lay on my face before him, and
he said to me, 'What has brought thee, what has brought thee, little
one, what has brought thee? If thou sayest not speedily what has
brought thee to this isle, I will make thee know thyself; as a flame
thou shalt vanish, if thou tellest me not something I have not heard,
or which I knew not, before thee.'

"Then he took me in his mouth and carried me to his resting-place, and
layed me down without any hurt. I was whole and sound, and nothing was
gone from me. Then he opened his mouth against me, while that I lay on
my face before him, and he said, 'What has brought thee, what has
brought thee, little one, what has brought thee to this isle which is in
the sea, and of which the shores are in the midst of the waves?'

"Then I replied to him, and holding my arms low before him, I said to
him,' I was embarked for the mines by the order of the majesty, in a
ship, 150 cubits was its length, and the width of it 40 cubits. It had
150 sailors of the best of Egypt, who had seen heaven and earth, and
the hearts of whom were stronger than lions. They said that the wind
would not be contrary, or that there would be none. Each of them
exceeded his companion in the prudence of his heart and the strength
of his arm, and I was not beneath any of them. A storm came upon us
while we were on the sea. Hardly could we reach to the shore when the
wind waxed yet greater, and the waves rose even eight cubits. As for
me, I seized a piece of wood, while those who were in the boat
perished without one being left with me for three days.  Behold me now
before thee, for I was brought to this isle by a wave of the sea.'

"Then said he to me, 'Fear not, fear not, little one, and make not thy
face sad. If thou hast come to me, it is God who has let thee live. For
it is He who has brought thee to this isle of the blest, where nothing
is lacking, and which is filled with all good after another, until
thou shalt be four months in this isle. Then a ship shall come from
thy land with sailors, and thou shalt leave with them and go to thy
country, and thou shalt die in thy town.

'"Converse is pleasing, and he who tastes of it passes over his
misery.  I will therefore tell thee of that which is in this isle. I
am here with my brethren and my children around me; we are
seventy-five serpents, children, and kindred; without naming a young
girl who was brought unto me by chance, and on whom the fire of heaven
fell, and burnt her to ashes.

"'As for thee if thou art strong, and if thy heart waits patiently, thou
shalt press thy infants to thy bosom and embrace thy wife. Thou shalt
return to thy house which is full of all good things, thou shalt see thy
land, where thou shalt dwell in the midst of thy kindred.'

"Then I bowed, in my obeisance, and I touched the ground before him.
'Behold now that which I have told thee before. I shall tell of thy
presence unto Pharaoh, I shall make him to know of thy greatness, and I
will bring to thee of the sacred oils and perfumes, and of incense of
the temples with which all gods are honoured. I shall tell, moreover, of
that which I do now see (thanks to him), and there shall be rendered
to thee praises before the fulness of all the land. I shall slay asses
for thee in sacrifice, I shall pluck for thee the birds, and I shall
bring for thee ships full of all kinds of the treasures of Egypt, as
is comely to do unto a god, a friend of men in a far country, of which
men know not.'

"Then he smiled at my speech, because of that which was in his heart,
for he said to me, 'Thou art not rich in perfumes, for all that thou
hast is but common incense. As for me I am prince of the land of Punt,
and I have perfumes. Only the oil which thou sayedst thou wouldest bring
is not common in this isle. But, when thou shalt depart from this place,
thou shalt never more see this isle; it shall be changed into waves.'

"And, behold, when the ship drew near, according to all that he had told
me before, I got me up into an high tree, to strive to see those who
were within it. Then I came and told to him this matter; but it was already
known unto him before. Then he said to me. 'Farewell, farewell, go to
thy house, little one, see again thy children, and let thy name be good
in thy town; these are my wishes for thee.'"




THE FAREWELL


"Then I bowed myself before him, and held my arms low before him, and
he, he gave me gifts of precious perfumes, of cassia, of sweet woods, of
kohl, of cypress, an abundance of incense, of ivory tusks, of baboons,
of apes, and all kind of precious things. I embarked all in the ship
which was come, and bowing myself, I prayed God for him.

"Then he said to me, 'Behold thou shalt come to thy country in two
months, thou shalt press to thy bosom thy children, and thou shalt rest
in thy tomb.' After this I went down to the shore unto the ship, and I
called to the sailors who were there. Then on the shore I rendered
adoration to the master of this isle and to those who dwelt therein.

"When we shall come, in our return, to the house of Pharaoh, in the
second month, according to all that the serpent has said, we shall
approach unto the palace. And I shall go in before Pharaoh, I shall
bring the gifts which I have brought from this isle into the country.
Then he shall thank me before the fulness of all the land. Grant then
unto me a follower, and lead me to the courtiers of the king. Cast thy
eye upon me, after that I am come to land again, after that I have
both seen and proved this. Hear my prayer, for it is good to listen to
people. It was said unto me, 'Become a wise man, and thou shalt come
to honour,' and behold I have become such."

This is finished from its beginning unto its end, even as it was found
in a writing. It is written by the scribe of cunning fingers
Ameni-amen-aa; may he live in life, wealth, and health!




Remarks


This tale is only known in one copy, preserved in the Hermitage
collection at St. Petersburg. The papyrus has not yet been published,
either in facsimile or transcription. But two translations of it have
appeared by M. Golenischeff: from the earlier a modified translation is
given by Maspero in the "Contes Populaires," 2nd edit., pp. 133-146,
and the later translation is in M. Golenischeff's excellent
"Inventaire de la collection Egyptienne (Ermitage Imperial)," p.
177-182.

The tale is that of a returned sailor, speaking to his superior and
telling his adventures, to induce him to send him on with an
introduction to the king. At first his master professes to disbelieve
him, and then the sailor protests that this happened to himself, and
gives his narrative. The idea of an enchanted island, which has risen
from the waves and will sink again, is here found to be one of the
oldest plots for a tale of marvels. But the construction is far more
advanced than that of the tales of the magicians. The family of serpents
and the manner of the great serpent is well conceived, and there are
many fine touches of literary quality: such as noise as of thunder, the
trees shaking and the earth being moved at the appearance of the great
serpent--the speeches of the serpent and his threat--the sailors who had
seen heaven and earth--the contempt of the serpent for his offerings.

"As for me, I am prince of the land of Punt, and I have perfumes"--and
the scene of departure. All of these points show a firm hand and
practised taste, although there is still a style of simplicity clinging
to it which agrees well to its date in the XIIth Dynasty.

The great serpent is not of a type usual in Egyptian designs. The
human-headed uraeus is seldom bearded; and the best example of such a
monster is on an Ethiopian temple, where a great uraeus has human arms
and a lion's head. The colours again repeat the favourite combination
expressive of splendour--gold and lazuli. Though lazuli is very rare in
early times, yet it certainly was known in the XIIth Dynasty, as shown
by the forms of some beads of lazuli.

The slaughter of asses in sacrifice is a very peculiar offering, and no
sign of this is found in any representations or groups of offerings.

The colophon of the copyist at the end shows by the style of the name
that it belongs to the earlier part of the XIIth Dynasty, and if so, the
composition might be referred to the opening of foreign trade under
Sankhkara or Amenemhat I.




XIITH DYNASTY




THE ADVENTURES OF SANEHAT


The hereditary prince, royal seal-bearer, confidential friend, judge,
keeper of the gate of the foreigners, true and beloved royal
acquaintance, the royal follower Sanehat says:--

I attended my lord as a follower of the king, of the house of the
hereditary princess, the greatly favoured, the royal wife,
Ankhet-Usertesen, who shares the dwelling of the royal son Amenemhat in
Kanefer.

In the thirtieth year, the month Paophi, the seventh day the god entered
his horizon, the king Sehotepabra flew up to heaven and joined the sun's
disc, the follower of the god met his maker. The palace was silenced,
and in mourning, the great gates were closed, the courtiers crouching
on the ground, the people in hushed mourning.

His majesty had sent a great army with the nobles to the land of the
Temehu (Lybia), his son and heir, the good god king Usertesen as their
leader. Now he was returning, and had brought away living captives and
all kinds of cattle without end. The councillors of the palace had sent
to the West to let the king know the matter that had come to pass in the
inner hall. The messenger was to meet him on the road, and reach him at
the time of evening: the matter was urgent. "A hawk had soared with his
followers." Thus said he, not to let the army know of it Even if the
royal sons who commanded in that army send a message, he was not to
speak to a single one of them. But I was standing near, and heard his
voice while he was speaking. I fled far away, my heart beating, my arms
failing, trembling had fallen on all my limbs. I turned about in running
to seek a place to hide me, and I threw myself between two bushes, to
wait while they should pass by.




THE FLIGHT


Then I turned me toward the south, not from wishing to come into this
palace--for I knew not if war was declared--nor even thinking a wish to
live after this sovereign.

I turned my back to the sycamore, I reached Shi-Seneferu, and rested on
the open field. In the morning I went on and overtook a man, who passed
by the edge of the road. He asked of me mercy, for he feared me. By
the evening I drew near to Kher-ahau (? old Cairo), and I crossed the
river on a raft without a rudder. Carried over by the west wind, I
passed over to the east to the quarries of Aku and the land of the
goddess Herit, mistress of the red mountain (Gebel Ahmar). Then I fled
on foot, northward, and reached the walls of the prince, built to
repel the Sati.  I crouched in a bush for fear of being seen by the
guards, changed each day, who watch on the top of the fortress. I took
my way by night, and at the lighting or the day I reached Peten, and
turned me toward the valley of Kemur. Then thirst hasted me on; I
dried up, and my throat narrowed, and I said, "This is the taste of
death." When I lifted up my heart and gathered strength, I heard a
voice and the lowing of cattle. I saw men of the Sati, and one of
them--a friend unto Egypt--knew me. Behold he gave me water and boiled
me milk, and I went with him to his camp; they did me good, and one
tribe passed me on to another. I passed on to Sun, and reached the
land of Adim (Edom).

When I had dwelt there half a year Amu-an-shi--who is the prince of the
Upper Tenu--sent for me and said: "Dwell thou with me that thou mayest
hear the speech of Egypt." He said thus for that he knew of my
excellence, and had heard tell of my worth, for men of Egypt who were
there with him bore witness of me. Behold he said to me, "For what cause
hast thou come hither? Has a matter come to pass in the palace? Has the
king of the two lands, Sehetep-abra gone to heaven? That which has
happened about this is not known." But I answered with concealment, and
said, "When I came from the land of the Tamahu, and my desires were
there changed in me, if I fled away it was not by reason of remorse that
I took the way of a fugitive; I have not failed in my duty, my mouth has
not said any bitter words, I have not heard any evil counsel, my name
has not come into the mouth of a magistrate. I know not by what I have
been led into this land." And Amu-an-shi said, "This is by the will of
the god (king of Egypt), for what is a land like if it know not that
excellent god, of whom the dread is upon the lands of strangers, as
they dread Sekhet in a year of pestilence." I spake to him, and
replied, "Forgive me, his son now enters the palace, and has received
the heritage of his father. He is a god who has none like him, and
there is none before him. He is a master of wisdom, prudent in his
designs, excellent in his decrees, with good-will to him who goes or
who comes; he subdued the land of strangers while his father yet lived
in his palace, and he rendered account of that which his father
destined him to perform. He is a brave man, who verily strikes with
his sword; a valiant one, who has not his equal; he springs upon the
barbarians, and throws himself on the spoilers; he breaks the horns
and weakens the hands, and those whom he smites cannot raise the
buckler. He is fearless, and dashes the heads, and none can stand
before him. He is swift of foot, to destroy him who flies; and none
who flees from him reaches his home. His heart is strong in his time;
he is a lion who strikes with the claw, and never has he turned his
back. His heart is closed to pity; and when he sees multitudes, he
leaves none to live behind him. He is a valiant one who springs in
front when he sees resistance; he is a warrior who rejoices when he
flies on the barbarians. He seizes the buckler, he rushes forward, he
never needs to strike again, he slays and none can turn his lance; and
when he takes the bow the barbarians flee from his arms like dogs; for
the great goddess has given to him to strike those who know her not;
and if he reaches forth he spares none, and leaves nought behind. He
is a friend of great sweetness, who knows how to gain love; his land
loves him more than itself, and rejoices in him more than in its own
god; men and women run to his call. A king, he has ruled from his
birth; he, from his birth, has increased births, a sole being, a
divine essence, by whom this land rejoices to be governed. He enlarges
the borders of the South, but he covets not the lands of the North;
he does not smite the Sati, nor crush the Nemau-shau If he descends
here, let him know thy name, by the homage which thou wilt pay to his
majesty. For he refuses not to bless the land which obeys him."

And he replied to me, "Egypt is indeed happy and well settled; behold
thou art far from it, but whilst thou art with me I will do good unto
thee." And he placed me before his children, he married his eldest
daughter to me, and gave me the choice of all his land, even among the
best of that which he had on the border of the next land. It is a goodly
land, laa is its name. There are figs and grapes; there is wine commoner
than water; abundant is the honey, many are its olives; and all fruits
are upon its trees; there is barley and wheat, and cattle of kinds
without end. This was truly a great thing that he granted me, when the
prince came to invest me, and establish me as prince of a tribe in the
best of his land. I had my continual portion of bread and of wine each
day, of cooked meat, of roasted fowl, as well as the wild game which I
took, or which was brought to me, besides what my dogs captured. They
made me much butter, and prepared milk of all kinds. I passed many
years, the children that I had became great, each ruling his tribe.
When a messenger went or came to the palace, he turned aside from the
way to come to me; for I helped every man. I gave water to the
thirsty, I set on his way him who went astray, and I rescued the
robbed. The Sati who went far, to strike and turn back the princes of
other lands, I ordained their goings; for the Prince of the Tenu for
many years appointed me to be general of his soldiers. In every land
which I attacked I played the champion, I took the cattle, I led away
the vassals, I carried off the slaves, I slew the people, by my sword,
my bow, my marches and my good devices. I was excellent to the heart
of my prince; he loved me when he knew my power, and set me over his
children when he saw the strength of my arms.

A champion of the Tenu came to defy me in my tent: a bold man without
equal, for he had vanquished the whole country. He said, "Let Sanehat
fight with me;" for he desired to overthrow me, he thought to take my
cattle for his tribe. The prince counselled with me. I said, "I know
him not. I certainly am not of his degree, I hold me far from his
place. Have I ever opened his door, or leaped over his fence? It is
some envious jealousy from seeing me; does he think that I am like
some steer among the cows, whom the bull overthrows? If this is a
wretch who thinks to enrich himself at my cost, not a Bedawi and a
Bedawi fit for fight, then let us put the matter to judgment. Verily a
true bull loves battle, but a vain-glorious bull turns his back for
fear of contest; if he has a heart for combat, let him speak what he
pleases. Will God forget what He has ordained, and how shall that be
known?" I lay down; and when I had rested I strung my bow, I made
ready my arrows, I loosened my poignard, I furbished my arms. At dawn
the land of the Tenu came together; it had gathered its tribes and
called all the neighbouring people, it spake of nothing but the fight.
Each heart burnt for me, men and women crying out; for each heart was
troubled for me, and they said, "Is there another strong one who would
fight with him? Behold the adversary has a buckler, a battle axe, and
an armful of javelins." Then I drew him to the attack; I turned aside
his arrows, and they struck the ground in vain. One drew near to the
other, and he fell on me, and then I shot him. My arrow fastened in
his neck, he cried out, and fell on his face: I drove his lance into
him, and raised my shout of victory on his back. Whilst all the men of
the land rejoiced, I, and his vassals whom he had oppressed, gave
thanks unto Mentu. This prince, Amu-an-shi, embraced me. Then I
carried off his goods and took his cattle, that which he had wished to
do to me, I did even so unto him; I seized that which was in his tent,
I spoiled his dwelling. As time went on I increased the richness of my
treasures and the number of my cattle.

_Petition to the king of Egypt._

"Now behold what the god has done for me who trusted in him. Having once
fled away, yet now there is a witness of me in the palace. Once having
fled away, as a fugitive,------now all in the palace give unto me a good
name. After that I had been dying of hunger, now I give bread to those
around. I had left my land naked, and now I am clothed in fine linen.
After having been a wanderer without followers, now I possess many
serfs. My house is fine, my land wide, my memory is established in the
temple of all the gods. And let this flight obtain thy forgiveness;
that I may be appointed in the palace; that I may see the place where
my heart dwells. How great a thing is it that my body should be
embalmed in the land where I was born! To return there is happiness. I
have made offering to God, to grant me this thing. His heart suffers
who has run away unto a strange land. Let him hear the prayer of him
who is afar off, that he may revisit the place of his birth, and the
place from which he removed.

"May the king of Egypt be gracious to me that I may live of his favour.
And I render my homage to the mistress of the land, who is in his
palace; may I hear the news of her children. Thus will my limbs grow
young again. Now old age comes, feebleness seizes me, my eyes are
heavy, my arms are feeble, my legs will not move, my heart is slow.
Death draws nigh to me, soon shall they lead me to the city of
eternity. Let me follow the mistress of all (the queen, his former
mistress); lo! let her tell me the excellencies of her children; may
she bring eternity to me."

Then the majesty of King Kheper-ka-ra, the blessed, spake upon this my
desire that I had made to him. His majesty sent unto me with presents
from the king, that he might enlarge the heart of his servant, like unto
the province of any strange land; and the royal sons who are in the
palace addressed themselves unto me.

_Copy of the decree which was brought--to me who speak to you--to lead
me back into Egypt._

"The Horus, life of births, lord of the crowns, life of births, king
of Upper and Lower Egypt, Kheper-ka-ra, son of the Sun, Amen-em-hat,
ever living unto eternity. Order for the follower Sanehat. Behold this
order of the king is sent to thee to instruct thee of his will.

"Now, although thou hast gone through strange lands from Adim to Tenu,
and passed from one country to another at the wish of thy heart--behold,
what hast thou done, or what has been done against thee, that is amiss?
Moreover, thou reviledst not; but if thy word was denied, thou didst
not speak again in the assembly of the nobles, even if thou wast
desired. Now, therefore, that thou hast thought on this matter which
has come to thy mind, let thy heart not change again; for this thy
Heaven (queen), who is in the palace is fixed, she is flourishing, she
is enjoying the best in the kingdom of the land, and her children are
in the chambers of the palace.

"Leave all the riches that thou hast, and that are with thee,
altogether. When thou shalt come into Egypt behold the palace, and when
thou shalt enter the palace, bow thy face to the ground before the Great
House; thou shalt be chief among the companions. And day by day behold
thou growest old; thy vigour is lost, and thou thinkest on the day of
burial. Thou shalt see thyself come to the blessed state, they shall
give thee the bandages from the hand of Tait, the night of applying the
oil of embalming. They shall follow thy funeral, and visit the tomb on
the day of burial, which shall be in a gilded case, the head painted
with blue, a canopy of cypress wood above thee, and oxen shall draw
thee, the singers going before thee, and they shall dance the funeral
dance. The weepers crouching at the door of thy tomb shall cry aloud
the prayers for offerings: they shall slay victims for thee at the
door of thy pit; and thy pyramid shall be carved in white stone, in
the company of the royal children. Thus thou shalt not die in a
strange land, nor be buried by the Amu; thou shalt not be laid in a
sheep-skin when thou art buried; all people shall beat the earth, and
lament on thy body when thou goest to the tomb."

When this order came to me, I was in the midst of my tribe. When it was
read unto me, I threw me on the dust, I threw dust in my hair; I went
around my tent rejoicing and saying, "How may it be that such a thing
is done to the servant, who with a rebellious heart has fled to
strange lands? Now with an excellent deliverance, and mercy delivering
me from death, thou shall cause me to end my days in the palace."

_Copy of the answer to this order._

"The follower Sanehat says: In excellent peace above everything consider
of this flight that he made here in his ignorance; Thou, the Good God,
Lord of both Lands, Loved of Ra, Favourite of Mentu, the lord of Thebes,
and of Amen, lord of thrones of the lands, of Sebek, Ra, Horus, Hathor,
Atmu, and of his fellow-gods, of Sopdu, Neferbiu, Samsetu, Horus, lord
of the east, and of the royal uraeus which rules on thy head, of the
chief gods of the waters, of Min, Horus of the desert, Urrit, mistress
of Punt, Nut, Harnekht, Ra, all the gods of the land of Egypt, and of
the isles of the sea. May they give life and peace to thy nostril, may
they load thee with their gifts, may they give to thee eternity
without end, everlastingness without bound. May the fear of thee be
doubled in the lands of the deserts. Mayest thou subdue the circuit of
the sun's disc. This is the prayer to his master of the humble servant
who is saved from a foreign land.

"O wise king, the wise words which are pronounced in the wisdom of the
majesty of the sovereign, thy humble servant fears to tell. It is a
great thing to repeat. O great God, like unto Ra in fulfilling that to
which he has set his hand, what am I that he should take thought for me?
Am I among those whom he regards, and for whom he arranges? Thy majesty
is as Horus, and the strength of thy arms extends to all lands.

"Then let his Majesty bring Maki of Adma, Kenti-au-ush of Khenti-keshu,
and Tenus from the two lands ol the Fenkhu; these are the princes who
bear witness of me as to all that has passed, out of love for thyself.
Does not Tenu believe that it belongs to thee like thy dogs. Behold
this flight that I have made: I did not have it in my heart; it was
like the leading of a dream, as a man of Adehi (Delta) sees himself in
Abu (Elephantine), as a man of the plain of Egypt who sees himself in
the deserts. There was no fear, there was no hastening after me, I did
not listen to an evil plot, my name was not heard in the mouth of the
magistrate; but my limbs went, my feet wandered, my heart drew me; my
god commanded this flight, and drew me on; but I am not stiff-necked.
Does a man fear when he sees his own land? Ra spread thy fear over the
land, thy terrors in every strange land. Behold me now in the palace,
behold me in this place; and lo! thou art he who is over all the
horizon; the sun rises at thy pleasure, the water in the rivers is
drunk at thy will, the wind in heaven is breathed at thy saying.

"I who speak to thee shall leave my goods to the generations to follow
in this land. And as to this messenger who is come even let thy majesty
do as pleaseth him, for one lives by the breath that thou givest. O thou
who art beloved of Ra, of Horus, and of Hathor; Mentu, lord of Thebes,
desires that thy august nostril should live for ever."

I made a feast in Iaa, to pass over my goods to my children. My eldest
son was leading my tribe, all my goods passed to him, and I gave him my
corn and all my cattle, my fruit, and all my pleasant trees. When I had
taken my road to the south, and arrived at the roads of Horus, the
officer who was over the garrison sent a messenger to the palace to give
notice. His majesty sent the good overseer of the peasants of the king's
domains, and boats laden with presents from the king for the Sati who
had come to conduct me to the roads of Horus. I spoke to each one by his
name, and I gave the presents to each as was intended. I received and I
returned the salutation, and I continued thus until I reached the city
of Thetu.

When the land was brightened, and the new day began, four men came with
a summons for me; and the four men went to lead me to the palace. I
saluted with both my hands on the ground; the royal children stood at
the courtyard to conduct me: the courtiers who were to lead me to the
hall brought me on the way to the royal chamber.

I found his Majesty on the great throne in the hall of pale gold. Then I
threw myself on my belly; this god, in whose presence I was, knew me
not. He questioned me graciously, but I was as one seized with
blindness, my spirit fainted, my limbs failed, my heart was no longer in
my bosom, and I knew the difference between life and death. His
majesty said to one of the companions, "Lift him up, let him speak to
me." And his majesty said, "Behold thou hast come, thou hast trodden
the deserts, thou hast played the wanderer.  Decay falls on thee, old
age has reached thee; it is no small thing that thy body should be
embalmed, that the Pedtiu shall not bury thee. Do not, do not, be
silent and speechless; tell thy name; is it fear that prevents thee?"
I answered in reply, "I fear, what is it that my lord has said that I
should answer it? I have not called on me the hand of God, but it is
terror in my body, like that which brings sudden death.  Now behold I
am before thee; thou art life; let thy majesty do what pleaseth him."

The royal children were brought in, and his majesty said to the queen,
"Behold thou Sanehat has come as an Amu, whom the Sati have produced."

She cried aloud, and the royal children spake with one voice, saying,
before his majesty, "Verily it is not so, O king, my lord." Said his
majesty, "It is verily he." Then they brought their collars, and their
wands, and their sistra in their hands, and displayed them before his
majesty; and they sang--

"May thy hands prosper, O king; May the ornaments of the Lady of Heaven
continue. May the goddess Nub give life to thy nostril; May the mistress
of the stars favour thee, when thou sailest south and north. All
wisdom is in the mouth of thy majesty; Thy uraeus is on thy forehead,
thou drivest away the miserable.

"Thou art pacified, O Ra, lord of the lands; They call on thee as on the
mistress of all. Strong is thy horn, Thou lettest fly thine arrow. Grant
the breath to him who is without it; Grant good things to this
traveller, Samehit the Pedti, born in the land of Egypt, Who fled away
from fear of thee, And fled this land from thy terrors. Does not the
face grow pale, of him who beholds thy countenance; Does not the eye
fear, which looks upon thee."

Said his majesty, "Let him not fear, let him be freed from terror. He
shall be a Royal Friend amongst the nobles; he shall be put within the
circle of the courtiers. Go ye to the chamber of praise to seek wealth
for him."

When I went out from the palace, the royal children offered their hands
to me; we walked afterwards to the Great Gates. I was placed in a house
of a king's son, in which were delicate things, a place of coolness,
fruits of the granary, treasures of the White House, clothes of the
king's guardrobe, frankincense, the finest perfumes of the king and the
nobles whom he loves, in every chamber. All the servitors were in their
several offices.

Years were removed from my limbs: I was shaved, and polled my locks of
hair; the foulness was cast to the desert with the garments of the
Nemau-sha. I clothed me in fine linen, and anointed myself with the fine
oil of Egypt; I laid me on a bed. I gave up the sand to those who lie
on it; the oil of wood to him who would anoint himself therewith.
There was given to me the mansion of a lord of serfs, which had
belonged to a royal friend. There many excellent things were in its
buildings; all its wood was renewed. There were brought to me portions
from the palace, thrice and four times each day; besides the gifts of
the royal children, always, without ceasing.  There was built for me a
pyramid of stone amongst the pyramids. The overseer of the architects
measured its ground; the chief treasurer wrote it; the sacred masons
cut the well; the chief of the labourers on the tombs brought the
bricks; all things used to make strong a building were there used.
There were given to me peasants; there were made for me a garden, and
fields in it before my mansion, as is done for the chief royal friend.
My statue was inlayed with gold, its girdle of pale gold; his majesty
caused it to be made.  Such is not done to a man of low degree.

May I be in the favour of the king until the day shall come of my death.

_(This is finished from beginning to end, as was found in the writing.)_




Remarks


The Adventures of Sanehat appears to have been a popular tale, as
portions of three copies remain. The first papyrus known (Berlin No.
1) was imperfect at the beginning; but since then a flake of limestone
found in a tomb bore the beginning of the tale, and the same part is
found on a papyrus in the Amherst collection. The main text has been
translated by Chabas ("Le papyrus de Berlin," 37-51), Goodwin, and
Maspero ("Mel. d'arch.," iii. 68, 140, and "Contes Populaire,"
89-130); while the beginning is treated in "Memoires de l'institut
Egyptien," ii. 1-23, and in Proc. S.B.A., 452. The present translation
is mainly based on Mr. Griffith's readings in all cases of difficulty.

This is perhaps the most interesting of all the tales, because it bears
such signs of being written in the times of which it treats, it throws
so much light on the life of the time in Egypt and Syria, and if not a
real narrative, it is at least so probable that it may be accepted
without much difficulty. For my own part, I incline to look on it as
strictly historical; and in the absence of a single point of doubt, I
shall here treat it as seriously as the biographical inscriptions of
the early tombs. Possibly some day the tomb of Sanehat may be found,
and the whole inscription be read complete upon the walls.

The name Sa-nehat means "son of the sycamore," probably from his having
been born, or living, at some place where was a celebrated sacred
sycamore. This was a common tree in ancient, as in modern, Egypt; but an
allusion in the tale, to Sanehat turning his back on the sycamore, when
he was fleeing apparently up the west side of the Delta, makes it
probable that the sycamore was that of Aa-tenen, now Batnun, at the
middle of the west side of the Delta.

The titles given to Sanehat at the opening are of a very high rank, and
imply that he was the son either of the king or of a great noble. And
his position in the queen's household shows him to have been of
importance; the manner in which he is received by the royal family at
the end implying that he was quite familiar with them in early days.

But the great difficulty in the account has been the sudden panic of
Sanehat on hearing of the death of Amenemhat, and no explanation of this
has yet been brought forward. It seems not unlikely that he was a son of
Amenemhat by some concubine. This would at once account for his high
titles--for his belonging to the royal household--for his fear of his
elder brother Usertesen, who might see in him a rival, and try to slay
him after his father's death--for the command to him to leave all his
possessions and family behind him in Syria, as the condition of his
being allowed to return to end his days in Egypt--for his familiar
reception by the royal family, and for the property given to him on his
return.

The date recorded for the death of Sehote-pabra--Amenemhat I., the
founder of the XIIth Dynasty--agrees with the limit of his reign on the
monuments. And the expressions for his death are valuable as showing
the manner in which a king's decease was regarded; under the emblem of
a hawk--the bird of Ra--he flew up and joined the sun.

Sometime before his death Amenemhat had been in retirement; after twenty
years of reign (which was probably rather late in his life, as he seems
to have forced his way to the front as a successful man and founder of a
family) he had associated his son, the first Usertesen, on the throne,
and apparently resigned active life; for in the third year of Usertesen
we find the coregent summoning his court and decreeing the founding of
the temple of Heliopolis without any mention of his father. The old
king, however, lived yet ten years after his retirement, and died (as
this narrative shows us) during an expedition of his son Usertesen.

The time of year mentioned here would fall in about the middle of the
inundation in those days. Hence it seems that the military expeditions
were made after the harvest was secured, and while the country was
under water and the population disengaged from other labour.

The course of Sanehat's flight southward, reaching the Nile at Cairo
after two days' haste, indicates that the army was somewhere west of the
Delta. This would point to its being on the road to the oasis of the
Natron Lakes, which would be the natural course for a body of men
needing water supply. His throwing himself between two bushes to hide
from the army shows that the message came early in the day, otherwise he
would have fled in the dark. He then fled a day's journey to the south,
turning his back on the sycamore, and slept in the open field at
Shi-Seneferu somewhere below the Barrage. The second day he reached the
Nile opposite Old Cairo in the afternoon, and ferried himself over,
passed the quarries at Gebel Mokattam, and the red hill of Gebel Ahmar,
and came to a frontier wall before dark. This cannot have been far from
Old Cairo, by the time; and as Heliopolis was in course of building by
Usertesen, it would be probably on the desert near there, for the
protection of the town.  Passing the desert guards by night he pushed
on and reached Peten, near Belbeis, by dawn, and turned east toward
the valley of Kemur, or Wady Tumilat. Here in his extremity he was
found by the Sati or Asiatics, and rescued. This shows that the
eastern desert was left to the wandering tribes, and was without any
regular government at this period; though all the eastern Delta was
already well in Egyptian hands, as we know by the monuments at
Bubastis, Dedamun, and Tanis.

The land of Adim to which Sanehat fled appears to be the same as Edom or
the southeast corner of Syria. It was evidently near the upper Tenu, or
Rutennu, who seem to have dwelt on the hill country of Palestine. The
hill and the plain of Palestine are so markedly different, that in all
ages they have tended to be held by opposing people. In the time of
Sanehat the upper Tenu who held the hills were opposed to the Tenu in
general who held the plains; later on the Semites of the hills opposed
the Philistines of the plain, and now the _fellah_ of the hills
opposes the Bedawi of the plain. The district of Amuanshi in which
Sanehat settled was a goodly land, bearing figs and grapes and olives,
flowing with wine and honey and oil, yielding barley and wheat without
end, and much cattle. This abundance points rather to the hill country
near Hebron or between there and Belt Jibrin, as this south part of
the hills is notably fertile. The Tenu who came to defy Sanehat, being
in opposition to the upper Tenu, were probably those of the plain; and
the opposition to Sanehat may have arisen from his encroaching on the
fertile plain at the foot of his hills, as he was in the best of the
land "on the border of the next land."

The Egyptian was evidently looked on as being of a superior race by the
Tenu, and his civilisation won for him the confidence which many
wandering Englishmen now find in Africa or Polynesia, like John Dunn.
The set combat of two champions seems--by the large gathering--to have
been a well-recognised custom among the Tenu, while it exactly accords
with Goliath's offer in later times. And raising the shout of victory
on the back of the fallen champion reminds us of David's standing on
Goliath.

The transition from the recital of the Syrian adventures to the petition
to Pharaoh is not marked in the manuscript; but from the construction
the beginning of the petition is evidently at the place here marked. The
manner in which Sanehat appeals to the queen shows how well he must have
been known to her in his former days.

The decree in reply to Sanehat is in the regular style of royal
decrees of the period. Apparently by a clerical error the scribe has
substituted the name Amenemhat for Userte-sen, but the Horus name and
the throne name leave no doubt that Usertesen I. is intended here. The
tone of the reply is as gracious as possible, according with the
king's character as stated by Sanehat, "He is a friend of great
sweetness, and knows how to gain love." He quite recognises the
inquiries after the queen, and replies concerning her. And then he
assures Sanehat of welcome on his return, and promises him all that he
asks, including a tomb "in the company of the royal children," a full
recognition of his real rank.  Incidentally we learn that the Amu
buried their dead wrapped in a sheep's skin; as we also learn, further
on, that they anointed themselves with oil (olive?), wore the hair
long, and slept on the ground.

The funeral that is promised accords with the burials of the XIIth
Dynasty: the gilded case, the head painted blue, and the canopy of
cypress wood, are all known of this period, but would be out of place in
describing a Ramesside burial.

Sanehat's reply is a full course of the usual religious adulation, and
differs in this remarkably from his petition.  In fact it is hard to
be certain where his petition begins; possibly the opening of it has
been lost out of the text in copying from a mutilated papyrus; or
possibly it was sent merely as a memorandum of Sanehat's position and
desires, without venturing to address it personally to the king; or
even it may have not been allowable then to make such petitions
formally, so as to leave the initiative to the king's free will, just
as it is not allowable nowadays to question royalty, but only to
answer when spoken to.

The proposal to bring forward his fellow-sheikhs as witnesses of his
unabated loyalty is very curious, and seems superfluous after
Usertesen's assurances. Beyond Abisha of the Amu at Beni Hasan, these
are the only early personal names of Syrians that we know. The Fenkhu in
this connection can hardly be other than the Phoenicians; and, if so,
this points to their being already established in southern Syria at
this date. But these chiefs were not allowed to come forward; and it
seems to have been the policy of Egypt to keep the Syrians off as much
as possible, not a single man who came with Sanehat being allowed to
cross the frontier. The allusion to the Tenu belonging to Pharaoh,
like his dogs, is peculiarly fitting to this period, as the dog seems
to have been more familiarly domesticated in the XIth and XIIth
Dynasties than at any other age, and dogs are often then represented
on the funereal steles, even with their names.

The expression for strangeness--"as a man of the Delta sees himself at
the cataract, as a man of the plain who sees himself in the deserts"--is
true to this day. Nothing upsets an Egyptian's self-reliance like going
back a few miles into the desert; and almost any man of the cultivated
plain will flee with terror if he finds himself left alone far in the
desert, or even taken to the top of the desert hills..

We learn incidentally that the Egyptian frontier, even in the later
years of Usertesen I., had not been pushed beyond the Wady Tumilat; for
Sanehat travels south to the Roads of Horus, where he finds the frontier
garrison, and leaves his Syrian friends; and there laden boats meet him,
showing that it must have been somewhere along a waterway from the Nile.

The abasement of Sanehat might well be due to natural causes, beside the
reverence for the divine person of the king. The Egyptian court must
have seemed oppressively splendid, with the brilliant and costly
workmanship of Usertesen, to one who had lived a half-wild life for so
many years; and, more than that, the recalling of all his early days and
habits and friendships would overwhelm his mind and make it difficult to
collect his thoughts.

Sanehat's appearance was so much changed by his long hair, his age, and
his strange dress, that his former mistress and companions could not
recognise him. The use of collars and sceptres in the song and dance
is not clear to us. The sistra were, of course, to beat or rattle in
time with the song; the sceptres or wands were perhaps the same as the
engraved wands of ivory common in the XIIth Dynasty, or of blue glazed
ware in XVIIIth, and would be used to wave or beat time with; but the
use of the collar and counterpoise, or _menat,_ is unexplained, though
figures of dancers are shown holding a collar and _menat,_ and such
objects were found buried in the ceremonial foundation deposit of
Tahutmes III. at Koptos.

This song of the princesses is clearly in parallel phrases. First are
four wishes for the king and queen, in four lines. Second, an ascription
of wisdom and power, in two lines. Third, a comparison of the king to
Ra, and of the queen to the great goddess, in two lines. Fourth, an
ascription of righting power. Fifth, a petition for Sanehat, winding up
with the statement of fear inspired by the king, as explaining
Sanehat's abasement. To this the king responds by reassuring Sanehat,
and promising him position and wealth.

The account of Sanehat's renewal of his old national ways can best be
appreciated by any one who has lived a rough life for a time and then
comes back to civilisation. Doubtless these comforts were all the more
grateful to him in his old age, when he was weary of his unsettled life.

In the preparation of his tomb it is stated to have been a pyramid, with
rock-cut well chamber, and built of bricks above. This just accords
with the construction of the pyramids of the XIIth Dynasty.

The last phrase implies that this was composed during Sanehat's life;
and such a life would be so remarkable that this biography might be
prepared with good reason. Also it is very unlikely that a mere
story-teller would have dropped the relation without describing his
grand funeral which was promised to him. From suddenly stopping at the
preparation of the tomb, without going further, we have a strong
presumption that this was a true narrative, written at Sanehat's
dictation, and probably intended to be inscribed on his tomb wall. In
any case, we have here an invaluable picture of life in Palestine and
in Egypt, and the relations of the two countries, at an epoch before
the time of Abraham, and not paralleled by any other document until
more than a thousand years later.






End of the Project Gutenberg EBook of Egyptian Tales, First Series, IVth To
XIIth Dynasty, by W. M. Flinders Petrie

*** END OF THIS PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK EGYPTIAN TALES ***

***** This file should be named 7386.txt or 7386.zip *****
This and all associated files of various formats will be found in:
        http://www.gutenberg.org/7/3/8/7386/

Produced by Eric Eldred

Updated editions will replace the previous one--the old editions
will be renamed.

Creating the works from public domain print editions means that no
one owns a United States copyright in these works, so the Foundation
(and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United States without
permission and without paying copyright royalties.  Special rules,
set forth in the General Terms of Use part of this license, apply to
copying and distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works to
protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm concept and trademark.  Project
Gutenberg is a registered trademark, and may not be used if you
charge for the eBooks, unless you receive specific permission.  If you
do not charge anything for copies of this eBook, complying with the
rules is very easy.  You may use this eBook for nearly any purpose
such as creation of derivative works, reports, performances and
research.  They may be modified and printed and given away--you may do
practically ANYTHING with public domain eBooks.  Redistribution is
subject to the trademark license, especially commercial
redistribution.



*** START: FULL LICENSE ***

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full Project
Gutenberg-tm License available with this file or online at
  www.gutenberg.org/license.


Section 1.  General Terms of Use and Redistributing Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic works

1.A.  By reading or using any part of this Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work, you indicate that you have read, understand, agree to
and accept all the terms of this license and intellectual property
(trademark/copyright) agreement.  If you do not agree to abide by all
the terms of this agreement, you must cease using and return or destroy
all copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in your possession.
If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound by the
terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the person or
entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph 1.E.8.

1.B.  "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark.  It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement.  There are a few
things that you can do with most Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works
even without complying with the full terms of this agreement.  See
paragraph 1.C below.  There are a lot of things you can do with Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works if you follow the terms of this agreement
and help preserve free future access to Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.  See paragraph 1.E below.

1.C.  The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation ("the Foundation"
or PGLAF), owns a compilation copyright in the collection of Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works.  Nearly all the individual works in the
collection are in the public domain in the United States.  If an
individual work is in the public domain in the United States and you are
located in the United States, we do not claim a right to prevent you from
copying, distributing, performing, displaying or creating derivative
works based on the work as long as all references to Project Gutenberg
are removed.  Of course, we hope that you will support the Project
Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting free access to electronic works by
freely sharing Project Gutenberg-tm works in compliance with the terms of
this agreement for keeping the Project Gutenberg-tm name associated with
the work.  You can easily comply with the terms of this agreement by
keeping this work in the same format with its attached full Project
Gutenberg-tm License when you share it without charge with others.

1.D.  The copyright laws of the place where you are located also govern
what you can do with this work.  Copyright laws in most countries are in
a constant state of change.  If you are outside the United States, check
the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this agreement
before downloading, copying, displaying, performing, distributing or
creating derivative works based on this work or any other Project
Gutenberg-tm work.  The Foundation makes no representations concerning
the copyright status of any work in any country outside the United
States.

1.E.  Unless you have removed all references to Project Gutenberg:

1.E.1.  The following sentence, with active links to, or other immediate
access to, the full Project Gutenberg-tm License must appear prominently
whenever any copy of a Project Gutenberg-tm work (any work on which the
phrase "Project Gutenberg" appears, or with which the phrase "Project
Gutenberg" is associated) is accessed, displayed, performed, viewed,
copied or distributed:

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org

1.E.2.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is derived
from the public domain (does not contain a notice indicating that it is
posted with permission of the copyright holder), the work can be copied
and distributed to anyone in the United States without paying any fees
or charges.  If you are redistributing or providing access to a work
with the phrase "Project Gutenberg" associated with or appearing on the
work, you must comply either with the requirements of paragraphs 1.E.1
through 1.E.7 or obtain permission for the use of the work and the
Project Gutenberg-tm trademark as set forth in paragraphs 1.E.8 or
1.E.9.

1.E.3.  If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is posted
with the permission of the copyright holder, your use and distribution
must comply with both paragraphs 1.E.1 through 1.E.7 and any additional
terms imposed by the copyright holder.  Additional terms will be linked
to the Project Gutenberg-tm License for all works posted with the
permission of the copyright holder found at the beginning of this work.

1.E.4.  Do not unlink or detach or remove the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License terms from this work, or any files containing a part of this
work or any other work associated with Project Gutenberg-tm.

1.E.5.  Do not copy, display, perform, distribute or redistribute this
electronic work, or any part of this electronic work, without
prominently displaying the sentence set forth in paragraph 1.E.1 with
active links or immediate access to the full terms of the Project
Gutenberg-tm License.

1.E.6.  You may convert to and distribute this work in any binary,
compressed, marked up, nonproprietary or proprietary form, including any
word processing or hypertext form.  However, if you provide access to or
distribute copies of a Project Gutenberg-tm work in a format other than
"Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other format used in the official version
posted on the official Project Gutenberg-tm web site (www.gutenberg.org),
you must, at no additional cost, fee or expense to the user, provide a
copy, a means of exporting a copy, or a means of obtaining a copy upon
request, of the work in its original "Plain Vanilla ASCII" or other
form.  Any alternate format must include the full Project Gutenberg-tm
License as specified in paragraph 1.E.1.

1.E.7.  Do not charge a fee for access to, viewing, displaying,
performing, copying or distributing any Project Gutenberg-tm works
unless you comply with paragraph 1.E.8 or 1.E.9.

1.E.8.  You may charge a reasonable fee for copies of or providing
access to or distributing Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works provided
that

- You pay a royalty fee of 20% of the gross profits you derive from
     the use of Project Gutenberg-tm works calculated using the method
     you already use to calculate your applicable taxes.  The fee is
     owed to the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark, but he
     has agreed to donate royalties under this paragraph to the
     Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation.  Royalty payments
     must be paid within 60 days following each date on which you
     prepare (or are legally required to prepare) your periodic tax
     returns.  Royalty payments should be clearly marked as such and
     sent to the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation at the
     address specified in Section 4, "Information about donations to
     the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation."

- You provide a full refund of any money paid by a user who notifies
     you in writing (or by e-mail) within 30 days of receipt that s/he
     does not agree to the terms of the full Project Gutenberg-tm
     License.  You must require such a user to return or
     destroy all copies of the works possessed in a physical medium
     and discontinue all use of and all access to other copies of
     Project Gutenberg-tm works.

- You provide, in accordance with paragraph 1.F.3, a full refund of any
     money paid for a work or a replacement copy, if a defect in the
     electronic work is discovered and reported to you within 90 days
     of receipt of the work.

- You comply with all other terms of this agreement for free
     distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm works.

1.E.9.  If you wish to charge a fee or distribute a Project Gutenberg-tm
electronic work or group of works on different terms than are set
forth in this agreement, you must obtain permission in writing from
both the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation and Michael
Hart, the owner of the Project Gutenberg-tm trademark.  Contact the
Foundation as set forth in Section 3 below.

1.F.

1.F.1.  Project Gutenberg volunteers and employees expend considerable
effort to identify, do copyright research on, transcribe and proofread
public domain works in creating the Project Gutenberg-tm
collection.  Despite these efforts, Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works, and the medium on which they may be stored, may contain
"Defects," such as, but not limited to, incomplete, inaccurate or
corrupt data, transcription errors, a copyright or other intellectual
property infringement, a defective or damaged disk or other medium, a
computer virus, or computer codes that damage or cannot be read by
your equipment.

1.F.2.  LIMITED WARRANTY, DISCLAIMER OF DAMAGES - Except for the "Right
of Replacement or Refund" described in paragraph 1.F.3, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation, the owner of the Project
Gutenberg-tm trademark, and any other party distributing a Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic work under this agreement, disclaim all
liability to you for damages, costs and expenses, including legal
fees.  YOU AGREE THAT YOU HAVE NO REMEDIES FOR NEGLIGENCE, STRICT
LIABILITY, BREACH OF WARRANTY OR BREACH OF CONTRACT EXCEPT THOSE
PROVIDED IN PARAGRAPH 1.F.3.  YOU AGREE THAT THE FOUNDATION, THE
TRADEMARK OWNER, AND ANY DISTRIBUTOR UNDER THIS AGREEMENT WILL NOT BE
LIABLE TO YOU FOR ACTUAL, DIRECT, INDIRECT, CONSEQUENTIAL, PUNITIVE OR
INCIDENTAL DAMAGES EVEN IF YOU GIVE NOTICE OF THE POSSIBILITY OF SUCH
DAMAGE.

1.F.3.  LIMITED RIGHT OF REPLACEMENT OR REFUND - If you discover a
defect in this electronic work within 90 days of receiving it, you can
receive a refund of the money (if any) you paid for it by sending a
written explanation to the person you received the work from.  If you
received the work on a physical medium, you must return the medium with
your written explanation.  The person or entity that provided you with
the defective work may elect to provide a replacement copy in lieu of a
refund.  If you received the work electronically, the person or entity
providing it to you may choose to give you a second opportunity to
receive the work electronically in lieu of a refund.  If the second copy
is also defective, you may demand a refund in writing without further
opportunities to fix the problem.

1.F.4.  Except for the limited right of replacement or refund set forth
in paragraph 1.F.3, this work is provided to you 'AS-IS', WITH NO OTHER
WARRANTIES OF ANY KIND, EXPRESS OR IMPLIED, INCLUDING BUT NOT LIMITED TO
WARRANTIES OF MERCHANTABILITY OR FITNESS FOR ANY PURPOSE.

1.F.5.  Some states do not allow disclaimers of certain implied
warranties or the exclusion or limitation of certain types of damages.
If any disclaimer or limitation set forth in this agreement violates the
law of the state applicable to this agreement, the agreement shall be
interpreted to make the maximum disclaimer or limitation permitted by
the applicable state law.  The invalidity or unenforceability of any
provision of this agreement shall not void the remaining provisions.

1.F.6.  INDEMNITY - You agree to indemnify and hold the Foundation, the
trademark owner, any agent or employee of the Foundation, anyone
providing copies of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works in accordance
with this agreement, and any volunteers associated with the production,
promotion and distribution of Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works,
harmless from all liability, costs and expenses, including legal fees,
that arise directly or indirectly from any of the following which you do
or cause to occur: (a) distribution of this or any Project Gutenberg-tm
work, (b) alteration, modification, or additions or deletions to any
Project Gutenberg-tm work, and (c) any Defect you cause.


Section  2.  Information about the Mission of Project Gutenberg-tm

Project Gutenberg-tm is synonymous with the free distribution of
electronic works in formats readable by the widest variety of computers
including obsolete, old, middle-aged and new computers.  It exists
because of the efforts of hundreds of volunteers and donations from
people in all walks of life.

Volunteers and financial support to provide volunteers with the
assistance they need are critical to reaching Project Gutenberg-tm's
goals and ensuring that the Project Gutenberg-tm collection will
remain freely available for generations to come.  In 2001, the Project
Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation was created to provide a secure
and permanent future for Project Gutenberg-tm and future generations.
To learn more about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation
and how your efforts and donations can help, see Sections 3 and 4
and the Foundation information page at www.gutenberg.org


Section 3.  Information about the Project Gutenberg Literary Archive
Foundation

The Project Gutenberg Literary Archive Foundation is a non profit
501(c)(3) educational corporation organized under the laws of the
state of Mississippi and granted tax exempt status by the Internal
Revenue Service.  The Foundation's EIN or federal tax identification
number is 64-6221541.  Contributions to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation are tax deductible to the full extent
permitted by U.S. federal laws and your state's laws.

The Foundation's principal office is located at 4557 Melan Dr. S.
Fairbanks, AK, 99712., but its volunteers and employees are scattered
throughout numerous locations.  Its business office is located at 809
North 1500 West, Salt Lake City, UT 84116, (801) 596-1887.  Email
contact links and up to date contact information can be found at the
Foundation's web site and official page at www.gutenberg.org/contact

For additional contact information:
     Dr. Gregory B. Newby
     Chief Executive and Director
     gbnewby@pglaf.org

Section 4.  Information about Donations to the Project Gutenberg
Literary Archive Foundation

Project Gutenberg-tm depends upon and cannot survive without wide
spread public support and donations to carry out its mission of
increasing the number of public domain and licensed works that can be
freely distributed in machine readable form accessible by the widest
array of equipment including outdated equipment.  Many small donations
($1 to $5,000) are particularly important to maintaining tax exempt
status with the IRS.

The Foundation is committed to complying with the laws regulating
charities and charitable donations in all 50 states of the United
States.  Compliance requirements are not uniform and it takes a
considerable effort, much paperwork and many fees to meet and keep up
with these requirements.  We do not solicit donations in locations
where we have not received written confirmation of compliance.  To
SEND DONATIONS or determine the status of compliance for any
particular state visit www.gutenberg.org/donate

While we cannot and do not solicit contributions from states where we
have not met the solicitation requirements, we know of no prohibition
against accepting unsolicited donations from donors in such states who
approach us with offers to donate.

International donations are gratefully accepted, but we cannot make
any statements concerning tax treatment of donations received from
outside the United States.  U.S. laws alone swamp our small staff.

Please check the Project Gutenberg Web pages for current donation
methods and addresses.  Donations are accepted in a number of other
ways including checks, online payments and credit card donations.
To donate, please visit:  www.gutenberg.org/donate


Section 5.  General Information About Project Gutenberg-tm electronic
works.

Professor Michael S. Hart was the originator of the Project Gutenberg-tm
concept of a library of electronic works that could be freely shared
with anyone.  For forty years, he produced and distributed Project
Gutenberg-tm eBooks with only a loose network of volunteer support.

Project Gutenberg-tm eBooks are often created from several printed
editions, all of which are confirmed as Public Domain in the U.S.
unless a copyright notice is included.  Thus, we do not necessarily
keep eBooks in compliance with any particular paper edition.

Most people start at our Web site which has the main PG search facility:

     www.gutenberg.org

This Web site includes information about Project Gutenberg-tm,
including how to make donations to the Project Gutenberg Literary
Archive Foundation, how to help produce our new eBooks, and how to
subscribe to our email newsletter to hear about new eBooks.

